O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	 O you, very dear son, I have completed this book which is the final part of the science of medicine along with its completion, and I have made the end through its explanations and by its clarifications.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	 And it has come to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	 And because the work of hands is foreign to our region and strange in every way, so the science has perished and decayed, and nothing remains of it except for small descriptions in books of the ancients which the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	 And from this has come error and vanity, and intentions are closed off and knowledge is distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	 And it seems to me that I want to revive the ordinance of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of cautery irons, and other tools of the work, with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	 And for this reason that no good master of hands is found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	 And it is necessary for one who engages in this to be well-versed in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and flesh and the number of them, and the movement and rest of the moving and stationary veins, and the place of their origin.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	 And for this reason said Hippocrates that the name with the name is much, and with the work is little; and likewise in the art of hands.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	 We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things previously mentioned should take care not to fall into error and harm people; just as I have often seen many of those who engage in this science and thus abandon their science and good judgment.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	 For I saw a foolish doctor who cut an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries of the neck; because so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	 And I saw another doctor who removed a stone from a man with water, and the stone was large; he also took away a part of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	 And I had already been called to remove it, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if one removed it he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	 And I saw another physician who took care of the Duke of our land whose leg was broken, and with the break he had a wound; and the physician, full of ignorance, pressed the break onto the wound to splints with great force, and left no salve at all on the wound, and left it thus for a term; and commanded that it should not be unbound; and so it remained until the leg was entirely swollen and the foot came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	 I was called to come to him, and hurried to come unbind the leg; and when I had unbound it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	 But still, the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, and it could not heal; and the corruption did not cease spreading through the limb until the entire limb was lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	 And thus another doctor who opened an abscess, and then inflamed it through the malice of his arrogance.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	 For a chancre, when it is purged of black bile, one must not touch it with iron unless it is in such a place that all the corruption can be removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	 And therefore, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: that is to say, works where there is danger in many situations; and I will show in each place in this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	 For which reason it is necessary that you guard yourself, so that the foolish physician cannot speak ill of you. If you take up your arms in caution, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best method, then by the grace of God you will come to safety and be praised; and leave behind dreadful diseases of serious illness; and remove your arms from those who make you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can go from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	 Galen said in some of his admonitions: "Do not take on a serious illness, lest you be called a foolish physician.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	 I have composed this treatise according to III chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	 The first chapter is about fire cautery and medicine-based cautery, and the chapter is organized from the head to the feet; and about the shapes of instruments, and the iron tools for cautery, and everything that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	 The second chapter is about cutting and drilling, and cupping and wounds, and extracting arrows, and similar things; and the chapter is organized with the shapes of the instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	 The third chapter is about resetting dislocations and sprains, and similar things; and it is organized from the head to the feet, and with the shapes of the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	 Just as we remember the work, it is necessary that I speak of the quality of help and harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	 I say that the qualities of the aid, and of the harm, are the longest words and the subtlest science and the secret responses; and many of the wise have spoken about this, and they agreed on this; and few of their words satisfy me, for I fear lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	 I say that cautery helps universally in every complexion where there is matter, except for two complexions: namely, hot complexion without matter, and dry complexion without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	 In hot and dry complexion together with matter, some have discussed and said that cautery is great help there; and others said the opposite: that cautery is of no use for an illness that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	 Car the nature of fire is so hot, and it should not be treated with heat for hot diseases, nor with drought; and he who says otherwise declares that cauterization greatly aids in hot and dry diseases that come into the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	 When you compare the body of man and his moisture to the nature of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	 And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	 For I have found it sometimes through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	 And nevertheless, let no one interfere with it except for he who has proven it, and who knows through long practice the chapter of cauterization, and the diversity of human complexions, and their predispositions and causes of their diseases, and their occurrences and the passage of time; we have no fear of other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	 Et toutes les médecins se sont réunies et ont convenu du cautère.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	 And know, son, that the cautery of fire together is one of the secrets of healing, and more beneficial than the cautery of burning medicines.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	 Because fire is simple, and does not go beyond the member that it burns, nor harms any other member if possible.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	 Burning medicines go from one member to another, spreading, and bring diseases of difficult healing to the members; and perhaps kill the patient. Fire, due to its power and the goodness of its substance, does not do this, unless there is excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	 And this I have found through experiment and the length of my service and study that I have put into the art, and it was on the truth of things; and therefore I excuse myself for the length of speech, because it does not please me that I take away from you the secret that is in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives out diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; now receive it into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	 And know, son, that they agreed on what time the cauteries should be done, and chose patients.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	 And I say that a cautery is suitable in all seasons, because the harm that arises is put down by the help of the cautery; and also if the cautery is necessary for pain, it must be done swiftly and promptly, so that it does not await the time when greater evil comes to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	 And never think of it thus, dear son, as the foolish physicians do; for the disease that is healed by cautery does not return; and they say so; but it is not as they believe, because a cautery is nothing but medicine which changes the complexion, dries the humors that are the cause of pain, and is more effective than medicine due to the swiftness of its power, and the virtue of its work and mastery.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	 And it is possible that the disease comes sometimes according to the complexion of the patient and the place of the disease and its virtue; and the superfluities are gathered in him by the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless cauteries are administered in a place where there is little superfluousness and moisture, such as dental cauteries for pain, and similar things; and such pain does not return.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	 And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and this is true; but they do not believe that cauteries are worthwhile after medication, but their thoughts are false. And cauteries are the last resort of medicine because when we administer certain treatments in some diseases and they do not work, then we administer the cautery, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	 Then it is clear that cauterization is the last resort in medicine, not at all according to the intention of foolish doctors.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	 The ancients said that cauterization with a golden instrument is more beneficial than with iron, and those outside [the profession] said this only because of the quality of gold and the fineness of its substance; but they said that the place of cautery does not cause putrefaction, which is not true, for I have tested it and found that it is true in some men; and cauterization with gold is more beneficial than with iron, as they say.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	 Nevertheless, when you heat a golden instrument, you cannot tell by the color of gold when it is hot enough, and it cools down quickly; and if you heat it too much, it melts in the fire; and so there are many obstacles.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	 And because of this, we use the fire cautery that we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	 Or I have ordered this chapter from head to toe, so that the way may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	 of olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	 This cautery is good for moisture and cold on the brain, and it has two advantages: one is due to a disease called "soda", and the other is due to many humors that descend from the head to the eyes and ears, and also due to excessive dreaming and toothache and throat pain, and also for all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	 The shape of this cautery is such that the patient should be purified by a dissolving medicine, modifying the head III or IV times, according to what the virtues and habits of the patient can tolerate; and then make the head of the patient's hair grow back.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	 And then have the patient sit cross-legged between your hands, and place their hands on your feet; after that, place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your fingers will come, let it bleed from there. Then heat the cautery called "olivare", which has this shape:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And place it on the designated spot, and while descending and tightening your hand little by little in rotation; then lift your hand suddenly, and check the spot if you see a small bone I; and if you do not see it, repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; after that, take a piece of linen and place soft cotton inside, and put it on the spot, and leave it for III days; then put on a cloth soaked in butter; and leave it on until the burn is healed; then treat the wound with the ointment called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	 And said the ancients that the longer an open wound remains, the more it purges itself; and therefore, it helps to move (the limb).
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	 And some of them said that one should allow the cautery to continue until part of the bone is burned, and then remove what has been burned from the bone, and it should be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	 And others said that one should allow the cautery to continue and push so hard that a piece of bone as wide as a spindle, which women use for spinning, comes out, so that the humors may be moved out; and one must leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards, it must be cured and healed.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	 And these two methods of cautery do not seem good to me at all, except in some men where there is fear; and I think that I should leave them; for the head (of the bone) is weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we have shown in other members; and likewise when the patient's head is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more healing and useful to me, and with this one I work together for safety.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	 of an ancient pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	 When there is chronic pain throughout the head that lasts for a long time, the patient should use herbs and pills called "cochie", as well as purgatives for the head, oils, and poultices; and if cautery, as we have said before, does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	 Take care if the patient's head is of a strong nature and not too cold; then cauterize it slightly under that cautery which we have mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	 After that, cauterize each horn of the head down to the bone, as we have said before, and make a cautery in the place called "vasselz"; and this is the place where cupping glasses are placed; and clean your hand so that you do not see it until the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere; and the cauteries for the horns should be finer than those used to cauterize the middle part of the head, and this is the method.
dou cautere dou chief	 From the cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	 When pain suddenly strikes in one part of the head and the illness extends to the eye, and the head is purged with cleansing medicines, and other treatments have been done as I said in the classification of diseases, and none of this helps: then you make cauteries in two ways, namely with water-based medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	 The cautery with water-based medicine is done by taking a clove of garlic and removing its skin and putting it into the eye for two times, then make an incision on the temple where the pain is such that you can place the clove of garlic under the skin; and when it has been placed, bind it well and let it stay this way for twelve hours; and then unbind and pull off the bandage with the clove of garlic, and leave the wound like this for two or three days; then apply a plaster soaked in butter until it can heal.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	 Après le cure d'onguent tant qu'il soit sané;
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	 The iron cautery is according to this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Heat the cautery which has this form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	 And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a closed fist with a hollow in which there is a little cavity; and in the middle there is a small hole; and you place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand steady and twist the fire slightly until half the thickness of the cure is burnt; and lift your hand so that the outer part does not burn, which is outside, and an abundance of blood flows out.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	 After, place cotton in vinegar water, and put it on the place for III days; then put wet cotton in butter, and then cure the place from oiling until it is healed; and if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery that is called "cultellare," do so at the point, and be careful not to cut the artery in this migraine which is not very old.
de emigraine	 of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	 When you cure migraine as we have said before in the division of illnesses, and it does not benefit, and you see that the cautery previously mentioned of medicine and iron does not help, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white; and immediately place it on the aching spot about half an inch long, and remove your hand once, and hold so that you do not cut the artery and that you do not reach the bone; and beware of the jawbone which moves when one eats, and let the nerve have no regard for movement or spasm in the patient, and beware of excessive bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or cutting has great fear and especially to those who are not knowledgeable and experienced; and leave the work half done; but I will tell you how one staunches blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you in the proper place in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	 And if you see that this cautery does not alleviate the disease, and the patient is tolerant, cauterize him on the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you wish, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on artery extraction, with a cautery that has two knives; and this cautery is better than the other and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	 of the pain of the ears from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	 When ear pain comes from cold, and one has used dissolving medicines and other cures that we have mentioned in the division, and the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery which is called "poin," of which here is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After piercing all around the ear of the patient, or around both if the pain is in both, and move slightly upwards from the root of the ear after having marked the spot; and make X punctures around each ear; afterwards, treat the area until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	 of the mouth's torment
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	 Torment that should be treated with cautery is only that which comes from fever, as we have said in the division of illnesses; and do not make cautery on those similar to those that come from dryness and nerve spasms.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 When you treat this resemblance of torment that comes from fever of snakes and purges of the head and gargle, and if it does not work, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another a little above the temple, and the third between the two lips; and place the cautery in the part that appears healthy, and make a cautery on top of the ear slightly below the horn of the head, and another on the temple as long as a finger; and leave the cautery until half the cheek is burnt; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And it resembles the cutaneous (one we have placed before), but it is a little more subtle and the knife should be a little larger; after curing the place as I said before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	 When apoplexy is chronic and you treat it as we have said, but there is no benefit and the patient does not have a fever, then make four cauteries: two on each temple of the head, one in the middle of the head, one in the place called "vasselz" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the opening of the stomach; and it should be treated as we have said before.
de litargie	 of lead
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	 For this illness, it is necessary to give the patient large pears and pills that purify the brain. Afterwards, wash the patient's head completely, and place a mustard plaster on the occiput as written in the treatise on plasters; and this is how to cauterize: do as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	 If it is healed in this way, good; and if not, make three cauteries in the middle of the head descending to the neck, with two fingers' breadth between each cautery; and treat as the others, and if you see a need, and the patient can endure, make one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, two more on the two horns, and treat until it is healed; and let the cautery be called "olivare", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	 of the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	 It is necessary that the head be cleansed of hair and what we have said before; then wash the patient's head, then make a cautery in the middle of the head and on each horn, and one behind, and three on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient can endure, and the disease is severe, make four cauteries on the spine of the back; and let it be until the most of the heart is burnt, and lift your hand; then treat until it is healed, and let the cautery be called "olivare" as we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	 of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	 The epileptic should not use the cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first fortify the brain with years and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section when the patient is strong and able to take medication.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	 And if it is a child who cannot tolerate it, make him gargle and chew to fortify the brain often with good food; then raise his head in the middle, and there make the cautery as we have said before, and the cautery on the vein, and on each corner; and if the patient is strong and able, make cauteries as I have said for those who have paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	 If the patient is a child, perform the subtle cautery in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	 When due to melancholy there are superfluidities or corrupt moistures and thick phlegm, then use these cauteries as we have said for one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	 And if due to melancholy the superfluities incline towards melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give him something to drink that will cleanse the brain, according to what is stated above in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After washing the patient's head, make a linen bandage well-formed like a circle and place it in the head. And let the patient sit cross-legged and be held securely from all sides; then apply the poultice, which consists of old sheep butter; and heat it over a moderate fire so that the two may suffer it; after emptying the circle inside the head, leave it to cool; and do this for the patient each week once with other good management until he is healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	 And if you see many points being made throughout the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	 This method of cauterizing moistens the brain equally; and then place wet cotton in butter and goose fat on it.
de l’awe des eulz	 of the eye's gaze
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	 When the gaze first comes to the eyes through the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something cleansing for the head, and protect it from all moisture, and make him sweat in the bath several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	 Afterwards, instruct the patient to shave his head, and cauterize the top of the head, and make two cauteries on the two temples if the descent is in both eyes together, or one if the descent is in one; and during all the cautery, tie off all the veins and arteries that are under the skull, and let the cauteries be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, then staunch it with as much power as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	 Et je t'enseignerai en l'extraction des artères et à l'incision la précaution dont tu dois te préparer; et parfois, on fait une cautérisation ou incision sous les deux os derrière.
dou cors des larmes	 du corps des larmes
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	 Et quant les larmes des yeux sont anciennes et habituelles et sont sur les veines, ou près des artères qui apparaissent à la surface du visage; et on voit que c’est une superfluité froide flegmatique, alors il fait le cautère dont j'ai parlé au début de cette opération descendante vers les yeux: un cautère dans la tête, deux cautères sur les deux tempes, deux cautères sous l’os, et s’il y a besoin de plus, alors il le cautérise prudemment dessus le sourcil à tout petit cautère.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	 From the body come tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	 When you treat it according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help at all, then give the patient to drink for three nights cochies; afterwards, raise the head, and make a cautery in the middle of the olivary cautery; and make two cauteries of the cautery which is called "clavilis" on the two temples, one a little below the eyebrows; and beware of the artery lest you cut it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	 And this is the form of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	 When the membrane of the eye is softened by illness and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery which is called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	 Pour cela il covient savoir la cause.
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	 Car le feu cauteriue a tant de vertus qu’il est merveillous pour toute meintaine enfermeté.
dou poil qui point l’oil	 Et si tu veis que il les tient et ne s’en muet pas, ales tant que li sorcilz soient arses, et puis les remuet sans fainre aucune halte. ‍
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	 Et se li oiel le poignent trop, si les metez en eau froide tant que il s’en sont estint.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	 For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 When they emerge and are equal, then place the patient in your care; afterwards, draw on the paper of the eyes a figure that resembles the leaves of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs; then place moistened cotton with egg white and muslin over the eye, then heat the cautery which has this form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Afterwards, cauterize over the figure that you have drawn little by little many times, so that the hair is burned in that place; and the sign of the healthiness of the work is that you see the paper retracted, and the hairs raised to the height of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it thus for III days, then place moistened cotton with butter until the burn is removed; afterwards, continue the cure with ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	 And if after this the hairs come, and the skin is softened, then begin the cautery again on that same spot, as you did first; and if the hairs are lacking, then cauterize so that the skin is raised to its natural place, and is even, and the hairs do not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	 The cautery of burning medicine is such that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they are large and even. Then make from parchment the shape of a myrtle leaf; then take French soap and quicklime, each one .З., and grind them together well. And do it quickly, so that it does not cool, then spread it on the form you have made like the myrtle leaf, and place it on the skin of the eyes. And if the disease is in only one eye, one should work in one, and if in both, similarly. And put cotton moistened with egg white underneath the eye; and let the patient's eye be in your healthy hand, and place your finger showing on the medicine, and press the cloth and the egg white all the times that the patient feels the burning of the medicine, for he feels the burning as if by fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	 When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	 And when the bite has passed, lift the skin of the wound, and look if you see the skin lifted as if it were lifted by the constriction of fire or by an incision; and if it is so, then it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If not, then put more medicine on the wound until your work is equal and your eyes are precise; then put cotton soaked in butter on it until the scab falls off; afterwards, cure the wound with ointment called «dyafenis» and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	 And if you need to look closely at your work, do so with great care that no medicine falls into the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	 And if the skin becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then begin the medicine again on that place which has been softened by the proper paper, as you have done before; then cure it until it is healed; and this is the shape of the leaf of myrtle:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	 And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and in smallness, and according to this be your restrictions; and do not answer the right way for him whose study is of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	 of the treatment of a fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	 When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments are not beneficial, then it is necessary that you perform cautery on it according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	 Instruct the patient to put their head in your hand; and let the minister hold his head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or lower his head; afterwards, place dampened cotton on the egg white or juice of parsley over the eye; afterwards, heat the cautery which is such: and it should be attached to the head like the shape of a feather quill, together with which is the cautery; if you see, let it be pointed from one end to the other, and if you see, let it be like a tent; but nevertheless, this one that is shaped is better for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	 Then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus, and dry it; and if it is closed, then open it, and draw forth the bow; afterwards, place a very hot cautery, and hold your hand to the cautery at the nose part above the eye, so that your hand does not falter; and place the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	 If you approach the beginning of the cautery until the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	 If not, then begin the cautery again one more time, and another if you need it, and let it be for three days; after that put moistened cotton with butter on it, and continue with the treatment of desiccating ointment until it is healed. And if forty days pass without healing, apply a corrosive medicine so that the bone may be exposed; and act according to what would come in its chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	 And there is a method of cautery for fistulas that some of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	 For a fistula, open the site; then place into the opening one subtle tampon made of what follows:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	 and they make of the quantity of one pound; and hold your hand firmly in the camahan, and let the patient not move at all, so that the melted lead does not run to his eye; and it is necessary to place on the patient's eye cotton moistened with egg white or water: thus lead heals the fistula, and the sane through marvelous health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	 And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have spoken of, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	 If not, then it is necessary to administer a perforation to the nose, and to bring the fistula back into the body of the nose according to its proper place.
des crevaices en levres	 cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	 Mouth sores often occur on the lips, which are called "hair", and also on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	 When you treat these sores as we have said in the divisions, and the treatment does not benefit, then heat a small scalpel-shaped cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And place it quickly in those sores until it reaches the root; afterwards, treat the area with wax until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	 of the throat abscess
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	 When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or in the eye, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after causing decay and rotting and being inflamed, it becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in the divisions, and it does not benefit: then it is necessary that you have a cautery according to the size of the fistula; afterwards, open or pierce the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the iron reaches to the bottom of it, and in the rear place; and do this once or twice, afterwards treat as we have said in treatments, until it is healed; and if it is treated thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the rotten bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	 Of tooth movement
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	 When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it does not help, then place the patient's head in your lap; afterwards heat the cautery which will be described later in such a way that you put a reed on the tooth; and quickly insert the hot cautery inside, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth; afterwards lift your hand and repeat the cautery according to your wish; afterwards have the patient rinse his mouth with salt water, and let it sit for an hour and spit it out.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	 And in this way the tooth that was moving is strengthened, and the softened gum is restricted, and the moisture that was causing decay is dried up.
de la dolor des dens	 Of the pain of teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	 When the pain of teeth comes from cold, whether it is in the cold or the heat, and medicinal treatments are not effective, then there is need for cautery in two ways: with a hot iron or with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	 The cautery with wax is done thus: take wax from a cow and put the tip into an iron or bronze spoon; then take cotton and wrap it around the point of a lance, and moisten it in boiling wax, and place it on the painful tooth quickly and hold until it cools; and do this often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth. And if you see that wool and cotton are moistened in cold wax, place it on the painful tooth, and put a hot iron on it so that the fire reaches the completion of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	 The fire-cautery is such that you take a metal rod of iron or copper, and it should be thick enough so the smoke does not reach the patient's mouth; then heat the cautery, from which the form will come next, and place it on the tooth and keep your hand there until the cautery is cooled; do this often, for the pain will be removed that same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 And it is necessary for the patient to fill his mouth with good butter during this cautery, and then he should rinse out strongly; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	 And make a cautery on whatever tooth you wish, according to what you are able; and this is the form of the rod:
des scrophules	 of the scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the scrofula are of phlegm and cold moisture, and are not responsive to digestion by medicines, then heat the iron cautery as described below, and let it have two openings for the smoke to escape; and place the hot cautery on the abscess once, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess. And if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; then place a wet cotton cloth soaked in butter until the burn is removed; afterwards cure the place with onions and bandages until it heals.
Li forme de la cainne:	 The shape of the wound:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	 When the moistures rise up in the veins of the throat, and especially when this comes from a cold temperament, then it is necessary that the patient first be emptied by purgative medicines; afterwards, apply cautery to the root of the throat, and be careful not to go all the way to the throat, and burn only for a moment.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then perform another cautery at the junction of the neck with the top of the spine, and let the cautery be called "clavicle" as we have described before; and treat the place as we said before until it is healed.
de la toust	 from the cough
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	 When the cough and disease of the throat are from cold moistures, and the patient has neither fever nor dryness, and the disease is chronic, then perform two cauteries on the breastbone in close places; and another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two breasts; and let the cautery be called "clavicle" according to the form that was said before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	 Et si tu veux, fais un cautère en piquant tout le long du point qui est appelé «poinçon» pour former ce qu'il y a au-dessus dans la maladie des oreilles; et que les points soient jusqu'à trente ou environ.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	 Après avoir traité l'endroit selon ce qui a été dit précédemment, et que le cautère soit à trois rangées selon cette forme.
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	 Et parce que les cautères sont plus légers, donc tu en fais trois à la fois.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	 De la dislocation de l’épaule
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	 Lorsque l'articulation de l'épaule est luxée en raison d'une cause humide, et qu'on essaie de la remettre en place mais qu'elle ne peut pas rester, et qu'elle revient aussitôt à sa position désalignée avec de légers mouvements qui se produisent, comme nous l'avons expérimenté, alors il est nécessaire que tu réduises d'abord la dislocation.  Pour cela, utilise un appareil approprié pour appliquer une traction douce et continue sur l'articulation.  Assure-toi également de stabiliser le reste du corps pour éviter tout mouvement brusque qui pourrait aggraver la situation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	 Afterwards, have the patient lie on his back and on his side; then lift the skin that is inside the tickling with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated within, heat up the cautery that has two nerves like this.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	 And cauterize the skin until it reaches the side, and there will be four figures of cautery together with three cauteries; and because this is done with the three-nerve cautery, therefore the figures of cautery are six cauteries; and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tendon, and this is the form of the three-nerve cautery:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	 And sometimes it is placed on this one nerve, which makes eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	 After, apply the cautery by burning with a hot iron; after that, make the patient rest, and do not move the limb for a long time until it is well healed.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	 And if it is dislocated above, which happens rarely, then make a cautery on the thick part of the shoulder blade, or make many cauteries by pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	 Because the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	 When in the stomach come coldness and much moisture that they draw out his complexion, and he has many catarrhs, and with the accustomed ways of cures he does not benefit at all, then it is necessary that the patient be seated on his back, and stretch out his legs and his hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	 For this, he makes three cauterizations. One under the sole of the foot by the quantity of a finger, all of the cautery closed, and two cauteries on each side so that the shape of the cauteries is at three angles, with such space between one and the other that they are not joined together when they release pus; and let the cauteries be so deep that they reach the two parts of the heart, and let the shape of the cauteries be according to this form without deviation:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 And if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and he who will have fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and signing on the stomach one point according to the quantity that you wish from within; then cauterize all the cautery which is called "point.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the healing of the previous treatment, until it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	 When the liver has pain from cold and moisture and great flatulence, so that it is strongly displaced from its natural complexion by superfluities; and the patient is treated with what we have said in divisions, and it does not help him at all, then the patient must be cauterized over his heart; and let there be 30 cauteries according to this form and this figure and this quantity over the liver, outside the hypochondria, where the ribs of a man come; and let there be the thickness of a finger between each cautery; and let the cauteries be long along the body, and do not press too much with your hand on all the cautery; and let only half of the heart be burned, and let the patient be upright on his feet; and if he cannot, then let him lie down, and let him extend his legs, and lift his arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	 And if your intention is to cauterize these cauteries of the scalpel, if you are skilled and knowledgeable in the art, be careful not to burn the entire heart, for you would dry out the whole body; and do not go as far as boiling, for the heart is very delicate there, and know this for certain.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	 When there is an abscess in the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain but not too severely; and if it is in the membrane, he feels insane pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	 And then, when this treatment should be done by the physicians, it is necessary that the patient be seated on his head; and then he should designate the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a grape, of which here is the shape:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	 And cauterize with the cautery until the heart is burned, and it comes up to the spleen, until all the humors are expelled; after that, treat according to the treatment of the illnesses until they are healed; and it is not necessary that anyone other than one who has studied medicine for a long time use this cautery, for by whom fewer of these diseases have spread at any time.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	 Then he can work boldly, but nevertheless it seems to me that it is better to leave him alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	 of the pleurisy cautery
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	 The ancients said that for pleurisy, one should use the cautery of the root of aristolochia, and in this manner: take a long root of aristolochia, the longest you can find, and let it be dry, and as thick and as long as your fingers; and soak it in oil, and hold it to the fire, and cauterize with the cautery between the sternum and the neck, and two small cauteries a little below in the part that is under the chin; and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, slanting a little behind; and one cautery in the middle of the chest, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two on the sides of the chest opposite the cautery which is between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand, but make openly as if sniffing.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	 And some ancients say that some men use a fire cautery resembling a razor, and heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches that abscess; and then the pain is relieved, as we have said in the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	 But in this work there is danger that the patient may die immediately, or a fistula may form which cannot be healed.
de la mice	 of the bladder
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	 When you treat the bladder disease as we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not improve, then there are three types of fire cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	 One of the methods is that you make three or four fire cauteries, aligning them according to the length of the bladder, similar to the liver fire cautery we mentioned earlier; and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and let the patient lie on their back; and another method of fire cautery is that you heat the cautery with two wires, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the skin that is above the bladder, where the ribs of the patient lean to the left, and the lifting should be according to the skin, according to the length of the body, and the cauteries should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	 After, he puts in the two inflamed nerves until the heart is pierced on the other side, and then draws out through the cautery, and thus there will be four. And if you see, cauterize all of the cautery with three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	 After the treatment when he has purged pus for a long time, and this is worth more than the other treatments mentioned earlier.
de ydropisie	 of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	 Cautery does not benefit someone with dropsy, except in the manner that is called "ascite".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	 When you cure according to the manners that we have said in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the navel, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the bladder, and two behind the back on the spine, and one in the place of the breast; and let the cautery be very close to the width of the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	 Après laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	 The form of the cautery for the belly should be the clavicle that we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, as is placed here before.
de l’enfleure des piez	 of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	 When the feet are swollen in one who is dropsical, and are full of watery fluid, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	 And do not enter too deeply, so that you would draw out the watery fluid, and let the cautery be in this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	 After that, make two cauteries on each leg at the tip of the little toe; and let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other outside, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries open for a long time without curing, so that the water comes out; then cure the others as we have said.
de la menoison	 of the wound
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	 When a stomach ulcer comes from cold and moisture, to the point where the retentive and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by any means of treatment; and you see the patient is strong and of great virtue, then make a large cautery on the stomach as described previously in the cautery of the stomach; and 4 subtle cauteries around the navel, each one a subtle clavicle cautery, and 2 cauteries on the groins.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	 And if you see that the moisture is abundant and the patient is strong, then make a cautery on the wrist, and one cautery on each thigh, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, for the cure is beneficial when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	 Of the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	 When the hemorrhoids are in the anus, one or several, and are old and caused by cold and moist corrupt humors, and they are treated as we have said by division, but it does not benefit much, then I make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, those that are completely underneath almecdate, slowly and in a triangle, and one cautery underneath the belly two fingers; and if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the food does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then on the face give one large cautery on the stomach as it was said before, and another on the liver, and another on the bladder with all the cautery clavicle; and let the cautery remain open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After care for the place until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	 of the fleshiness that is called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	 When you cut thelul, heat the cautery that resembles a razor, and then place it entirely ablaze on the cut thelul; and leave your hand there so that the cautery reaches the base of the vein from which the blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is a lot of thelul, cauterize each one as we have said; after the treatment with beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on alchatim, it will provide greater assistance.
de plaie mal curee	 of a poorly healed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	 When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will describe in its place, such an illness occurs that it cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	 When someone comes down with a fistula and it becomes swollen and exudes foul-smelling pus, you should test the entire tent, and ensure that you know the depth of the tent throughout.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	 After heating the cautery that appears like a razor, insert it into the fistula according to the depth at which the tent has entered, and continue cauterizing until that rotten and corrupted flesh is burned, once, twice, or three times, depending on what is needed; and beware of burning the nerves in there, and of large veins. ‍
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	 If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestines, beware of these places, and do not perform these surgeries except in a meaty place, and think that it is not persistent; after caring for the place until it heals, and if the place heals, and the matter is removed for a long time, then know that the place is entirely healed; and if the matter is not removed, know that the place is pierced, and the bone at the font is corrupted; and thus as one of those which we will speak of in its place.
de la maladie des reins	 Of the illness of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	 When pain from cold comes to the kidneys, and with severe flatulence, and if it takes on the appearance of pregnancy, then you must make a cautery on the kidneys on both sides with the clavicle cautery that we have mentioned before; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will provide greater help.
de la vessie	 of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	 When the bladder is soft and weak due to cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cautery on the part above the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, one on the right and one on the left, and let each cautery be as long as the fingers of a hand; and if you need two, make one on the back. And let the cautery be clavile according to the form mentioned above.
de la marris	 from the womb
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	 When the womb is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the periods are corrupted and their times delayed; and when they come, there is great pain: then it is necessary that one make three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries on the back; and let the cautery be clavile, as we have said.
de la hainche	 of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	 When the viscous moistures descend into the hip joint, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the sign is that when measured together the thigh is longer than the other; and if the place of separation is found to be open, then you should cauterize the patient on the hip joint with one cautery resembling a circle, and let it be before the place around the joint as it turns, so that the joint is inside the circle; and let the cautery be like that with which one has cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if this cautery is not available to you, then make three large olive-sized cauteries, and let the cautery be as deep as all the hearts; and continue the treatment until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	 of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	 When pain comes in the hip joint, due to cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of this as we have said in the division, but the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of gross humors with fetid pills or other good similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	 Afterwards, make a cautery; and the manner of the cautery is in two ways: that is to say, with burning medicines together, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	 Fire cautery is in many ways, one of which is as follows: you cauterize on the hip joint three triangular cauteries like this form, and make a good depth and large, and between each cautery there should be the thickness of a finger, and let the cautery be olive-sized; sometimes one makes a cautery in the middle on the head of the hip joint, for which there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	 And if you see it, then cauterize with the circular cautery that we have previously mentioned for the dislocation of the hip; but do so in such a manner that the circle contains all of the hip, and all of its thickness is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	 And this is the manner in which one acts for sciatica, when the pain is located in the hip and does not reach the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 And if it reaches the thigh and the leg, make two cauteries there where the patient says the pain is located; and one cautery above the ankle on the left side, slightly lower; and let the cautery be incisional, and burn the thickness of the skin. And if the patient feels that the pain extends to the toes or near them, then cauterize three or four points where he feels the pain with the cautery called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	 Et si il est necessaire, faits-en plus; et s'il sait que la douleur est sous le genou vers la cuisse, faites un cautère avec une lancette ou circulaire, et soyez bien vigilant dans tous vos cautères de ne pas laisser le fer jusqu'à ce que vous brûliez les nerfs et les grosses artères, afin de ne pas causer plus de tort au patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	 And I myself have seen many who have made a cautery on the ankle of the foot, and left it in such a way that the leg was completely swollen, and the foot as well, and the entire foot was pierced and rotten.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	 After undergoing a treatment for colic that resulted in death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	 Et si le douleur est dans deux parties ensemble, faites un cautère dans l'une et dans l'autre, selon cette manière.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	 Et les sages disent pour le cautère de la hanche, dont voici la méthode : faites un tel fer et qu'il soit au bout aussi gros qu'un pouce ou un peu moins, et qu'il ait entretoises entre lesquelles il y ait l'espace d'un nœud de poix ; et que les entretoises soient inclinées de deux côtés, et soient également comme des noix, et qu'il y ait un manche de fer bien fait; et voici la forme :
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Et il doit être chauffé jusqu'à ce qu'il soit tout rouge et dégageant des étincelles, puis on le place sur la boîte de la hanche malade, et on le tourne du côté sain; et on fait un cautère une fois par jour, et on leisse la plaie ouverte pendant trois jours ; ensuite, on fait un emplâtre de beurre, et on laisse la plaie ouverte longtemps; après le traitement par onguent jusqu'à ce qu'il soit guéri.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	 Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery due to fear of its gaze, and if we see few who use it; nevertheless, this is one of the good cauteries, which can endure, and where it is applied.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	 The cautery of medicine that burns is made in such a way that you make the instrument with interwoven parts into which the margin of the door descends, and it should be of bronze or iron with one long side, and at its height there should be two nooses, and between each there should be the width of a finger; and they should be open from within and above, and join together according to this shape:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	 Afterwards, place the box on the patient's hip as he lies on his healthy side, and then press your hand very firmly on the box on the hip; afterwards, throw between the two circles of the awl some hot liquid that has been heated over the fire, a little, and leave it there for an hour, and let the patient endure the heat and burn of it.  (Note: "I poc" is translated as "a little", and "dou tens" is translated as "of time")
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And it finds the cauterization like fire; and when the cauterization has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and gently raise the hip and let it remain thus for three days, and put on butter until the blackness of the burn is removed; and leave it for three days so that the rotting comes out; and this would be the last help after the treatment of ointments until it heals.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	 And if the pain has spread to the thigh or to the leg, make an instrument that dyes with hot water in the same way as you did on the hip; and this is the manner of hot water, and I have written it in the treatise on the correction of medicines.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	 Take quicklime and live coal, as much of one as the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	 Make a small hole in the lid so that the tip of a razor can enter; and put another well-leaded pot on top of it, and put alkali and coal on top, and pour sweet water over it until there are two handsful of water above the powders when you have it firmly grasped in your hand; and let it rest thus until the water descends into the leaded pot, then take all that water, and throw it back onto the coal and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	 And then it will be very watery and is suitable for many medical works and for cauterizing other members, because it does the same work as fire, and there are other medicines with which one can cauterize the hip well thus as terebinth and anacardium honey and coal mixed together with soap.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	 And Galen tells of a cure by which a man was healed of hip pain and sciatic vein pain, and he praises it greatly, saying that no other cure was used, and he was cured in one go when this cure was done, and he bathed as instructed hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	 And he said that you should take fresh and dry litargirum, grind it very well with a little fat, and apply it to the hip, thigh, and leg where the pain is, and bandage it; and leave it there for III hours, and in such quantity that the patient no longer feels the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	 And then make him enter the bath so that his body is a little warm, and put him to bed, and all the pain will go away and he will be cured.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	 And know that no one should use such a cautery of these medicines, except after the evacuation of pus.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	 And Dioscorides said that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with wool of goat, it helps greatly; and the cautery should be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	 Take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it on the depression that is between the big toe of the foot and the other which is called phalanx.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	 Then take dry goat wool and press it to the fire until it is charcoal, and place it on the wool, and let it stay until it is burnt; and do this again, and do not stop doing so until you feel by sense that it reaches to the hip, and that the pain is ceased; and this manner of cautery is called "goat cautery".
de la dolor dou dos	 Of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	 When pain comes to the back, from falling or from a blow or from too much bleeding, or from the spreading of cold matter, for none of these reasons is cautery worthwhile, except in cases caused by the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	 After the patient has been emptied with fetid pills or similar substances, make three lines of ink on the back where the pain is, and in each line V cauteries or more, according to the patient's ability to endure; and let the cautery be made like the one called "poin"; and if you wish, make III or IV cauteries with a medium-sized cautery following this method:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	 Many times this disease comes to small children, and the sign of its beginning is that they have narrow hips when they rise, and fear; and you find in the lower part of the back a spine that protrudes over the other vertebrae.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	 When you see this and wish to cure it, cauterize it with a heated iron in this manner.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	 So that the iron burns each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	 And if you wish, cauterize around the spine with a pointed iron two or three lines wide, and let the points be close together.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	 After curing the place until it is healed as we have said, beware of administering cautery in a part where there are nerves.
de la dolor des jointes	 of joint pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	 When joint pain is due to moist humors that are spread throughout each member of the body, and when the pain comes in the feet, which physicians call "gout" properly, and when it is caused by cold and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cautery in this manner: make many cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	 And if you need to prick on the sole of the foot, make a cautery at all the places called "points".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	 And if the pain reaches up to the knees and other joints, which often happens, then make three or four cauteries on each knee, all of them olive-shaped; and if you need more, do more, but do not hold your hand longer than it takes to burn the depth of the cautery. ︎
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	 Et si les doulours descendent iusques à genol et au dos, se li administre le cautère que nous avons dit en son chapistre.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	 And if the pains are in the hands, make two lines around the wrist; and if there remains pain in the fingers, make marks on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the ribs or to the shoulders, cauterize each part, and take good care of the patient and give him medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	 For if you take good care of him and purge phlegm, he will be healed with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	 of the treatment of the shoulder
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 When the shoulder is in spasm and the swelling descends to the hips, which has just happened, it is necessary that when you see him being treated, he should not eat anything that day; and let him use things that open up his stomach, so that the feces come out of his body. Afterwards, make him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to hold his arm as long as the swelling has subsided, then return it to your hands, and sign with ink under the shoulder onto the bone of the elbow, and let the whole mark resemble half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery as described here:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	 As long as it is white and casts shadows.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	 Until it is white and casts shadows. Then reset the joints to their place; and let the minister touch his hand above them so that they do not return behind; and work well the thighs of the patient, and put a cushion and a prop under the thighs, and another under the foot which holds the hands; then put the cautery on the sign with all your hand, and hold it straight and firmly until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, start again until you come to the bone; and be careful that the joint does not protrude when making the cautery, so as not to burn it; and thus the patient will not die or suffer other evils.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	 And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	 And it is necessary that the cautery of children be delicate according to their measure, and likewise for adults according to their measure; after three days, cure the place with butter until the burn is removed; then cure with other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is well closed; and it is necessary that his care be prolonged, so that the blisters do not break out when he wants to go into rooms.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	 And after forty days, when he wants to get up, let him be given a well-made bandage and wear it for another forty days; and may he have good rest, that he labor little and guard against overindulgence in drinking and eating and excessive laughter; and when he follows this instruction, then he is completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	 And I will say hereafter the treatment of cutting in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	 of the perforation of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	 When perforations occur in other bellies and are noticeable, and you see that they do not grow any longer, perform the cautery of the cautery again according to its quantity, and let it be burned by one-third of the heart; after the treatment as we have said; and some of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with a three-angled cautery like this:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	 but first mark the place of entry and make a line along the width above the perforation, and another below it, and then hold your hand in the middle of all the cautery firmly.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	 But the first cautery is lighter and milder.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	 of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	 When pain comes to any limb, whether from falling or striking, and that pain lasts a long time, and medical treatment has no effect, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "poins", and let the cautery be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and strength and location of twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	 If he is healed from the first cautery, that is good; if not, then another cautery should be done on it, because such is the custom that it should move to the nearest limb, for which reason you must make as many cauteries as necessary until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	 Of mixing
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	 The mixtures are sometimes helped by cautery with great assistance, and especially the diseases that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	 If you see it being cauterized, take care if the disease is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not worsen or remain, and you doubt that corruption may spread throughout the patient, then make V cauteries on the head: I in the middle of the head towards the back, and the other towards the forehead at the hairline; and II on each side of the temples; and I behind on the occiput; and leave your hand there until the cautery reaches the bone, and so that the scales come out so that the vapors of gross humors can escape; and cauterize on the neck as mentioned before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	 And if the mischief is everywhere scattered; and it clearly worsens, then you must cauterize with these cauteries that we have mentioned before, one cautery on the neck, two cauteries on the spine of the neck, six cauteries on the spine of the back, one large cautery on the buttock and another nearby, two on each shoulder; two on the ribs, two on the tendons of the foot, one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are on the hindquarters, lest you burn them; and sometimes someone makes a cautery on the bone of the wrist, and one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	 And know that the more I do of cautery, the more I help him, and it benefits him; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as the healthy person feels it, because the body is already completely corrupt.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	 And it is necessary that the cautery be large and small according to the members and the joints, as you will find in the manner of irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	 After the cure, treat the place with flour of vetch mixed with honey and other cures until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When swelling comes to any member and is cured by medicines, oils, and plasters, and it is not healed, then I make cauteries on the member according to the size of the member; and let the cautery be a little deeper than the thickness of the skin; then cure it with onions until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	 And sometimes one makes a cautery both on the hand and on the foot and on the back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb; and thus the swelling is removed; however, no one should intervene unless he is knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the moving nerves of the body.
de albaras	 Of bandages
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the disease called "albaras" is discovered, and medicinal remedies have no effect on it, then one cauterizes it with a cautery somewhat deeply, according to the thickness of the skin, until the paleness is removed and its color changes; then cure it with a mixture of flour of peas and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of a pigeon and almonds, each one part; and mix everything together, and bind it with a cloth, and place it at the spot until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	 The treatment of cancer with cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	 When the cancer first appears and you see it halted, then burn it with a cautery shaped like a circle, all around the circumference of the cancer.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	 However, the wise say that one should also burn in the middle of the cancer; but this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it may be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen this happen sometimes; and a more direct thing is that it be burned around [the edge], with the cautery called "circular," as we have said in many places about cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	 from the inflammation which cannot heal
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	 When someone has an illness called "adubelati," and it is slow to heal due to the excess of what it produces or because of the patient's weakness when they are infirm (that is, too old) and have little blood, or because of the time; and you see that it hastens to heal: then burn it all around with many small cauteries by pricking; afterwards leave it thus. ‌
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	 Because she will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 And if you see her pierced with the entire cautery, then heat the cautery as follows:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	 And put your hand in the middle of this illness called "adubelati" so that the cautery can pierce the heart, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it outside in this way, so that the course of the corruption is lightened.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 After the treatment until he is perfectly cured.
li cure dou feu par fer	 The treatment by fire with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	 There is another type of illness called "corrodens," and it is nothing but the consumption of a member, for it consumes the members just as fire consumes dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	 Se tu vois cette maladie en un lieu où il peut supporter la cautérisation avec du feu, alors chauffe les cautères clavile très peu et beaucoup, selon ce qu'il convient pour le lieu où se trouve la maladie; ensuite cautérise de tous les côtés jusqu'à ce que tu élimines toute la corruption, et qu'il ne reste rien d'elle, afin que tout ce qui est corrompu soit enlevé.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	 Et puis le laisse trois jours, et met sur les lieux cautérisés une pommade à base d'huile jusqu'à ce que les brûlures causées par le feu disparaissent, ainsi que toute la corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	 Après le traitement des plaies qui produisent de la chair.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	 And if after three days no healthy flesh grows, that is good; and if not, then restart the cautery on that which remains of the corrupt place.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	 And this affliction has sometimes been cured with cold medicine instead of fire cautery; however, fire cautery is more effective, and I have already discussed the treatment with cold medicine in the previous section: take it when needed.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	 Of leeks that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	 It often happens that on the soles of the feet a disease appears which we call "close," and it is a large growth that injures the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	 And the cautery for this disease is according to two methods.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	 It is to know the fire cautery, and the hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	 The fire cautery is that you heat the iron cautery like a quill pen, and it should be made of good iron in such a way that it can pierce the nail from all sides, and there should be subtle edges on it; then put it hot on the nail, and turn your hand completely around the nail until it reaches the tip of the nail; and let it remain so for three days until it begins to produce pus; then make him a plaster of crushed wild mallows with salt, and leave the plaster on all night, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal the burned place by applying a salve until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	 And if they have grown outward from the body, and this often happens in hands and feet, then you must apply a hot water cautery; and it is done thus: take an iron or brass tube, or a goose feather, and place over the nail and wart, that is to say, for small warts; and put the tube over so that it covers all around, then put a little hot water on it, and hold your hand well, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the tube comes to the base of the nail, and let the hot water find its way deep to the base; and allow the patient to endure the scalding of the hot water for an hour; then leave them thus, and they will all be uprooted completely.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	 And so one after another, until you heal all those that are on the body, then treat the swellings that generate flesh.
li cure dou trembler	 The treatment of trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	 When some shake from the coldness of nerves, or quartan fever, or other causes, it is necessary that you make four or five cauteries on the spine of the back, one cautery between each vertebra; and one cautery on the foot, and one on the stomach at the olive-shaped cautery; this will cease the shaking, and health will be hastened from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	 of stinking pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	 Sometimes there appear on the surface of the body boils or stinking pustules, which come from large corrupt substances.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	 if it is necessary at the first appearance that a cautery be made on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery of myrtle wood, whose point should be grasped by the fire, or a long root of aristolochia, or a lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	 And sometimes they cauterize at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and they cannot grow after that, but the superfluousness from which they come is destroyed, and they are healed; but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	 when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	 Many times there is great hemorrhage from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes forward, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is a very serious matter to staunch.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	 And nevertheless, when this happens to someone, hasten to put your finger on the vein wound, and hold it very tightly until the blood is calmed under your finger, and no drop comes out; then put several olive-shaped cauteries in the fire, small and large, until they are all red; then take one, whether large or small according to the wound and the place where the vein is open, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery there until the blood is coagulated.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	 And if it spurts when you remove your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then take hastily another one of the cauteries that are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	 And do not stop doing one after the other until the blood is clotted; and beware that you do not burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient; and know that when blood flows from the artery, it cannot be properly clotted even if the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods we have mentioned: by cautery, or by extraction if it has not been treated, or by tightly tying with thread, or by applying medicines that have the power to clot blood; and let it be tied and constricted accordingly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	 Whoever administers clotting by tightly tying with cloths or placing heated objects on it, or other similar things, if it does not help, then it is of no use.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	 And if this happens to someone and he does not have a doctor or present medicine, then he should put his finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and press well until it is congested over the wound and over the vein; and do not move the finger, but moisten it with cold water frequently so that the blood becomes frozen and swollen and congested; and make inquiries afterwards for whatever he needs of cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	 Here begins the second book on the treatment of hemorrhoids
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	 We have told you in the first chapter about every disease where it is necessary to cauterize with fire or burning medicine, and the tools and causes and forms of cauteries; and I placed that chapter from head to toe, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same path so that one can more easily find what one wants.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	 And before I begin this, dear son, you must learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first cautery, and therefore greater care is needed.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	 For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	 And I advise you not to undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	 For many kinds of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	 if they come from such people who are so affected by their illness that they will die easily due to the madness they find in it, and because of the greatness of their illness; and these one should fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	 And of these there are some who give you their senses and say: "Wait, I am healed"; and the illness is deceitful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	 It is not fitting for you to consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put more consideration in your honor than in your greed, and do not open recklessly but wisely concerning what you are certain about, from which you can take praise and fame; and use prognostication and indication in the cures of your patients so that health may be restored; and this will help you to acquire a good reputation, glory, and praiseworthy memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	 Very dear son, may our Lord give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	 Or I have arranged this chapter in discussing by chapters, according to what is before the chapter on cauteries, which I have discussed from the head down to the feet, so that you may find more easily what you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	 full of water from the head
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	 Know that this disease comes often to children at birth, and when the delivery is too hard on the child's head; and sometimes it comes from an unknown cause.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	 And I have never seen this disease except in children, and in all those that I have seen death came quickly; and therefore it seems to me that it is better to leave the work in such cases.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	 And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head swelled every day so much that it could not support it; and the moisture grew so much that he died, and this moisture is gathered under the bone on the cheekbone, between the heart and the bone; and the work is such if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, that you split open the head with a wide incision; and let it be as long as two fingers, until the moisture runs out; and see here the form of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	 If the moisture is thicker, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	 And if the moisture is under the bone, and the sign you see are the openings at the top of each part, and it jumps with great force when you press your hand inside, and this does not respond to you: then you must make three incisions in the middle of the head in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	 And after the incision, draw out all the moisture completely.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	 After, bind the incisions with cloths and powders, and put wine and oil on them, and leave it thus until the fifth day; then release it, and treat the wound by tenting and applying bandages, and let the head heal evenly, and give the patient dry food of little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	 And another method of incision is that you observe where the opening of the abscess is, and the gathering of the water; for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	 Cut then where the abscess opens, and the gathering of the water, and make an incision according to what you have the power to do; and beware that you do not cut the artery; and let blood flow, so that the patient does not die from blood loss and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	 of fever
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	 When someone has a disease called "catarrh" in the eyes or the bladder, and the disease is chronic, and medical treatment does not help, then the last resort is to use cautery by cutting the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	 It is necessary, then, when you see them bleeding, that the patient lean back his head; afterwards rub the place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then have the patient stretch his neck all along the cloth; then look where the vein beats, and the places of one and the other are after the ears, and they are not far apart; then mark the places, then cut one and the other with a sharp spatula of two parts, as deep as the incision reaches to the bone, and let it be wide across the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	 And if you see, push the spatula underneath the artery and cut above it, slicing as if two fingers across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	 And when the vein is cut, the blood spurts up continually.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 And if the artery does not open upon palpation, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the space of III fingers, then signify and cut until the bone; and what must be let out of blood is VI c/, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the fullness of the artery; then look at the wound: if there remains on the bone any scab, cut it so that no such abscess comes, then press the wound and bind it, and care with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	 of headache
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	 When the migraine comes on, and acute catarrh due to the moisture of tears, heat in the temples, and old senile insanity, and similar things, and it is treated by various medical treatments but none of these help, then we extract the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	 And the method of extracting them is such that the patient pulls back the hair from his temples and looks for the artery which appears in the temple, for it appears well by its pulsation, and it is little concealed except in some men who are too cold; and if it is concealed, let the patient stretch his neck with some cloths, then rub the place with some rough cloth, and wash the place with hot water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatula which has this form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	 Then gently scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then pull it upward with tweezers, and carefully separate the threads that are beneath each part; and if the artery is thin, turn it with the tip of a hook, then cut off that part according to the quantity of the II fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	 For if it is not cut, the blood will not flow at all.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	 And draw out the blood of VI c/ until III; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it with II strong double silk threads to prevent infection before the healing of the wound, and let the bleeding come gradually; then cut off the excess between the II ties immediately in that hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize with the cutting cautery until the bone, so that the fingers are severed; and this is a moderate work, if the patient does not have a fever and he has a warm temperament.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	 For the fire cautery is used to end the moists; therefore, it is of greater help to the moists.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	 Or for the extraction of arteries, one should fill the place with old cotton and put on well-made bandages; and when they are loosened, it should be cured with dry medicines that produce flesh, and with bandages, until it is healed; and if there is blood from the artery as much as you work there, hasten to close it with a cautery or fill the place with vitriol and hold it in your hand so that the blood is stopped; and if you do not have this present, then put your finger on the place until the blood is frozen, and rinse the place with cold water until the bleeding stops, and hold it as needed; and what is easier and lighter for the extraction of an artery is to cauterize the vein of this cautery by cutting into two parts, but let the cuts be well spaced to retain their heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	 Because when the instrument is too dull, it retains less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 And it must have between the two knives one knife's width of space, and then when you have placed the two in the proper places, and you measure your heated iron until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and let them be distant from each other because it is not completely healed by this cautery; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	 tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	 When tears flow from the eyes into veins that are on the forehead, and no medical treatment is beneficial, and you see the patient's face redden, and feel a throbbing in the forehead as if with fever; and their eyelids are pale and moist so that the hairs of the eyelashes fall out, and the eyelids are hot and scorched by the heat of the tears, then this treatment is needed.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	 And the ancients called it "treatment for contusion," and it is that you do to the patient who has this disease the hairs that he may have on his forehead, then make III incisions on the forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead; and let one of the incisions be as II thumbs in the middle of the forehead going downwards until the neck, and the other two on the temples above the eyebrows, and beware of cutting the arteries that are on the temples above the eyebrows; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the II jawbones, and let each wound be the quantity of III thumbs in width; and have prepared a piece of sponge and much cloth for wiping away the blood, then apply the sharp spatula in two parts where this form is:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	 From the incision which is in front of the temple up to the second incision; and scrape all the heart that is between the two slits at all the tissue that is on the bone, then do another part from the middle incision up to the other second, and then extract strongly this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	 If you put in the first slit the instrument which is called "scalpel," and it is very sharp on one side and soft, not sharp, on the other; this is its shape.
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	 And put the cutting side towards the tough heart tissue and the soft side towards the bone, and push it until it reaches the middle slit.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes so that the incision is continuous until it opens to the heart; then do another part in the middle slit up to the other defect; and then extract the blood equally, and press the place for the taken blood; then put in each slit a tent of old cotton, and put on wet cloths in wine and oil and vinegar, and ensure that such abscesses do not come there; and on the third day remove the bandage, and bring great plenty of warm water, then the cure of ointment basilicum with rose oil, and other cures by which wounds are cured, until they are healed.
dou reume des eulz	 Of the rheum of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	 When acute catarrh comes to anyone, and you see the eyes dim and small, and the vision weakened, and the eyelids burned; and the hair falls out, and there is a severe headache, and the patient sneezes; then know by these signs that those substances and this catarrh come from many veins, and if there is no cure for it, then this is the treatment.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	 And you should instruct the patient to shave his forehead, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another one as wide as an inch.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	 And begin the incision from the left temple to the right temple, and let the cut go down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move when chewing; and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, then insert old cotton and linen threads between the two lips of the incision, then bind it with cloths soaked in wine and oil, and beware of hot abscesses; when they are removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat it with drying agents that promote flesh growth.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	 In this manner: take two parts of flour from wheat, and four parts of resin, and make a poultice; and administer it in these wounds to heal all flesh.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	 of the stoppage of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	 Everything that falls into the ears is one of these four things: grain, an animal, a stone from mining or similar things like iron; or seed, such as peas, beans, lentils; or something flowing, such as water and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	 When something falls into the ear that does not fit in the ear and does not grow in the ear, put the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	 If you see the stone, then drip some drops of violet oil or sesame oil, then administer extraction; and make him sneeze by conditioning [the air], and plug his nostrils when the sneezing comes, and put pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and stretch the ear upwards.  />
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	 Often fever comes from this treatment; if it does not come, then administer extraction with subtle lancets.
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	 If fever comes from the lancets, it is good; if not, then administer extraction with a subtle onion of small double; and if it does not come that way, make an iron tube and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal strongly, and stop up what is around the tube with soft wax so that the wind cannot enter with the tube; then draw fever strongly, for very often fever comes as we have said; and if it does not come in this manner, then take a glutinous substance from which birds feed, and put some in a suitable instrument, and put a little cotton around; then press the glutinous substance on the stone or whatever it may be, and draw fever.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if she does not jump from all these things that we have said, then hurry to cut the ear before an abscess or spasm comes there; and the way of the cutting is such that you first make the patient sit under the cephalic vein, and draw blood according to its measure of virtue. Then make the patient sit between your hands and turn their ear upwards, and make a small cut at the root of the ear into the fat or dependent place; and let the cut be like a half-moon, until you reach the stone, then remove it according to your ability, and suck it hastily to your mouth; and treat until he is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	 And if it is a grain that is inside and swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer a subtle tenuous spatula according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	 and make an incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	 But do not do this when you think the grain is moist because of the moisture in the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract with fine tweezers and the suction cup, as we have said, so that the extraction may be easy.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	 In the case where water falls into the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use sneezing with pepper first, and fill the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	 And let him lie on that same ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	 If it jumps out by itself, that is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	 If not by itself, then take many small and light stones according to the length of your thumb, and heat them slightly in the fire. Have the patient put one in the opening of his ear, and jump on his feet from the other side, and strike with another stone on the stone that is in the ear; and do not stop doing this with stone after stone until all the water comes out, and thus it jumps out entirely. And if you see, then take a reed, and put one end in the ear, and hold the other end in the fire so that the thinnest part of the reed is burned; then repeat the process with other reeds until all the water comes out, as we have said about the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	 En l’estraction de la beste, if it is of small size, such as a flea or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is of large size that can be felt, then use extraction by pricking; and this is the lightest thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	 En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, when you treat it as we have said in the division and in dealing with distillations, if the treatment does not help, then you must look at the ear in the sun: if any worms appear, draw them out with subtle pricks, and if they do not appear, take the cane of which this is the form:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	 And let it be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	 And put the most subtle end in the ear according to the quantity of the patient's suffering, then suck all the wax out; do this often until all the worms come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	 And if they do not come out, then stop up the ear with cotton as I have said before; and if they do not jump out as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proven for the killing of worms, and you will find in the treatment of distillations; and also distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all this apparatus, which is shaped like this:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	 And let it be of silver or brass narrow at the bottom with a small opening, and open on top for distillation; and to press in the distillation there is a well-made brass instrument for this purpose, and if you wish, take a scraper and wrap cotton around the tip evenly; then throw your oil or juice, and whatever you want of your medicines into the ear, and let the ear be in the ear; then put the scraper inside all the cotton, and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled into the opening of the ear; and let the patient feel it inside, and let the distillation be a little heated by the fire before you distill it into the ear; and take care that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	 Of the stoppage of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	 No child is born without any hole in the ears; and this same thing happens to men by stoppage of a wound, or of flesh born within the ear, and these stoppages sometimes go deep into the ear so that it cannot be seen; and sometimes the hole disappears, which can be clearly seen.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	 Therefore, those that go deep and cannot be seen are of serious illness in many cases, and in those that can be seen, it is necessary that you place the patient's ear towards the sun; and look inside: if you see the stoppage clearly, then work with all this spatula to remove it.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	 Et il doit être aiguisé et tranchant à l'avant et à l'arrière tout autour, afin qu'il ne blesse pas l'oreille; si l'opération est sur la chair nouvellement formée ou le corps de l'oreille, alors tenez-le avec des pinces fines, et coupez légèrement jusqu'à ce que toute cette chair soit complètement enlevée.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	 And if the incision is deep in the ear, then take a subtle and light razor and heat it a little over the fire, then place it on the body of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	 If you feel the incision where the patient feels pain, pierce lightly and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear; then place in the ear a tent according to the width of the hole, and soak it in Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Do this every day until the wound is healed: Take a cloth and soak it in rose water, and sprinkle powdered vitriol on it. And if you see the ear swelling, then you must remove the cloth and apply another cloth moistened with ointment made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then continue the treatment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	 And if bleeding occurs, soak a sponge in cold water and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding which are described in the section on distillations.
de la char des papieres	 of the flesh of the blisters
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	 This blister that comes on the eyes when they are moist and then dry, you should extend it with tweezers and scissors, and cut off the top with a spatula made from its roots; then apply powdered vitriol to the place.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	 And if it exfoliates, then cauterize with the subtle lancet cautery, and after incision the cautery works well; and many times they return, because some part remains from their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, then those roots are burnt and do not come back.
de la gresle	 of the hail
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	 Many times in the eyes there appear things that resemble hail in their shape and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "hailstone", and it is a large assembly of moisture on the surface and inside the eye; the treatment is as follows: take care if the hailstone moves from one side to the other, which is an easy thing to know; then make a wide incision, then lightly scrape each part, then take it with forceps, and cut it off.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	 If you cannot cut it without piercing the skin a little, it does not harm the patient; and if the wound is large, sew it with one stitch, and cure it until it heals; and if it is small, do not apply too much pressure, for the ointment restores it quickly and heals the flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	 And if the boil descends inside the ear towards the upper part, then turn the skin over and spread out the boil with tweezers, and cut and press it from both sides; and if the skin is pushed away by the incision, that does not matter; and when the boil is cut open, wash the area with salt water, and treat the place with that which heals flesh until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	 of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	 of the paper that is applied on top of the skin above it, and this happens more in children than in any other people, and it greatly troubles their eyes, and they get catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because tears rush to their eyes; and for this reason, they always lie down on their faces and sleep with them, and their skin underneath their eyelashes is moist where the swelling and appearance are covered by exinach which opens in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	 And when you press on the place with your fingers and feel the exinach between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	 And the manner of working is that the patient puts his head in your hand; and then take a cloth of linen, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains exinach from each part, then put it on him; and press with your fingers on one side and the other, so that the exinach is gathered into the circle; then make in the middle of the moisture with a sharp lancet a slit wide enough, and not be larger than the wound made in the vein of the arm; and pierce the skin deeply until you reach the exinach; and in many dispositions comes out exinach from the slit, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	 Tear off then all in one piece of cloth between your fingers toward the outside, and turn your hand to the right and to the left until it is spread out; and beware that you do not approach the crack, lest you come to blind the entire eye up to the eyelid, lest you injure it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	 And if the eyelash does not open at the beginning of the fissure, then widen the fissure slightly until it opens; then tear off as we have said, then moisten cloths in oil and water, and place on the spot, and bind with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	 And there are such men who grind salt and put it on to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat until healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the boil is hot in place, then treat with soothing poultices until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	 of the hair follicles
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	 When hairs grow in papillae other than the natural ones, and they are irritated, they harm the eyes and bring on various diseases such as chronic tears, softening of the skin, and cataracts, to the point that it causes blindness; and the treatment is according to four methods: either by cautery with fire, or by purgative medicine as described in the previous chapter on cautery, or by incision and suturing, or by canthus, as I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	 It is necessary that you place the patient's head in your hand, then turn the paper of the eye towards your left hand; if it is turned, that is good; if not, insert a needle with all its thread on top; and let it be near the edge of the paper where the hair grows near these hairs, and draw the thread above all the way to the paper, and turn to the razor; then make an incision in the part below the paper, below the joined hairs, covering everything from the large tear duct to the small one; then extract the thread, and place a small tent of cotton and linen under the paper, then seal on the paper a figure of ink, like the leaf of myrtle, and nevertheless it is necessary that the figure be according to the amount you wish to raise the paper which is divided for all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	 And so, for one who needs it, cut a large quantity of the skin according to how soft the skin is; then make an incision along all the spatula lines that you have marked, and begin from the great tear duct down to the small one; let one of the fissures be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root; then put the ointment in one of the two corners of the heart; then remove all the skin; then join the two lips with a stitch of a needle at one thread of fine wool, and wipe the blood, and make the superfluity of the threads adhere on the two sorcerers with any gluey things if you wish to do this; and if not, then don't worry about it, but leave the stitch and the threads for three days or four; then heal the wound without a stitch with drying and constricting substances, because the skin will heal on its own at the closing of the wound and the joining together, but the stitch is harmful (as the ancients say), and this work is without fear; and there is another way: which is to mark the skin with a figure that is like the leaves of myrtle, as we have described, with three open ointments according to the form which is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	 then take this which surmounts the small forces equally according to the form that is here
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	 and if you do not have the power to hold the pliers, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle with one thread, and push it into the figure; and push another thread next to the large lip, and the second thread next to the small one, and assemble the threads equally between your fingers; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin on which you have signed, as we have said, then assemble the two lips of the wound by stitching, and cure it until it is healed; and if pus forms at your incision, soothe it with wax and similar soothing ointments; and sometimes it happens that the hair of the skin is turned: then you must use what we have said about the incision; but stitching in one place or another is more skilled.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	 Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: and the treatment of dogs is as follows: you must turn the paper and the opening inside as I have said; then make two dogs by art, and two fine threads as long as the paper and as wide as the spatula's width; and cut off at the two ends where you hold the threads; then subtly connect one to the other above what surmounts the paper of the eye, and tighten the two dogs from the two parts firmly; and leave it this way for some days, and the skin that is tightened will die and blacken and rot, until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	 If it delays, cut it with scissors, then treat it until it is healed; and when the wound is closed, and the paper is removed, the hairs will no longer grow; and these are the shapes of the two dogs that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	 The work is such that you should take a subtle needle and thread it with a soft and subtle silk thread; then bring the heads together and tie them both subtly, and let the length of the threads be one palm long; then arrange another brief thread of silk in the shaft, and tie the ends of the thread; then have the patient put their head on your hand; and let it be near the sun so that the work is illuminated, for this is a subtle and small work.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	 And if the hair is removed and the hair does not come out with it, then you will draw out the hair all the way to the end of the thread that you have threaded, until the hair comes out through the hole above and you see it with your eye; then you will pull out the hair and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for two days or three, until the hair regrows in its place and the flesh grows back; and if the hair is small, let there be one long natural hair accompanying it, and raise it with that one until it is elongated and then remove it.
de la porriture de l’oil	 of the eye infection
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	 When this disease called "aleacrati" or eye infection occurs in the eye, there are two types: one is natural, and the other is unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	 And it happens suddenly from a wound, or from cutting, or from cautery, and from similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	 And the manner of working on it is that you split that joint, and sever its lips, and place linen tents inside, and bind it until it heals; and it is not necessary to use in its care things that dry out and restrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	 For if you do this, the disease returns worse than before; but work with softening things, such as fenugreek; and wash it with water or altea, and seeds of flax cooked, and onions of dyacilon melted in some oils, and wrap a tent around it, and cure it this way.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	 And the treasure of your care is that you take heed that it does not heal according to the form which it was before; and these works which we have said are not beyond the remedies of this sickness, that it may return according to the form which it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	 of the flesh which comes into the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	 This sickness that is beneath which is truly called "axacrati," and it is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	 The accident comes from wound and tear and cautery and similar things; and the way of the work in it is that you take a needle with which there are two threads, and the point into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left corner of the eye to the right, so that the thread comes into two corners of the flesh; then stretch the flesh above all the needle, and cut off one broad spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the shape of the stone returns as it should be, that is good; but if not, take a scraper and place it in the cleft, and turn the stone, and make two clefts on either side inside the stone; and let the heads of the two clefts be at the two corners of the incision that you have made, and let an angle be made so that when they are assembled, the shape is like the shape of a letter which is called "I grieche"; then remove that flesh according to the quantity that its edges are sharp beneath it, from what follows the stone, then join the two severed parts, and sew them with a wool thread; then follow the cure as we have said about softening medicines, and of tents, until he is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	 Et si la maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, il est nécessaire que tu fasses une incision pleine sous les poils des papiers; ensuite, tu dois faire l'opération selon la forme de la maladie, car elle est très diverse en forme. Et le sage maître doit préparer un ingénieux dispositif avec tout son pouvoir pour ramener la figure à sa forme naturelle; et le patient lui-même doit être préparé avec les instruments nécessaires en plusieurs positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	 Si la maladie vient de fendure, de couture ou de cautérisation, il est nécessaire que tu fasses une incision pleine sous les poils des papier
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When this fusion happens to some men in such a way that the skin above is fused with the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must insert the tip of a razor underneath the skin, and lift it up; and you apply the tweezers, until you cut what is in contact with the thin spatula, which should not be too sharp or cutting, so that the patient cannot tolerate being cut by the spatula; and your incision, with which you scrape off that assembly, should be light, so that the skin returns to its natural form; and all that assembly is healed, and sometimes in the eye it causes salty tears, and you lift it with fresh water, and with collyrium; then place between the skin and the eye a linen tent, and put on the eye wool moistened with plenty of egg; and after three days use the collyrium and healing substances until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	 of the nail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	 Know that the nail is in two forms: one is nerve-like and resembles a hard shapeless mass, and the other which is not nerve-like, but resembles white congealed moisture; when touched by iron or tried with pincers, no one can grasp it. Both appearances begin towards the inner corner of the eye, and grow little by little until they cover the entire sight, the light, and the movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	 And the method of incision is such that the patient places their head in your hand, then opens their eyes. And you lift the skin to your hand, then roll the nail with small pincers and place it above; then take a needle, and put one hair from a horse, cow, or ox into it, and a strong thread. And double the point of the needle slightly and insert it into the nail, and pierce all the way through with the needle, and tie the nail with a thread and place it above, and shave to the root of the nail following the vein and the silk of the hair up to the head, then trim the remainder in the corner of the eye with a subtle spatula and small forceps, leaving the natural flesh in the corner of the eye so that tears do not come through the incision; sometimes the nails are only placed on the eyelid and on the thread, as we have said.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And see to it that the saliva does not touch the flesh and tear it, and that the prune seed is not punctured; and after the incision, put in the eye a little of boiled linseed, and made from lead into oil, and leave it until the next day; then heal as needed until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	 And if the nail is not fleshy and you cannot insert the needle and the hook cannot enter, often this appearance of a nail is treated with medicine; and as I have said in the division, and if you see it covered, then work on the eye of the patient, and take a little light saliva in this manner:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	 And shave the nail carefully, and if you see that it does not diminish and the root approaches, then drip into the eye a drop made of lead and red ocher and sealed, and stuff the eye until the next day; then begin again the other work according to this same work, until it is all removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If nothing stands in the way in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then leave it, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then begin again with the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	 And if the appearance of the flesh from the tear duct affects the eye with great harm, then suspend it at the corner, and cut a part of it but not all, so that no tears come into it; then drip into the eye red collyrium which is made of lead.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	 Of the flesh that grows over the eyelid
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	 Of the flesh that grows over the eyelid, in some men there sometimes grows red flesh, which covers the eyelid and extends onto the cheeks and turns outwards, and it appears like a rose on a baluster; and the operation is such that the patient places his head in your lap, then you open the eyes, and peel off all of that flesh with tweezers suitable for this purpose, and hold it firmly; then cut off the first piece of flesh, and continue cutting to the root until the end, and be careful not to damage the eye during the operation; and let the incision of the spatula be as we said in the incision of the nail and small forces from which one removes the scab, as the figure after this chapter demonstrates; and when the incision is completed and all the flesh removed, fill the eye with boiled salt water or instill red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines into it, and place a cotton pad soaked in egg white on the eye, so that it is secure from inflammation; and if there remains anything, and pus overcomes you, and you doubt inflammation, then leave the eye and treat the inflammation with soothing remedies; then return to your operation until it is healed, and do the same when flesh grows in the eye in this manner.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	 But nevertheless, you must cure each weak eye according to its natural way; and for the accidental way, in ironwork; and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this member can endure this work.
des voines des eulz	 of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	 There are red veins that appear on the eye and prevent it from working properly, weakening the eye every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	 It is therefore necessary that you first check whether the eye in which there is a vein is sound and does not have any other disease except for the vein; then deal with the eye in this way: instruct the patient to place his head in your hand, then carefully cut those veins along the entire length according to your skill, and let the scissors be sharp, double-edged like this shape:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	 Et que ce soit fait en deux fois, progressivement dans le corps selon cette forme :
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	 and then close subtly those veins with the forces, and wipe away the blood hour by hour until you see those veins withdraw from the eye; and take care not to injure the eye with the points of the spatulas, and perform this work at noon before the sun, and be very careful in your work so that you only cut those veins; and when you have done this, then instill into the eye a green and red collyrium to destroy what remains of the blackness.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	 And if you do not have the power to close all of them in that hour, then make a poultice on the eye with things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is soothed and assured without infection, then begin again according to this manner which was before until it is healed; and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	 of the eye's fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	 The doctors call «arissati» fistula: when you cure it by cautery and with burning medicine as I have said before, and if it is not healed, there is an abscess within it that you should open above the abscess where it must die, and draw out all the moisture that is there, until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	 And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, then clean it with all the tools of which this form exists; and it is called «aspre chief», and let it be made of iron or steel, and let it be sharpened like a file as shown in the present figure:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	 And place the corrupt bone under the healthy one, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand until you know that this corruption is dried out; and do this several times, then restore the place with drying medications.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	 if the place is healed and flesh grows there, and the body of the wound is healed and remains so for forty days without reopening or becoming infected with evil accidents, then you know that it is healed; but if not, there is no other device than to bring the fistula back to the opening of the nostril in this manner: and it is necessary that you expose the bone a second time with iron and sharp medicines, and when it is exposed, take a piece of wood like this shape, and let the head of the iron be at three angles, and let the stick be thinned until its end as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	 Then place it on the bone near the eye socket, and remove your hand from the pocket, then turn the drill completely until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it because the wind exits if he holds his hand over his nose; and then restore the place with dry medicine, as I have shown you, and when the flesh emerges and hardens the place, the material goes to the nose; so it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	 of the exit of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the eye is completely open throughout and there is no obstruction or shrinkage of the nose, it is necessary that you bind the patient; then heal it, then place cupping glasses on the temple without pricking to draw out, then place on the eye a plaster made of alum, aloe, frankincense, and mastic, then hold the eye, and bandage with cloths and strips; and the manner of the cloths is such that you take cloths soft enough, and double each one four times, and then place one on top of the other according to the amount that the eye needs; then bind tightly above with a firm strip, and renew the cupping glasses to draw out without pricking; then remove the cupping glasses and leave the eye bound day and night, and if the bandage softens, it is necessary that you bind it strongly; then remove the bandage after the day and night, and if you see the eye begin to heal, it is good; if not, then renew the plaster and the cloths and the bandage and the cupping glasses until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	 For the breaking of a bladder swelling
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 When disruption occurs in the bladder swelling, it opens, and there comes out pus like grains of resin, which is frightening to see; then if you see it open, the operation is such that you insert a needle into the root of the lower part until it reaches the upper part, then insert another needle where there is a double thread from the edge of the eyelid; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to the position; then cut off the place of the double thread and tie a piece of the bladder around it, and tighten it well, then extract the needle and put on the eye a cloth moistened with plenty of egg; and let it be until the threads join with the bladder, then treat the eye with soothing things until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is restricted by the bladder each part of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the eyes give off a strong appearance, then pierce it with a subtle spatula that comes to the depth of the eye, and drain the watery moisture, and let the eye descend, and insert it quickly; then draw it out until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	 from the bottom of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	 This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing other than water that is gathered in the eye, appearing like descending water, and this is not water; and the manner of the appearance of the work is such that you make the patient sit on a prepared and straight seat, then take the head between your hands from two parts, and move it so that you see the water come above your eyes; then let it be inserted, and do not allow it to descend and let the light be obstructed, and let the patient see things as he used to; and if it does not descend below, know that it is water, and if the descent of the water is not prepared as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 If the patient is sitting between your hands, then take a fine spatula and make an incision on the horny layer of the eyelid along the continuation of the conjunctiva with the horny layer and the cornea, until the abscess comes out; and when it has come out, drip hot water mixed with honey into the eye, or boiled fenugreek water mixed with honey, then continue treatment until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	 of the water of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	 We have seen similar waters in the division, and those that should be pierced; then operate according to good health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	 It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light of the sun, and tie the healthy eye tightly; then place the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eye is left, or in your right hand if the eye is right; then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument called "almagda," or in your left hand if the eye is right; then place the point of the instrument near the cornea by the thickness of a hair at that shiny part of the eye towards the inner corner, then thrust the instrument called "almagda" skillfully, and turn your hand until it pierces into the shine of the eye, and feel that almagda reaches the empty place; and it is necessary that the measure of the almagda be to the depth of the measure of the space from the pupil to the end of the black; and this is the cornea of the eye; then you will see the bone in that paper through the clarity of the horny layer, and then place the instrument up to where the water is, then press down one way after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	 If the water descends now, then the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	 After resting it a little, and if the water rises again the second time, place the finger with the instrument, and when it is inserted and does not rise, gently withdraw the almond turning your hand a bit; then put back in water a drop of holy oil, and lift the eyelid inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	 Then place over the eye cotton or wool soaked in rose oil and plenty of egg yolk, and bind with clean cloth.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	 We, and those of our time, apply comfrey with plenty of egg yolk.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	 And if the almond cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are such men who have eyes that are too hard, then you must take the instrument called "alberit", which looks like this:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	 And pierce the conjunctiva only, and do not go too deep, but make the place subtle; then put in almagda, as we have said; and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient an agreeable sleeper, in which he should sleep on his back in a dark place; and be free from all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head to the right or to the left, and let him be bound according to his disposition until the third day; then unbind him in that same dark house, and test his vision, and show him some things, and then rebinding him until the seventh day; and it is not necessary that you do this at the time of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you bind him beforehand, because the water rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	 If abscesses like this appear, uncover the eye before the seventh day, and apply what relieves abscesses; and when it is calmed, uncover the eye and place on its face a bandage for some days, and let it always be in that darkened room.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	 And then go out of the house little by little, and turn according to his case; and know that no disciple should interfere in this matter.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	 And one came to us who was from Iraq, who told us that in his country they make an almagda, at which water is drawn out, but nevertheless I have never seen any in our land, nor have I ever read about it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing. ething
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	 And these are the likenesses of the forms of almagda, because those who do not know them may see them; and they should be made of pure brass.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	 And their heads should be of the same subtlety, and their ends in three sharp points.
de la char sor le neis	 on the flesh of the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	 Sometimes there are various flesh growths on the nose, some of which resemble scorpions with many feet; and there are those of this kind where there is reddish flesh, and there is soft flesh of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	 In that case of this flesh which is soft and not reddish, you should have the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and work their nostrils, and apply the salve to those growths, and draw them out; then cut off what you can sustain with a subtle sharp spatula on one side, until you know that all of the flesh is removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	 And if there remains anything that cannot be cut out, then open it all with subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and if it overcomes you, or if it is an abscess, then support it as needed; and if it is malignant abscesses, then hasten and cauterize until the pus is dried up and all the flesh is removed, then throw into the nose easily and with vinegar.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	 If the nose swells, and moisture reaches as far as the palate, know that it is healed; and if the moisture does not break through as needed, know that there is new flesh born on the bone above, which prevents the instruments from cutting: then it is necessary that you put a thread of linen in, rather thick, and knotted by hand, and between each knot there should be a finger's width or less; and let the patient hold the end of the thread in his nose with all his might, and draw it through to the point where it comes out of the nose into the mouth; and many times children do this in school, and it is an easy thing for someone who wants to do it; then hold the end that comes out of the nose with one hand, and the other end that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and pull one after the other, tightening like us who are on the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	 Do this as long as you know that the nostrils have corrupted that flesh, then remove the thread, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nose again as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointment has dissolved all that remains of the flesh; and then put a stick of lead into the nose for some days until it is healed, and if there is need for drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to clean out the head, in which one distills the oils and medicines into the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	 And let it be of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, like a tube, and its passage similarly; and if you wish, make a closed tube, and let the instrument be full for cleaning out the head; and let there be one handle at the top to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	 of the flesh on the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	 Often there is on the tip of the nose a disease called "telul", and it grows and becomes very large, so that it is a visible thing to look at; and for this reason you must cut it at the beginning, and remove all of the hard substance, then place on it the cautery or burning medicine; and if one waits to cut it until it is large, then beware if it is hard, of foul color, of poor sense: do not touch it with iron because it is a hidden abscess, for when one cuts it sometimes, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of foul color, and you see that it can be completely cut, then let the patient bleed and cut without fear, and treat the place with drying and constricting things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	 When the nose is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	 Know that when a solution of continuity comes to one of these cartilaginous works, it profits little, except in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Therefore, when this happens to someone, look first if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then join the two lips in one stitch, then cure it until it heals; and if the lips are already separated on both sides, it is necessary that you cauterize all the parts of their heart until they heal, then join the two lips in one stitch, and hold them, and sprinkle powdered dragon's blood and crushed incense; and put a piece of strong emplaster or other adhesive plaster on the powders, and leave it until it falls off by itself, then cure with ointment until it heals.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	 The manner of the suture is such that you join the solution: either by needles, as we have said in the suturing of the belly; or by thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	 of the abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	 At many men there happens within the lips a hard abscess, similar to grains of peas, smaller and larger; then you must turn the lip, and cut into each bump, and take it with tweezers and chop it in every part; then fill the place after the incision with vitriol powder, until the flesh is stained; and then apply aloes leaf, and cure the place with dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	 of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	 Many times a growth appears on the gums, which the ancients call "albulus"; then you must hold it with tongs and cut it at its root, and let the pus or blood run out; then place vitriol powder, or other restraining and desiccating powders, on the spot; and if that growth returns after the incision, which often happens, then cut it a second time and cauterize it: it will not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of the instruments for cutting.
des sordens	 of the growths
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	 Sometimes there are growths at the top of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, which are ugly and rough; and sometimes the teeth turn black and yellow, to the point that the corruption reaches the gum, and the teeth become putrid; then you must make the patient sit between your hands, and his head should be in your lap, and scrape off the teeth or growths until nothing remains; and do likewise with the blackness and greenness, and the yellowness and other stains, until they are cleaned away; and know that the teeth require various forms of instruments for scraping, according to what the work demands, because the scrapers used on the surface of the teeth have different shapes than those used between the teeth; and these shapes and others should be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	 It is necessary that when you treat the tooth for its pain, you delay pulling it as long as possible, because no one should do this; because it is a very high substance up to the point where there is no excuse for pulling it out.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	 Then when the patient is forced to pull [the tooth], you must be certain of the tooth that hurts.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	 Many times the pain deceives the patient and thinks that it is in a healthy tooth, and has the good tooth pulled out; and nevertheless the pain does not depart from this until the evil one is extracted, because we have already seen this happen with these lords; and when you are well certain of the hurting tooth, then you must cauterize all around the tooth to ward off the gum on all sides; then move it with your fingers or with fine pincers tooth by tooth, until they are well loosened, then firmly hold the pincers; and let the patient's head be in your lap between your knees, and hold it so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	 After extracting the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, then take one of these instruments and push it gently on each side, and remove it as you first did.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	 And if the tooth is perforated and eaten away, then you must fill it with dressings in the places where the openings are; and delicately clamp it with tongs so that it does not break when clamped; and you must work very skillfully around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	 And beware well that you do not break it, and a part remains, and the patient suffers greater pain due to the root's wickedness than before.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	 And beware that you do not act like the ignorant healers, who in their haste and boldness sometimes break the tooth, and do not bring what we have mentioned; but sometimes cause a great disease through the roots that remain, or because of the tooth they break, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is pulled, wash the place with wine or vinegar and salt; and if blood flows from it, which often happens, fill the place with powdered vitriol; and if that does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	 The shapes of the instruments, to which one attaches the teeth first, should be long and thick, so that they do not double when you pull out the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	 And let them be of large members so that they do not bend at all when drawn, and let them be made of good iron, and let them have teeth to hold well.
de la racine des dens	 from the root of the tooth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	 When the root remains after extraction, it is necessary that you place cotton moistened in butter on the spot for one day or two.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	 until the spot is softened, then insert the tongs called "algefri", making the tooth resemble a beak; and let them be made inside like a file, and this is its shape.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	 And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tongs, it is necessary that you uncover all the flesh around the root and place the instrument called "althali", which is also known as a chisel, in its form.
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	 Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, and if the root jumps out like this, it is good; if not, then help yourself with all the instruments, from which the forms come afterwards.
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	 And so one helps oneself with this instrument which has two handles, of which there is the form here:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	 and other irons that are in front for the reason of the teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large tongs, of which there is the form here:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	 And let this instrument be strong so that it does not break, and know that there are many dental instruments; and likewise other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise master finds his own instrument by himself, according to what his work and the disease show him, for there are such diseases where the ancients did not teach any instrument because of their differences, and if one does not break the cartilage or other bones, then he looks for the instruments that are needed, as I have told you, and helps with the gestures, of which there is the form here:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	 And let them be thick and well-anchored to hold the bone, so it does not slip but can be held and removed; then restore the place with appropriate medicine, and if there is decay in the bone and it is small, raise it all with this instrument.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	 When the teeth appear not according to nature, and their shape is ugly, especially in young women, you must know if the tooth is new after the teeth have erupted, and it is not in its right place, and one cannot pull or grind it: then remove it; and if it is above the tooth, take this instrument whose form is like a little beak, made of iron, sharp at the top.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	 And the blade cuts little by little each day due to the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it is apparent that one can be filed down, then file it with a file of this kind:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	 and it is also like the file with which needles are made; and file the tooth little by little each day gently, so that it does not move until it falls out; then in the end flatten it with any scraper, and if the tooth is too sharp and injures the tongue, it is necessary to file down the roughness until it is level, so that it does not injure the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	 when the teeth become loose
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	 When the front teeth are dislocated, either by impact or falling, and the patient cannot press on what he bites without them falling out, and you have treated them with restricting medicines, but it doesn't work; then they need to be restricted with a gold thread, for silver threads turn green and rot, but gold never moves; and let the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the space between the teeth; and if you wish to straighten the teeth, take the thread and pass it double between the two healthy teeth, then place the eyes between the crooked teeth, whether there is one or several, until you wisely reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then begin the covering again up to the part where you started, and subtly and wisely tighten your hand so that they do not move; and let your thread be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	 Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, and then place them between the healthy teeth,
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	 And when the tooth falls out, replace it in its place, gradually as we have said; and do not interfere with this if you are not wise and patient, and sometimes one makes a form of a cow's bone tooth, and puts it in the place where there is a lack, and secures it as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	 of copper the wire of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	 Often this wire comes from under the tongue either by nature or by injury from a healed wound; and the operation is such that you open the patient's mouth and place his head in your lap, then lift the tongue; then cut the nerve wire wide, so that the tongue is dislocated from its position, and if there is hardness or knot, which is from the sudden closure of a wound, then insert the hook and cut the wire wide; and be careful that the slit is not too deep for the artery underneath; and when you have done this, lift the area with rose water and aloe, or cold water, then place a linen cloth under the tongue; and let the patient wash the site every night, so that it may not heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	 And if the flow of blood comes, then place vitriol powder on the spot; and if the blood continues to flow, then cauterize with the cautery called lentigo, which is good for this; then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if you see it turned to the color of soot or black or hard, such that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is cancer; and if it tends toward greenness, and there is moisture, then apply alum, and make a hole with a subtle spatula, and remove it from one side and the other; and if the blood continues to flow during your work, then place vitriol powder on it until it becomes blackened, then return to your work until you have drawn out all the force; then lift up the spot with silk and linen, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	 of the throat abscesses
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	 Sometimes there appear in the throat boils which are called "godath", and they are properly called II almonds, and when you cure them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care: if it is a hard abscess of small sense and of pus color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	 And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also for the flow of blood; but leave it until it dies, and then you will divide it, or it would burst by itself; and if it returns to white color, and the root is subtle, prepare the instrument for covering, but first check if the abscess is hot and quiet.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	 Then have the patient sit facing the sun, and his head should be in your hand, and he opens his mouth and you take the instrument between your hands, and press the tongue down with all the instrument, of which there is this form; and it should be of silver or fine tin as sharp as a knife:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	 And when you press the tongue down with all this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the onion and stick it in the almond, and draw it out above as much as you can; and draw something from the cloths along with it, then cut off the instrument, of which there is this form, that resembles tweezers; and nevertheless the tips are curved, and one next to the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of Indian iron or adamant:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	 Et si tu n'as pas cet instrument présent, emprunte-le aux tenailles, dont voici la forme :
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	 Et soit tranchant d'un côté, et nommé d'autre part; et quand tu as coupé l'une des amygdales, coupe l'autre de la même manière, puis après l'incision, rince la bouche du malade avec de l'eau chaude et de l'eau salée. Si du sang sort, alors rince la bouche du malade avec de l'eau où des écorces de pommes grenades ou des feuilles de myrte ont été cuites, jusqu'à ce que le saignement s'arrête; ensuite soigne jusqu'à guérison; et parfois d'autres abcès apparaissent dans la gorge à côté des deux amygdales, alors coupe-les aussi de la même manière.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	 And I treated a woman for an abscess that had grown within her throat, specifically the small gland; and it had nearly closed off her entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe due to the blocked passage, and she could neither eat nor drink, and she would have died if she remained this way for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	 And the abscess had risen so high that it had pushed out two ribs through the two nostrils.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	 I hastened immediately and inserted a small needle into one of the nostrils, then pushed it through, and drained a large amount of pus; then I did the same in the other nostril, opening the mouth and pressing the tongue; afterwards, I inserted the needle into the abscesses and drained some of it, but only a little blood came out; thus the throat passage of the woman was opened, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I did not cease cutting away at that abscess for a long time; and the abscess always regrew, filling the place that I had emptied, until it became very large again; then I placed a device in it and cauterized it within the throat: thus it remained without growing; and I left those parts, and knew only that God would do with her after me.
de l’uve	 of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	 When pus descends into the eye, and it is swollen and elongated, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is below, large, and round, it is called "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	 When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that this abscess has subsided, and it is subtle, then you must cover it; and the one which is round in shape and is not long; and it is sanguine or of a dark color or black, then you must avoid incising into it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	 Because there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	 Therefore, when you see it according to the manner that I have said, of its color and length, let the patient sit in front of the sun, and press the tongue against the instrument we mentioned earlier; then insert the hook into the eye and draw it downward, and cover it with the two instruments that I mentioned for the incision of the two almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And it is necessary that you not cut more than the excess which is beyond the natural limit; for if you cut more, then it harms the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the II almonds, and treat until it heals.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	 And if the patient is afraid of being cut, then you must use an ingenious method to calm their fear during the cauterization.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	 And the method of cautery is very sharp.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	 And it is that the patient places their head in your hand, and then presses the tongue against the instrument which we have said in the chapter on cautery, and cauterize with lively water like this, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and use the handle of this instrument, whose form is thus:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And let there be on the head a tuft where one places the medicine, as the strands of a spoon, and place the instrument with all the medicine on the eye; and the patient should lie on their side, so that the saliva and mucus run from his mouth into the medicine, so that it does not descend to the throat, and wounding it; then hold your hand with all the medicine and press on the eye, for the duration of half an hour, until you see it become numb and the bites of the medicine are appeased; and if you wish, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and push the instrument with all the cotton into the tear duct above, until the cotton dries on the eye; and do this often, until the cautery is perfected, then let it dry, and after four or five days it will fall off. And if you need to restart the cautery of the medicine, then restart it, and after the cautery, wipe around the eye with cotton dipped in butter, and clean what is around the medicine; and let it be rinsed with cold water, and let it be cured with gargles until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	 This cure is more skilled than the incision or the cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calamint and hyssop and oregano and rue and camomile and lavender and similar herbs, and assemble all of them or some of them in a pot, and put ashes therein, and boil; and the pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and in the middle of the pot let there be an instrument shaped thus.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	 It should be made of silver or brass, and one end of it should be inserted into the patient's mouth until the vapor reaches the eye through the nose, until the eye is weakened; then repeat often, until the eye dries out. Be careful not to do this at the beginning of the appearance of a hot abscess, because many things can happen; and it should not be done unless at the decline of a hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	 And if this instrument is not present, take a reed and place inside it the crumb of an egg, so that the patient's mouth does not become too hot; for the egg crumb does not allow the steam to irritate the mouth, and this is a good cure along with healing.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	 Many times a bone or fishbone gets stuck in the throat; therefore, you must pull out what you can see, and press the patient's tongue against the instrument, so that you can remove the object; and whatever does not open and is lodged in the throat, you should make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach; perhaps the hard thing will come out with the vomiting; or the patient may swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of flax, or a lettuce root, or a crumb of dry bread; and tie a thread to the sponge, then swallow it; and when it reaches the place, it will swell, and then you can pull it out; and if it does not come out with what we have said, take an instrument of lead according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	 And let the instrument be curved at the tip so that it may more easily enter the throat, and have the head lifted upwards; and take care not to touch the epiglottis, lest the throat swell or break a bone inside; and it is better that the patient himself puts in the instrument, because he will be more accustomed to such things; thus he pushes it downward, where he draws it strongly with all the instrument equally until it is strong.
de la sansue de la gorge	 of the blood from the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	 Sometimes the blood is treated, as I have said in the division, by the healing of medicines; and when this does not work, then look at the patient's throat in the sunlight after you have pressed the tongue with the instrument that I have told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	 And if you see blood, draw it out with a very small hook or fine pincers that are suitable for this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	 And if this does not work, take a hollow reed, and put it in the patient's throat, then insert a hot iron into the reed's hollow, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	 And if the patient is feverish all day long.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	 then take a full glass of cold water, and hold it in your mouth, and pour it into the throat without swallowing, and move it around with his hand often; and as soon as the blood feels the water, it will fall out.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	 And if it does not fall out as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafoetida, using the instrument I mentioned for the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will fall without delay.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	 And the manner of fumigation is such that you take a pot with glowing coals, and let it be covered by a cloth pierced in the middle, and through that hole place the head of the instrument; then cast your fumigation, and the patient places the head of the cane in his mouth, closes his mouth so that no smoke escapes, but it comes to the blood vessel; and the blood vessel will fall immediately, and if it does not fall, repeat the fumigation many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty things and such, and do not drink water; and then it will be necessary for it to come out through this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	 And the shape of the instrument with which one draws blood is such that when it can be seen, it resembles curved pincers to enter the throat; and it should have the appearance of a hawk's beak, and there should be roughness like a file, so that what it takes, it cannot leave; and see here the shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	 the chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	 There are many kinds of abscesses, as will be remembered hereafter in this book and others, and they are different in penetration and cutting; and this is in two ways: one is in its own appearance, and the other because it retains moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	 And the second way is for the places where they are on the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	 Because the abscess of the head is different from that of the base, and the fleshy abscess is different from that which occurs in joints, each should be judged according to its nature in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	 And there are abscesses which one should not pierce until the head is ripe according to its development; and there are those which must be pierced when they are hardened, and do not ripen according to their nature, such as abscesses near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	 For when an abscess comes near a joint, and it is left until it rots all around, perhaps the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which causes contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	 When the abscess is near the main member, and if you delay the perforation until it is dead, it will harm the main member; when it is near the anus, pierce it as soon as it is dead; and it is not necessary to pierce a mature abscess before digestion is complete, except for one that is near the anus, lest it become infected deep inside, and form a fistula; and may not heal for a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	 It is necessary that you know the hour of the perforation of a dead abscess according to its completion, and this is when the pain is appeased, and the separation of the fever, and the diminishment of the pain and redness, and the subsidence and maturation of the abscess head, and other signs; and it is necessary that you make the perforation sit in the most dependent place of the abscess, and where it opens more; and let the perforation be lengthwise along the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and near nerves and arteries, and in all places equal where there is no pliability.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	 In those (cases) where they bend, according to this member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	 And when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed by complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	 For if you pierce it beforehand, the body will be filled with the abscess's poison, and it is full of much filth; and by chance the lips and depths of it may harden.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	 And if there is an abscess that is pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the member needs.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	 And it is necessary that you make small holes in small abscesses, and large holes in large abscesses, and many cuts according to the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where you need to make a cut, and cover (it) when they become like cloths, and are dead, then you should act as one does with carbuncles: and if there are those that are split into three angles, and if there are those which are capped as the leaf of myrtle, like abscesses of the armpits; and if there are those where a round cut is made, and other cuts and similar coverings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	 Ceux qui n'ont point de chef, comme un furoncle superficiel, il faut que tu le perces entièrement; et lorsque le furoncle est gros et qu'il a formé une grande boule, et que tu le perces, ne tire pas toute la boule en cette heure, mais en retire une partie; ensuite, tamponne le furoncle jusqu'au lendemain, puis retire à nouveau quelque chose; fais cela plusieurs fois de suite, tant que toute la boule sorte; il en est de même si le patient est de constitution faible, ou une femme enceinte, ou un petit enfant, ou un vieil homme décrépit.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	 Because the spirit sometimes jumps out with the release of the pus, which may cause the patient to die unexpectedly, and you would not be aware of it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Avoid this chapter with great care, and when you have noticed your abscess, wipe the wound clean, and look to see if the abscess wound is small; and if it is a simple cut, place cotton or old linen bandages over it; and if it is a large abscess and there are many openings, you must insert one bandage into each opening so that they come together; and if you have cut into the abscess and removed some skin, you must fill it with dry cotton or linen cloth scraps without moisture, and bind it until the third day; then remove it and treat with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	 And if bleeding occurs during your work, bring cold and easy water, and wet the cloth, and place it on the bleeding area many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the bleeding persists, bring treatment and care, and the powders that I mentioned in less quantity in this book, and if it is in winter, and the place of the abscess is very sensitive, then you must apply wet tents and cloths soaked in wine and hot oil; and if it is in summer, and the place is fleshy, then you must apply wet cloths soaked in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said; and then release the abscess and dry and treat it, as needed, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	 And this must be known generally in the treatment of abscesses: now I have told you how one should proceed with the treatment of abscesses, and see here the chapter.
des soros	 from sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	 Where small abscesses come from the head, and are like those that are in tissues, like the eyes of a hen, and there are many similar ones.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	 There are some that are fat and such that have moisture like pus; and there are those which are hard and stony to cut, and there is no doubt if the surgeon does not act contrary.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	 And the work of the cut is such that you prove everything with an instrument called "spoon," from which the form comes afterwards, whatever it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	 Because if it contains moisture, then make an incision over the length.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	 And when the moisture is removed, then scrape off without leaving any skin that contains this moisture, because it returns again if anything is left there; then soak cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in water and oil, and fill the wound with it, and leave it until the next day; and those who stay overnight will cure them.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then renew the cotton as before on the second day and the third, so that you are certain it does not remain overnight; then treat the wound with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	 And if the abscess holds a knot of fat, cut it according to this form, lengthwise; and cast your onions upon it, and peel it from all sides, and put all your care into drawing forth the cloth where it lies; and if the art of healing goes against you, then do as I have told you afterward.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	 And do likewise for the abscess if it is pustulous, and in cutting and in dressing as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	 And cut into the pustulous and moist abscess, for it is more delicate, because they contain little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	 And if there are some of these abscesses at the head where there is no moisture, and such were the abscesses that I cut at the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess like a hard, rough, and white stone, and it could not be broken; and if one had struck against it, one would have made as much a wound as with a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	 In other abscesses coming to the head, except those which come to the heads of children and the roots of the ears, let the opening always be in the most dependent place so that the pus may exit; and treat it as needed.
des scrophules	 from scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	 This abscess often occurs in the neck, under the armpits, and in the groin; sometimes it appears elsewhere on the body, and they are numerous and interconnected with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	 And each scrofula is specifically within its rib, like the nodule and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and there are many similar to these scrofulae.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	 There are some that contain moisture, and others that are malignant and refuse to obey health. ‌
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	 In that case, then, which you see of good disposition for touching, and is similar to the color of the body, and moves from every part and is not harsh on the nerves of the neck or on the artery or on the canal, and is not deep; then you must cut it above, and scrape each part, and stretch the two lips of the heart at the corners, if you need to, as we have said in the case of head abscesses; and draw little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and let the spatula not be too sharp or cutting, lest the hand slips, and do not go too far forward, so that you do not cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	 And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to work, then put into the wound vitriol powder, or some powders that staunch blood, and bind the wound; and let it be so until the abscess is calmed, and the wound is softened, and begins to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	 And when the blood is staunched, then return to your work until you complete it; then check with your finger if there are any small scrofulous growths remaining, and cut them off and cleanse them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	 And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofulous growth, then it is not necessary to cut this scrofulous growth at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it fall off by itself, without harm; then fill the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, and bandage it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	 And if you cut all the scrofula, it is necessary that you join together the two lips of the wound and sew them now, since there is no longer any excess due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	 it is necessary that you cut the root of it and pull strongly, and sew as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Those scrofulae which retain excessiveness, pierce there where the wound opens; and pierce it in a similar manner as those previously mentioned, hanging downwards, then introduce tents with ointment and similar things, so that they corrupt what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleansed, cure it with a rich ointment of flesh until it heals.
de squinance	 Of a dislocation
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	 The ancients spoke and discussed the cutting of the throat; but I have never seen anyone in our land who did it, and this is written according to their word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	 For those who have dislocation, it is necessary that the slit of the throat called "epiglottis" be cut; and one should not help through this, because all the veins and the pommon of the patient are hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both tonsils.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	 When the illness is in the channel of the pommon, it is necessary to cut the epiglottis to avoid death from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	 Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, we should cut it below three circles or four, a small slit across, between the two circles or by the amount of the siphon, not in the cartilage; and these places are suitable for the section of the epiglottis because there is no flesh there, and the vessels are long.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	 And if the master is fearful, then it is necessary that he extend the skin of the throat to all the nape, then split the heart until it reaches the chin; and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then cut the hypoglossal nerve as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the vein of the chin which flows stronger through the broken place, and by the lack of voice; and leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when the hour has passed in which one fears strangulation, bring together the two lips of the heart wound and sew them up alone without a patch; then administer medicines that make flesh grow, until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	 Albucasis said that one should not do this until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be dead, and his wing fails.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	 Therefore, cut the epiglottis so that the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death; and for this reason, the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the mischief of the disease has passed, which passes in three days or four. And then they commanded to close the wound and cure it, until it was cured; and I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	 I saw that a young woman took a knife and thrust it into her throat, and cut part of the cartilage of the larynx; and I was called to cure her, and found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	 I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had flowed from it, although it had not struck a vein or artery except for the throat, and the wind was exiting strongly through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	 I hastened and sewed the wound, and treated it until it was healed; and nothing more happened to the maiden except that she lost her voice, which later returned to normal; therefore I say that in the cutting of the epiglottis there should be no fear.
de la grosse gorge	 of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	 This abscess is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a large abscess in color like charcoal, and it is very common in women; and there are two types: natural, and accidental; where the natural type has no venom.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 And the accident occurs in two ways, one is like our nose, and the other way is like an abscess that comes from us of artery; and there is fear, and it should not be worked on by making a hole except in that which is small, and test and search all around: if you find it as we know our nose, and it does not open to any vein, then cut it off, as one cuts the nose, and draw out all its hair, if there is any; and look well early on, and treat it as it should be, until it is healed perfectly.
des nous	 from us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	 Many kinds of nose are there, whose all resemblances I will tell; and now it is necessary that I say all the difference that is between our (nose) and abscess.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	 I say that it is cold and feverish, as long as the inflammation has passed, and putrefaction is complete; then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	 With the new, there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a sac, which is its own bag and according to the body's color, and begins like a blister, and grows; and they are in two types, either fatty or moist, and many of their colors are as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	 It is necessary that when you come to the treatment of the new [growth], you should first try and inquire about all the instruments which are called "entromissoire," according to its form, as it will be shown in the following chapter.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	 And the manner of investigating abscesses from us is that you take the moistest place that you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little, until you know that the instrument has reached the core, then according to the size of the abscess; then remove the intermission, and be careful not to jump out.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	 If the moisture running out is of any color, puncture it as I have said for other abscesses; and if after the intermission no more moisture comes out, know that it is fatty, then puncture it in a cross shape, and take it with tweezers, and lightly scrape from each side and beware the wall where it lies that you draw it out whole with the thread; and if you cannot draw it out whole, then remove it in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	 Car if anything remains, the nose returns many times; and if a bit remains and the wound pains, fill the wound with some corrosive, burning powders, bind the wound, place on it things that calm the abscess, heat the abscess, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed; and if the nose is large, sew together the two lips of the wound, and treat this as one would for an injury to the flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	 And if the vein pulsates against you or another, then hasten and fill the place with powdered vitriol, and let it lie there for two days or three, so that the wound may suppurate and the boil of the blood subside; then return to cauterize what remains of the knot.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	 Here are the forms of the introducers, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small; and there are three squares which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are also three kinds: large, medium, and small, for encircling the abscesses of fistula; and they are like the needles with which one sews the sorceresses, and they are made of yellow brass, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are worth more, and they are tried more in black lead to encircle the swellings of fistula; and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the width of the holes.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	 The forms of the onion are of many similarities, as you see here: large, medium, and small; there are also onions that have two corners of three kinds as well; there are also onions that have three corners, and they are also of three kinds; and there are onions that have two corners, and onions of only one corner, and they are all necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	 The points of these are sharpened, and there are some that do not cut from both sides, which are used to remove the skin so as not to cut the vein or nerve; and among these instruments are the hooked lances held in handles, so that the patient does not notice them when opening abscesses; and they come in three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see; and one does not use them except on fleshy places, such as legs, arms, breasts, and angles, and similar places; and sometimes one makes another small instrument, resembling the peeling of chestnuts, according to this form, with which one stops bleeding:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	 And it is placed sometimes in the place that heals quickly with veins, and with arteries, and sometimes they return according to this great form.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	 Sometimes the breasts of certain men swell when they begin to become corrupt, so much so that they seem like women's breasts; and they remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wishes to cure them, it must be done according to this form of these lines b to g.
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	 Then scrape off the fat, and fill the wound with medicine containing meat, then sew the two lips of the wound together, and care for it until it is healed; and if the breast hangs down and is softened due to its size as often happens in women, make two incisions above the two breasts through two similar slits, so that one is held by the other at the end of each, such that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form, from this line b up to this line g; then scrape off the skin between the two lips, remove the fat, and apply what we have said about suturing and powders, and whatever is necessary for the cure, until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision is not completely done because the patient does not want to rest, or due to bleeding, then you must fill the wound with moistened cotton in corrosive ointment; and leave it until it consumes the remaining fat, then care for it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	 of the abscesses of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	 This abscess which comes under the armpits is a kind of hard scrofula where there are ribs, and some contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	 Therefore, those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line .b. to line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when all the pus that is in the abscess has been emptied, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and apply an ointment suitable for this purpose until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	 And if the abscess is like a scrofulous ulcer, cut it as we have said for scrofulous ulcers, and if the wound becomes pus-filled, apply cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	 of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	 When the artery is cut and the skin above it is sewn up, abscesses often form; likewise with a swollen vein and an abscess; and one knows this when it is due to the artery, for then the abscess is long and deep; and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel constriction; and when it is due to the vein, there is often a lack of blood flow visible; and it is foolish to cut this abscess, especially when it is under the nails or in the angles or in the neck or in many other places, for it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Therefore, one must avoid the cure of iron, and he who is chief should also avoid it; and in that which is due to swelling of the artery, cut through the skin lengthwise; then make an incision at the angles, and carefully separate the artery from the veins until it is exposed; then insert a needle underneath it, and make it pierce through to the other side, and constrict the artery with two threads in three places, as I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples; then pack the place between the two ties with a plug until the blood comes out, and let the abscess be relieved; then apply the dressing that covers the wound, until the threads fall off; then treat it as one would a burn, so that it heals; and if the abscess is due to the incision of the vein, you must dip your hand in what you can from the abscess all over the skin, then insert the needle underneath the place where you hold your hand, and make it pierce through, and there should be a double thread, so that you draw it out on the other side; then bind the abscess as I have told you, with one end of the two threads in two knots at the ends of the filament; and if you doubt that the threads will come undone, then insert another needle all along the thread underneath the entire abscess at the first incision, and constrict the threads in four places; then cut away the abscess until the excess comes out, then cut away the excess skin and leave what is bound; then apply a cloth moistened in wine and oil, then apply dressings of tenths and ointments until it heals.
des apostemes des ners	 of the abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	 Similarly, as an abscess comes to the artery and the vein, so it comes to the nerves when they are pierced, or by too great a labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	 And this happens more often in the shoulders and arms, and in all places where there are joints, and it is very painful, and its color resembles the color of the body, and it is in many positions without pain; and when one presses it strongly, the patient feels pain, and it is not entirely within the body, but beneath the heart; and it moves well from all sides, and does not go forward or backward, or down or up, and that which is in the joints should not be struck with iron: perhaps contraction would occur; and that which is in the head or forehead, split the skin with a spatula.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the abscess is small, hold it with tongs and cut it at its root; and if it is large, suspend it by the corner, skin it, then remove and close the wound with stitches, and tend to it until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	 of hanging swellings
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	 Sometimes it happens in the stomach and nowhere else, and this is a disease called "fungus" because of its resemblance to them, and it has subtle roots and large heads; and there are small ones and very large ones; and I saw a man who had two in his stomach that looked more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had fine roots, and were always oozing moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	 I cut them and found in one XVIII ounces weighing, and in the other VI, and the work in the incision is such that you observe if the patient is moist, and the color of the artelul is pale and moist with a subtle root; then cut it with a wide spatula, and let the cautery be present in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	 For in cutting often comes too great a flow of blood, and if the wound overcomes you, then hasten to cauterize; and if you see the patient is frightened and fearful of the incision of iron, then take a well-made linen thread and bind the artelul as we have said, and leave it for two days; and then restrain it, and do not cease to bind the linen thread until it cuts off the artelul, and each does its work without difficulty; and if the roots are thick, be careful when cutting, but you can cut half, then cauterize so that it does not return; then treat the wound, and take care not to cut the telul which is of red color and poor sense and milky appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	 Car this is an ulcerated abscess, and I will come to the treatment of the ulcer later.
quant li boude ist fuer	 when the wound is strong
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	 If the appearance of the wound comes from a burn or a tear in the intestines, and it is on the abdomen and some of the other wounds are like this, as happens with other perforations, or from bleeding veins or arteries according to what was said before, or from flatulence; and if it is due to the perforation of the intestine and the exit of the bowel, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the flesh, and it is a slight thing without pain, and it opens with various exits.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	 And if it is due to the exit of the intestine, then it is even more diverse, and when pressed between two fingers, it returns, and then comes back, and by chance it may harden, and greatly enlarges at the entrance of the bath and with great effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	 And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and it opens well when you press it in your hand, do not constrain at all; and if it is due to blood, then the abscess opens with these signs: large and hard, and fixed according to a certain amount; and if it is due to windiness, then it is soft to touch, and the work is such that you should look to see if the appearance is of the blood from the artery or vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	 Then you must leave the treatment alone.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	 For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding the artery and vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	 And if the appearance is of the intestine or bowel, then you must instruct the patient to hold his leg, and let it be stretched straight; then surround the entire thigh with a bandage; then command him to lie calmly between your hands, then go all around the place that you have marked with all the spatula, then extend half of the abscess above onto the large uncine; then tie it all around with a strong thread or a cord of thick silk firmly, and let the knot of the ligature be secure; then work the other half of the abscess stretched out on the ligature, and put your index finger in there, and search for the intestine; if you find it caught by the ligature, then loosen it, and push the intestine back into the belly; and if you find the bowel, then take hold of it with the uncine, and cut off the excess; and if the artery or vein gives you trouble, then go around well, then return to your work and take two needles, and put in two strong threads, and insert the two needles all around what you have done in a cross that you made perforate; then draw the abscess onto the needles in four places, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave the place until it rots, and let the dead flesh fall off by itself; or you cut it when it has softened and rotted, then cure the abscess as we have said; and draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the place as it should be cured, and close the place.
dou chancre	 Of the sore
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	 We have said in the division the resemblances of the sore, and how one should work on it with medicines, and how one should avoid the cure of iron; and we say the sore is in the flesh, and great care is needed in the cure, and the ancients said that when the sore is in a place where it can be scraped off, such as a sore in the breasts, and in the thighs, and similar places, one should remove all of it when it is at the beginning; and when it is large and old, one should not approach it, for I have never seen anyone healed from it; nor has anyone ever been healed from it before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the work, when it is in a place where one can remove it, as we have said, is that you first purge the patient of black bile; then make him fast if he has manifest repletion; then put the patient in a good place to do the work; then apply your fingers on the sore, and press from all sides, and remove it from all sides without leaving anything behind; and let the blood flow freely, and compress the area well with your hand or any other thing, and if the bleeding bothers you from cutting into an artery or a vein, then cauterize until the blood is blackened; then cure it with another cure until he is healed.
de ydropisie	 Of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	 We have already said in the division the similarities of dropsy, and in what manner the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the cure that is done by medicines, and that which is cured by iron: this is only for «eclites»; and one should not touch iron in these two similarities, namely tympanites and hypochondria, for it is mortal; therefore when you treat this similarity of dropsy called «eclites» with medicines, and the cure does not benefit, then consider whether the patient is weak, or if he has another disease besides dropsy, such as a swollen belly and similar things; then do not touch iron, for there is doubt. And if you see that the patient is of strong virtue, and he has no other disease but only dropsy, and he is neither too young nor too old, then proceed thus: lift the patient straight up on your hands, and have an assistant press the belly outwards, expelling the water to the lowest part of the foot, then take a thorny spatula according to this form.
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	 And let it be cut from two sides.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	 And at the point, and however it is not so deep that when you stick it in it may reach the intestines and wound them; then look to see if the dropsy is on the side of the intestines: then your cut should be above the navel on the right side below the wrist; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, let your cut be on the left side of the navel; and if it is due to urine retention, let it be on the right, and it is not necessary that the patient lie on the incision so that the excess fluids do not run to that weak place; then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and push it through, and lift your hand to all the thickness between the skin and the flesh as if you were peeling to the extent of a nail or around; then pierce the flesh until the thickness comes to the desired place, which is the watery place, then draw out strongly, and into this instrument is put what follows:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	 And it is similar to a fine silver wire, and it is made of light bronze or copper, and has in the lower part a small hole; and on one side there are three holes, and two on the other side, and one on the other; and the head is cut like a pen, and that is the shape of the incision with which the scribe cuts the pen:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	 On the top of this is the alembic, so that when the instrument comes to the water, it immediately goes up on the instrument; drain then half or a third, for if you drain more than is necessary at that time, perhaps the patient will die from the resolution of his spirit in blood, or he falls fainted, or approaches death; but drain according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the patient's virtue signify, and his pulses; then remove the instrument and retain the water, and it is retained now by the cork that stops the hole that is on the still, as I have said, pierce in this manner; then renew the instrument the next day, if you see the patient tolerating this, and draw a small amount of water; do this every day, and be careful not to overdo it until only a little water remains.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	 And if you doubt the patient, and you leave much water in him, cure him with burial or hot sand, and through much sweating or bathing in the sun, and dye him with wine; and cure him with desiccative medicines until he is dry, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after extracting the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	 Of the obstruction of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	 Sometimes children are born without a hole in the penis, or with a small hole, or with it not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	 Then it should be pierced immediately if it has no opening, and must be done very skillfully according to this manner:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	 And then put into the hole a subtle plug of lead, and tie it and hold it thus for three days or four, and when he wishes to make urine, let the plug be removed, and make urine, and then replace it; and by chance it is not necessary, because the urine that comes out does not leave it closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	 He whose hole is small, let him be treated with the lead plug as we have said, and it will enlarge.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	 He whose hole is not in its place is injured, for some are born with the hole at the head of the penis, which prevents them from urinating unless they lift their penis up; and they cannot have sex because the matter cannot reach the testicles, and this is a serious illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the manner of the work is such that the patient often lies on his back, then stretch the head of the rod and the handle similarly to the width of a pen, so that the hole falls in the middle, as it should; and beware of blood loss which happens often, and if it occurs, staunch it with that which staunches blood, and care for the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	 from the pustules of the rod
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Often these albathes come to the rod, and it is an ugly appearance of flesh; some are malignant and others not; thus you must take them with a subtle lancet, and cut and clean all of them, then place on cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment; then heal with definite ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	 And if the ulcer is malignant, of foul color and stinking, then you must apply cautery there.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	 And when you have cut it out, and if the ulcer is partly within the flesh and partly outside, then first remove the part that is inside; and when it is healed, treat the part that is outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 For when you treat it together, the ulcer is not assured not to be perforated, and there comes darkness and corruption in its flesh and bone; thus one must cut away all that is dark and corrupted, then apply a plaster of honey and flour made from oak bark and lentils, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	 And if bleeding occurs, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	 The cautery helps in two conditions together: that is to say, for bleeding and for corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary that you insert a leaden tube into the urethra, and let the patient urinate through it; and when the hair at the tip of the penis occurs in those who have not been circumcised, due to wound or abscess, it is then necessary that you shave it with one instrument until the foreskin is released, and the head of the penis is freed on all sides; and if it is difficult to discuss this, it is necessary that you shave some of the skin at the tip of the penis and the glans; then carefully separate between two, and place a thin linen cloth moistened in cold water there, so that it does not adhere again.
de la circoncision	 of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	 Circumcision is not the separation of continuity like other wounds; nevertheless, when we perform this work by our own will, especially on children, it is necessary that we do the best and lightest work for healing.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	 I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcising their children, for they do not practice it in their law, and we only have what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	 For I have seen the majority of masters and surgeons who performed circumcision around Idal (or Idel), at the strong parts, and on the whole foreskin; so that the heart flees because there are two layers, and perhaps one cuts the upper layer and the lower one remains.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	 Or the patient recovers slowly, and the pain is double; and in the amputation where the nail is not removed securely, the point of the member may remain; and in the amputation of the fingertip sometimes the iron slips, and it ruins the work, and many times such cases arise that they do not need amputation and I wish it so.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	 Of the amputation done with silken thread I have found the advantage of the experiment, for the silk cuts just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 For when you press your hand and cut evenly in all directions, just ensure the thread is well tightened around the skin; and the manner of the first operation is such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are only tying the thread around the penis, and then comfort him in every way possible; then hold the penis straight between your hands, and pass the thread between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see it, nor any of the instruments; then place your hand on the penis and blow into the urethra, and pull up until the glans is inside; then clean well the dirt that has gathered there, then tie the place tightly with a double thread, then tie another thread below the first one; and hold by the second knot with the thumb and index finger, and cut between the two threads, then quickly raise the hand above and pull out the head of the penis; then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the remedy; and put powder on top and on top of the powder a cloth soaked in a mixture of rose water, egg yolk and fresh rose oil, and leave it until the next day, and continue with other treatments until he is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	 The form of the strength for healing is this: the two hands should be empty and sharp, and the hands should be as large as the wrists equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	 The error in healing is when the heart flows to the incision; therefore, you must stretch it with your fingernail before the place creates an abscess; and cut it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then hold it with pincers, and then cut.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	 And if it passes through three days, and that which is beneath the penis is swollen, then leave it until the abscess has subsided, and gently scrape off the scab; then cut as much as you can move, and beware of the part of the penis, for this will not harm it.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Cure the place of a sudden wound with powder, as we have said in the treatment of powders, and if it is cut beyond measure and it goes to the heart, it will not harm; cure it then, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	 Concerning the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	 The retention of urine is due to the concretion of stones, or frozen blood, or bone, or dead flesh, or similar things, as we have said in the division; and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to a stone that is in the neck of the bladder, then the patient must be kneeling on his knees; and his feet must be placed on his back, and he must extend his belly from the top towards the back, and the patient must restrain his anus as much as he can; and then the neck of the bladder is constrained to express the stone above, so that the urine is released; and if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction with all the instrument that is called a "syringe," which has this form: and let it be of fine, light silver, like the feather of a bird; and let the tube be one and a half palms long, and let it be fine at the top.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	 And the manner of releasing the urine is such that you take a double thread, and tie at its end a bag of wool or cotton, and insert the end of the thread into the syringe; and cut off the excess wool and insert it up to the tip of the syringe, then grease the syringe with oil or butter and egg white, and make the patient sit on a chair, and wash the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and warm water; then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then fold the penis back towards the scrotum; then push the syringe forward to the bladder, and the patient will feel it coming to an empty space, and this is not done except according to this order because the conduit in which it goes is twisted; then draw the thread with all the wool bag by bag, and the urine follows the wool, then pull it out, and let the urine flow; and restart the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	 Of diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	 When scraping or blood enters the bladder, and putrefaction is gathered there, and you pour in water and medicines, then make for all the instrument that is called "clepsydra," and it is like this:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	 It is closed, and has three holes: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and let the place where the medicine passes be such that it stops the tube well without addition, so that moisture can be drawn out, and pushed when necessary; and when you pour your medicines into the bladder, put the end of the funnel in the moisture, and draw on the tube that is inside; thus you will draw the moisture into the funnel, and then strongly push the tube back in; thus the moisture will enter, and it will come to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it; and this is the form of the subtle enema with which one enemas the bladder: here it is:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	 And it is of silver or gold, and the head is higher; and below at the chest where the band falls; then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture in which you want to enema the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts firmly with a double silk thread, and heat the pouch of that moisture over the fire; then insert the head of the enema into the tube, then press your hand on the bladder until all the moisture has entered the bladder; and if you don't have the bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce it roundly around; then insert a strong thread through these holes, then assemble the circle like an almond, and put inside what you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, to press with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	 of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	 We have already mentioned in the division the types of stones, and their extraction along with medicines; and I have mentioned the difference between stones in the kidneys, and all the signs, and in which stone one should operate to cut; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	 I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder often happens to children, and it is a sign that the urine from the bladder is like subtle water; and there is bloody discharge, and it presses on the patient's penis, and he urinates frequently, and then it stops; and with many of these urinations the foundation [of health] is lost; and it is easy to heal children until they are four years old, and it is very grave in adults, and it is in the middle way for those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is easier for those who have a large stone than for those who have a small one.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	 And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to purify the patient with an enema, in order to draw out all the feces that are in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	 Because sometimes it hinders the search for the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	 Then take the patient by the feet and lay him flat on his back, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder and sometimes rises from its place; then have him sit between your hands prepared, and let his hands be under his thighs, so that the bladder is completely inclined downwards; then seek and touch inside it; if you feel the stone in the space, then hasten now to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	 And if it does not fall with the touch alone, then moisten your finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger, if the patient is an adolescent; and insert it into his anus, and seek the stone, and when you feel it at your finger, guide it to the neck of the bladder; then press on your finger, and push it out where you wish to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	 And instruct the assistant to press the bladder in his hand, and command him to extend with his right hand the testicles upwards, and with his left hand remove the skin that is below the testicles in the area where one makes the cut; then he introduces the cautery instrument, this being its form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	 And make an incision between the area that is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side of the vein; and let it be straight upon the stone, and your two fingers should always be on the anus, and let the cut go across so that it is wide outside, and narrow within, according to the size of the stone, not too large; perhaps the pressure on the finger in the anus will cause it to jump out without effort; and know that there are such stones which have angles and edges: they are eager to come out; and there are those which are below, similar to a bean, and round, from which the issue is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	 At those with angles and edges, make the cut larger; and if it does not jump out, then you must extract it using tweezers that are like a file at the tip, to firmly extract the stone so that it does not escape; or you push underneath the instrument subtly curved at the tip; and if you cannot deceive it thus, then widen the hole somewhat, and if the flesh tears, tighten it with vitriol; and if there are more than one stone, first push the largest into the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then pull strongly, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are several.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	 And if it is very large, you must saw it, and make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	 Because two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine comes out constantly through the place where the wound cannot heal; but nonetheless you should strive to draw it out, either by pulling or tearing with pincers, until you pull it out piece by piece; and when you have completed your work, then fill the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it in place, and put on top a cloth moistened in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then lay the patient back on his pillow, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when you untie it, wash the area well with oil and water, then treat it with diachylon ointment and basilicon ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	 And if an abscess or corrosion forms in the wound, and congealed blood in the bladder retains the urine, which is known to pass with the urine: then insert your finger into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, the bladder will become corrupted; afterwards, wash the wound with water and vinegar and oil, and assist him in all ways you know, until he is healed; and it is necessary that every time you treat him, you bind his two thighs together, and apply medicines to the place.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	 And if the stone is small and it is in the passage of the bladder, and embedded within, and urine cannot pass; then cure him as I have said before, that you cut into him many times, and he will be relieved from the cutting through this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	 I have already proven it thus.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	 Take a piece of iron according to this shape, and let there be three pointed ends on one stick:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	 Then take a thread and tie it around the stick under the stone, so that it cannot go back into the bladder; then gently push the punch into the stick until it reaches the stone; and turn the punch in your hand against the stone bit by bit, until you can pierce through to the other side of the stone; then urine will come out immediately, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the stick.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 It is then immediately broken and exits with the urine, and the patient is cured; and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, tie one thread under the stone and another on top, then split the stick where the stone is between the two threads, then pull it out strongly, and untie the thread, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound; and continue the treatment until it heals.
de la piere des femmes	 of the women’s stone
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	 It often happens that women may have a stone, and if it occurs, the cure is difficult, and is prevented by three things: the first is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a skilled woman who reveals herself to the physicians, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	 And the third manner is that perhaps one cannot find a skilled woman in this art of the hand; and the fourth manner is that the women's stone is more buried than the man’s stone, which requires making a deeper incision, and there is great fear involved. And if necessity compels, it is necessary for you to take a skilled midwife, and one is hardly found, and if you cannot find one, then seek a subtle castrated physician; and present her with a wise maiden in the ways of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command that she do what you command her about the examination of the stone; and watch very carefully if the woman is a virgin: then she must insert her finger into the anus and search for the stone; and if she finds it, she must press it under her finger, and she should recommend that she insert her left hand into the vagina of the patient, and search and press her left hand strongly on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	 If she finds it, she must move it from the entrance of the bladder downwards until it reaches the root of the thigh; then strike against the stone in the root of the thigh opposite the middle of the anus, where it is most prepared to move, and she will feel the stone in that part; and do not move her finger above or below the stone, and let the cut be small at first; then push the thread into the cut, if you feel the stone, tighten the wound so that the stone may come out forcefully, and know that there are many kinds of stones: that is to say, small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and some have points.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	 If you know the signs, you can recognize the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	 And if the blood overpowers you, then put ground vitriol on the spot and hold it there for an hour until the blood is stanched; then return to your work, until the stone is out, and have the instruments I told you about for extracting stones from people to help you in your work; and if the blood overpowers you and it is from the artery that has been cut, then put the powder on the spot and bind it with linen cloths and bandages, and do not attempt this again, and leave the stone and do not pull it out, for fear that the patient might die; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	 And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the place is pale, return to your work until the stone comes out.
de hernie carnouse	 of a fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	 A watery hernia is nothing other than a collection of moisture or white sack, which is under the heart of the testicles, containing the egg; and it is called "sack", and sometimes it is properly in the skin of the egg, so that one believes it to be another egg; and this is the scrotum of the testicle between the white sack that we have said; and these do not occur unless there is a pouch.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	 And the origin of this hernia is from weakness that comes to the testicles, and that substance is spread out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	 And sometimes it comes from striking the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: either it is inclined towards yellow, or it is redless, or black, or watery white, and this happens often; and these are the signs to recognize this collection, because if it is in the white sack that we have said, then the abscess is reasonable, a long pouch like the shape of an egg, and the testicle does not open, for it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	 And if there is moisture in the proper cloth, then the abscess swells with a part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the thighs and the white silk, one feels it well; therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, prove all the intromissary square, from which the form is as follows.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	 According to what comes after the intromissory, judge of what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when we cure it with fire, it is necessary that the patient be bled according to his power and the fullness of his body; then have him lie on his back, on something a little high, and put many cloths under him; then sit on his left side, and command the assistant to sit on the right, and extend the rod along one of the two ribs at the knee of the thighs; then take the spatula lance, and cut the skin of the thighs lengthwise from top to bottom until near the joint, and let your incision be straight in dividing the skin of the thighs up to the white silk, and delicately peel according to your ability; then pierce the silk thoroughly with water at a wide hole, and drain all the water, and then put your thumb, and stretch the silk up; and do not touch the knee of the thighs, but only the silk; cut or in pieces likewise the side of him delicately, that if you do not cut well wisely, the water will return; and if the egg jumps strongly against your work, then put it back in its place when you have completed the work of the silk; then join the two lips of the knee of the thighs with a suture, then cure as the other wounds, until he is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	 And if you find the egg corrupted by another illness, it is necessary that you bind the vessels that are suspended, suspecting the flow of blood; then cut the anus completely around the suspended part, and extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	 And if the egg is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two ramifications; then cut the other part as you have done the first equally, then wipe away the blood, and put on the wound linen moistened in rose oil; and put outside another linen moistened in wine and oil, and put on the two anuses, and put on doubled cloths, and bind it all with the ligature according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	 Then take two bandages, and fill them with woolen shreds according to this description, and let them be sewn together at the waist of the breeches; and one of the heads should go underneath from the fundament up to the back, and the other at the wrist; and the other two heads on the two ankles, and let all the bindings be gathered in the loop of the breech; and sometimes this bandage is cauterized instead of iron tailoring, and it is that you take a subtle surgical cautery, and cut the skin of the testicles, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white surface containing the water is revealed; then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that surface at the ankles, and peel it with this hot cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	 And strike in every way that you can, until you have struck everything out; and take care that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more beneficial; and watch for bloodletting, and wounds caused by surgery; and if anything goes against you, whether an abscess or bloodletting or something else, then cure what goes against you, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	 And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to undergo this procedure because of its dreadfulness, then use perforation, as I tell you; and it is that when you are certain by the signs we have mentioned that pus is present, make the patient sit on a stool; then pierce the abscess in the lower part, making the opening as wide as possible; and make the hole long through the body; and let the hole be wide so that all the water runs out; then place cotton on the spot, and bind it, and let the remaining water drain out, then cure until the wound is healed; and if the white cloth does not allow the water to come out of the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a quill or the instrument used to draw water from dropsy patients, as its shape has been described before; and enlarge the hole in the wound, and know that the water will return and be collected again after six months or thereabouts, and when it is collected as before, then the patient will pass his days thus.
de l’aposteme des coions	 Of the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	 Know that in the cutting of this vein there is fear in many conditions, which is why I think it is better to leave it alone; and I will tell you the work and similar things about the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	 I say therefore that many abscesses come in the body, especially in the testicles; and this is due to many reasons.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	 That is to say, due to excessive bitter and acute humors that are spread in the testicles, or from blows; and the color of the abscess depends on the color of the body; and it does not cause pain, but the abscess is serious; and sometimes there are painful and hard abscesses, with red color, and sometimes they come from a nodule in the artery, or from the swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	 Quant il ad vne plaie en la teste, si covient qu'il li soiet mis sus le chief un pan de lin ou une peil de sedes.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	 Et cil qui ne puet pas muevre ses genols, si covient que tu metes ung gastel de poyvre vigne a la teste deles les oreilles, ou une gastele de fien enfllee a chauld ewe, ou ung gastele de lin trempet sus la plaie, et c’est bien fait.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	 Et se il ad ueines a lor costez, si covient que tu metes les chars suz ces vueines, car ele n’ont mie tant de fors come le uef.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	 And if the base of the flesh is in the posterior place, then you must cut all of it and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when your work is completed, fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	 of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	 This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping resembling a bud, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient becomes seriously ill when walking; and the treatment of this disease is almost as dangerous as the previous one, nevertheless we will tell you the work on it, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	 It is necessary that you make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then you pour down the suspensory ligament of the scrotum towards your thighs, over all the vessels near the penis, and the master holds them and stretches them greatly; then cut with a sharp spatula wide from across the vessels, until they are uncovered, and then scratch from each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in temples; then you insert a needle where there is a double thread, and tie it to the first place where the vein comes out, and tie again to the other end; then cut them straight in the middle according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted humors; then treat the wound as with others when a bow is inserted, so that some vessels bleed which nourish one of the testicles; for by this there is no harm, and if at all the vessels come out, it is necessary to pull the testicles at all the vessels; so that the bird does not lose its feeding because of the incision of the vessels, and they dry up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	 de la dislocation of the shoulder
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	 The occurrences of this dislocation are by the section that comes to the shoulder, or the extension on the belly in the area of the intestines, for which the intestines descend from that dislocation into one of the testicles; and this dislocation is either in the shoulder or from the extension of it, and these two types come from many causes: from a blow, from jumping, from leaping, from lifting heavy weights, and from similar things; and the sign when it is from the extension of the shoulder is that it happens little by little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly; and the abscess is equal all the way to the bottom, because the shoulder presses the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	 And the sign is when it is from the section of the sinus, that it brings at the beginning a sudden pain, and the abscess appears diverse, under the skin nearby, and this is due to the exit of the intestines and the body outside of the sinus.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	 And sometimes the coils go with the intestines and are retained therein, causing the patient to suffer great pain, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	 And in these treatments with iron, due to fear, for which it must be avoided.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	 And the manner of this operation is that you instruct the patient to reposition the intestine with his hand inside the wound, if he can reach it; then have him sit up on his knees between your hands, and raise his thighs; then press down on the abdomen above, and cut all the skin along the length of the testicles; then insert the hooks of the tailor's shears into the groin as many as you need to open the wound, and let it be so wide that the intestines can pass through; then peel off the sinus that is under the skin of the testicles, until the hard white sinus is uncovered on all sides; then insert your index finger in the place where the testicle follows, between the white sinus that is under the skin of the scrotum, and between the second sinus, and separate what is behind the scrotum, and between the second sinus; and then move it with your right hand inside the groin of the testicles, and raise the white sinus high to your left hand, and lift the scrotum along with all the sinuses towards the abdomen; and instruct the assistant to raise the scrotum upwards, and release what is attached behind the ligature; and see with your fingers if there is any intestine wrapped in the hard white sinus, and if you find anything, push it down into the abdomen; then take a needle where there are I thick thread made of X threads, and insert it into the back part of the sinus, which is after the skin of the testicles; after the abdomen, then cut the threads that appear from the threads, until there are IVI threads; then assemble them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and tie the sinus, which we have said is under the skin of the testicles, with a strong ligature of II parts; then wrap the threads of the threads, and bind them firmly with II parts, so that none of the small vessels that nourish them can enter into it, lest an abscess come there; and put again the ligature according to the first long ligature, and after these II ligatures leave the sinus that is under the groin of the testicles the width of a finger; and after all the other according to the roundness that the scrotum carries; then cut in the part that is under the skin of the testicles, until the blood flows, as we have said before; then bring moistened wool in oil, and place it in the wounds, and bring there the ligature which we have spoken of.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	 And sometimes the white flesh is cauterized after incision, for fear of blood loss.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 For this happens often, and let the ligament hang by itself; and if it delays in falling out, it should be softened with hot water, and place on it what we have said, until it falls out; then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	 of a fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	 In this case, I have never seen anyone who dared to treat it with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the ancients said that it is done like the hernia that is together with the bladder, in such a manner that you tie the vessels after slightly cutting underneath; then cut in half, and treat the abscess as one should, until the vessels fall out; and then treat it as we have said, until it is healed. />
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	 When an ulcer occurs in the anus, as we have said, it opens up the place; and no one should move any of the intestines to the side, and if they do move, it is little, and they return every hour; but if it stays too long in this state, the ulcer or fistula grows so that the intestines move; and this happens due to the extension of the fistula which is in the anus, as we have said, because it is extended, then the place becomes softened and swollen and open; and the cure for this is cautery, as we have previously said; sometimes it is cured by iron in this manner: and it is that the patient lies face up on his back between your hands, then cut the inflamed place of the ulcer wide according to the quantity of three fingers; and then extract the fistula which is under the skin like a worm, then take the thread and put it on the apparent place of the fistula; and press it deeply into the abdomen, then sew the two apparent places of the fistula on the head of the thread, and sew one and the other; then remove the head of the thread, and do not cut or extend anything else in the fistula, as I have informed you in the cure of the intestine's fissure; then treat it like a wound treatment.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when you cut the threads, cleanse it and treat the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	 The sponge is compressed, and there is no appearance in the suture, and the cautery is placed in this place, and it is closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	 of the softening of the leather of the testicles
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	 Often the leather of the testicles is softened in some men because the testes within are softened and it is evident by the milk that can be seen; and it is necessary that when one wants to treat it, they make the patient lie on his back, and cut the softened skin on top of the natural skin; then join the two lips together with a stitch, and if you wish, first sew the excess softened skin with three or four strong stitches; then cut between the stitches, and treat it as with other wounds until it is healed, and the threads fall out.
dou chastrement	 The scourging
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	 You should know that scourging is forbidden in our law, and therefore I would prefer not to speak of it in this book; it is only necessary for two reasons: one is so that the doctor knows how to respond when asked about it, and knows how to treat it; and the other is because we often need to scourge certain animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	 I say therefore that scourging is done in two ways: either by attraction or by incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	 In the method that we perform by attraction, make the beast sit in hot water until the tendons are softened and relaxed; then take them with your hand until they return to their original position and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 From the castration of animals: you must hold the animal, and press its skin around the testicles with your left hand, then tie the rope, and cut each testicle with one cut, when you have well bled them; and leave some pouch of the scrotum and the subtle part that is above the vessels; and this method of castration is milder than that done by attraction, because at attraction perhaps something remains from the testicles, causing the animal to desire lust; then heal the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	 Of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	 There are two types of hermaphrodites in men: one is when between the two testicles there appears like the female figure of nature, with hair, and sometimes it passes urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	 And the other manner is in women, and it is on the wrist like a rod and two inches.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	 And the treatment for men and women is that you cut the cartilages together, and treat them as other wounds; in the second manner, of the men whose urine comes out through the skin of the penis, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	 of the tonsils
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	 The tonsil is a cartilage joined onto the natural part, so that it is too ugly to look at; and some women have it as large as a hand, and this is the treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	 You should hold the excess of the tonsil in your hand or with tweezers, and cut it slightly; and do not go too deep, so that bleeding does not come out, then treat it like other wounds until it is healed; and there is another cartilage that occurs at the mouth of the womb, and it swells, and perhaps comes out, and it resembles a cow’s teat, and for this reason the ancients called it "cow's disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 Si it is necessary that you cut it as we have said for the tent, and treat it until it heals.
de erratique	 of the erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	 Erratic is when the woman's nature is not well-known, or the opening is small; and it is natural by birth, or accidental due to illness that has occurred; or it is caused by bad alignment, or subtle or thick cervix, and is done deep in the womb, or on the sides, or below, or wherever; and it prevents conception, childbirth, and perhaps menstruation; and knowledge of this is through the examination of the belly.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	 If the blockage is close to appearing, it will seek its way out through two paths or by means of urine.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	 S'il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, and let the woman be on her back, with her legs spread; then stretch the two lips very strongly, so that the subtle syfac is round, and there is an overhang; then take wool, and moisten it in oil, and put it on the place, and let the woman rest at home each day, so that it cannot heal.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	 And if the syfac is hard and thick, then you must cut it with a spoon similar to a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the swelling is of fleshy origin, then suspend it in vinegar and cut it; and have the hemostatic medicines, such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, together with plenty of egg; then bring a wide lead plate, so that the wound cannot heal; and thus let it be for a long time, and bring a tent of dry linen; then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	 And when a skin blemish appears on the stomach, it should be covered in this manner, unless it is an ingrown abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	 For an ingrown abscess on the stomach, one should not attempt to treat it with fire.
des emorroides	 of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	 Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that usually occur suddenly, and when hemorrhoids are old, they become hard; and we have already spoken about their similarities, and their signs, and I will speak here about those that can be cured.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	 I say that hemorrhoids and hard growths, when they are deep in the stomach and cannot be felt, should not be treated with fire.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	 Those who are at the mouth of the wound, which can be felt, are those who can be healed.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	 You must therefore place the woman in a cold house, then set the altelul with tongs, and cut off its roots, then sprinkle powdered medicines that restrain blood, such as acacia and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then dip her feet against the wall for an hour, then place her in cold water; and if bleeding continues, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark and galls and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and oil, and make one plaster on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	 And if it drains, this is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	 If not, let him be bled with cupping glasses on the back and on the breasts without cutting; then take linen, and soak it in juice of plantain or in juice of hawthorn with old wine, and let him bleed at that place.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when the abscess subsides, then treat the place with onion until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a sharp head, then you must cover it as I have said above; and then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	 of abscesses of the breast
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	 Many types of abscesses come in the breast, such as cancer and perforating abscess and herpes and osteomyelitis and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	 It is therefore necessary that I speak in this treatise about the hot abscess that comes to the stomach, which is not one of those that cause fever; and if you wish to know the work of iron, look at whether the abscess is acute in its beginning, full of heat and fever, and if it turns red when you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	 Therefore do not hasten to pierce, but let the matter die down until the pain is relieved; then have the patient sit on a chair, and place two small chairs where he can lean, and support his back and draw together his feet on the outside of the leg; and let his thighs be spread, and put his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good ligature; then give him to drink towards the left side, and bring there the instrument by which one works the mouth of the stomach, about which comes afterwards the form; and it is necessary that when you have brought this instrument, that you insert the reed first in order to know the depth of the stomach, so that what enters from the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not wound the patient; and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the stomach with cloths, so that the instrument does not hurt him; and it is necessary that he put the horn of the instrument above, and hold the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	 And when the abscess is opened, and it is probed with a soft hand, it must be covered at the head with spatula oil; and when the bag is emptied, you must place in the wound tents moistened in rose oil or dry green oil; and put the tent outside of the wound at the bottom of the bandage, and put outside on the bandage and on the finger clean linen moistened in water where mallows have been cooked; then cure it after two days of ointment similar to this, until it is healed; and sometimes lift the bandage and the wound with a clister of water and honey, and then with water and roots of lily and long aristolochia, well-cooked; then return to the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	 And if the wound is infected on the head, you must be careful not to burn with iron, but treat it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	 of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	 It is first necessary for the midwife to recognize the figure of natural childbirth, and its sign is when you see the woman pushing downwards and desiring to smell the air: then know that the child wishes to come out by force; at this point know that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and the issue is under the head, and the afterbirth with it; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press her belly so that the child comes out quickly; for when it descends onto its head, the afterbirth comes out with it, and the mother is purged of her superfluities by good purging; and this which happens otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	 Because it sometimes occurs in the feet, and it comes strongly in the body or the head, and the hands, where it comes in the stomach, or in the back, and it is turned by chance onto the neck, and other bad shapes; therefore, it is necessary for the nurse that she be wise and skilled in these things, and guard against error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one should help him.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	 If the child comes onto its head by natural birth, and the woman gives birth painfully, and her strength is weak, then have her sit on a saddle where women hold her; and bring up her nature with oil or cooked fenugreek, and then the nurse puts the small spatula between her teeth whose form is thus:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	 And split the secondine, and cut to its fingernail length so that the moisture inside flows out; and press the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to give the woman a clister of fenugreek with sesame oil; then have her take and sneeze condiment, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now the child will come out.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	 And if the two hands come out strongly, then you must reset them gently little by little; and if they cannot go back in, have the woman sit on a stool and lift her feet up; then knock the stool to the ground, and hold the woman so she does not jump during the fall; and if the hands cannot go back in and the child dies, cut off the hands with the knife mentioned earlier, extract the child, and reset them equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	 Of the child's birth onto its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	 When the child comes onto its feet, it should be pushed upwards; then turn it little by little until it is straightened; then take one foot and extend it little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	 When he jumps up to his hips, then she should take him and make him sneeze condiments; if he jumps further, so be it with God’s will.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	 And if he does not jump farther as we have said, then turn him little by little until he is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	 For then he will be lightened.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	 And if he does not come farther as we have said, then take a mixture of aloe, and sesame oil, and melted gum, and grind all together in a mortar; and apply this ointment on the woman’s genitals both inside and outside; then make her sit in hot water up to her navel; and when she is well soaked below, give her a drink of honey wine, and make her lie down, and leave her for an hour; then make her sit on a stool, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose closed, and gently press her belly, for the child will jump now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	 Of the child's birth on its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	 When the child comes in this manner, then put the midwife her hands little by little; then be supported on its neck, and let the feet hang down, and lie on the bed; and bend its hands little by little, and then take the hands above the belly, and remove the pillows from below, until it is ready to pass; and if the child does not come out, then take its feet and move them strongly, then move the belly upwards, then put your hands in; and draw the child little by little; and instruct the woman to push until the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	 Of the birth of a child that comes with one hand hanging
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	 It is necessary to manipulate the hand: if it cannot be returned, then have the woman get up and walk; if she cannot walk, then have her lie on a bed and spread her legs wide; then bring in the midwife whom I have mentioned; and if the child does not emerge, then have her sit on a chair, then study how to return the hand; and take the child according to its natural shape, and make it sneeze, and command that she takes hold of herself until the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	 from the emergence of the child onto its neck, and its hands spread wide, and its face turned towards its mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	 It is necessary that the midwife should take hold of her hand, then turn it little by little, and gently remove it; and when it is equal, place on top the natural midwife of height and oil, as we have said, then command that she move little by little; and when you have done this, have her sit on a chair, and command her to take hold of herself; and make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	 of this same manner to all the second one
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	 When it happens in this manner to all the second one, strike the second one with your fingernail until the moisture is emptied; and if the child comes up on its face and on its neck, then cut it from below, so that it is not retained, and let the child die; then push the child back inside, as much as you need to, and instruct the woman to take some time: then it will come out easily.
de l’issue des gemelz	 of the delivery of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	 Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not at all a strange thing, and it happens rarely.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	 Two are a strange thing, and do not live, except rarely; I know that they are divided, and are separated by the sinew which divides them, which is tied to the navel; and sometimes they come out as naturally as one all alone, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	 And if they come out violently, treat them as we have said, and let the bandage be subtle, and make it quickly and lightly as she does; and do so that it can move for healing.
de plusors enfans	 of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	 Sometimes they are formed in the womb, one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, and sometimes even more, up to fifteen, all formed in the shape of a child by the skillful measurement of the wise and glorious One, and it is necessary that the bandage know all these things, for similar things may happen; therefore do according to what is needed.
de l’enfant mort	 of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	 When you treat the woman for the dead child in the womb, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are forced to work by hand, it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound virtue, and does not have an accident or fear of death; it is necessary that the woman be placed on her back, with her head inclined downward, and her legs raised; and the midwife holds two parts, where she is tied to the bed so that she may not be disturbed by the descent of the child; then rub the mouth of the womb with moist oils mixed with althea and fenugreek and flax seed, then anoint the hands of the midwife with these oils and these mixtures; then gently insert them into the womb, looking for one place where they may be convenient for this purpose, and take care if the child is ready to descend onto its head; then place the thorns in his eyes or neck or mouth or soft palate or under the beard or on the forehead or near the ribs, and if the descent is on the feet, place them in the heel and on the middle of the ribs; it is necessary that she hold the thorn with her right hand, and put the pliers between her left thumb and forefinger, and insert her entire hand gently, and place the thorn in any of these places that we have mentioned, until it reaches the empty space; and this is the shape of the thorn:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	 Then insert against the other bone, or a third if you need it, so that the extraction is equal; and then keep them equally steady while moving from side to side, to come out smoothly, and let the bones be sharp-edged to hold well, as shown in this figure:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	 And if a part remains, smear one of the patient's fingers with oil and press it into that part, and draw out the other part; and if nothing remains, place this bone higher up and do this until it all comes out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	 And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be pulled back due to constriction, it must be wrapped in a cloth until it all comes out; then cut at the joint of the foot or the knee, and you must do the same with the other hand and both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	 And if the child's head is large and it is narrow in the outlet, or if there is sharp water collected at the top, then you must insert the pointed spatula between your teeth, and make an incision in the head and extract the water; or pass it to the instrument that is called "almidach," from which the form comes with the instruments in the following chapter; and do likewise if the child has a large natural head; then draw out the bones with forceps, and if the head comes out and it is stuck at the pelvis, then split it until the water that is in the bladder comes out; and if it cannot come out, then strike it into pieces with the hammer as much as you can; and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you must pierce it until the water runs out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	 And if the child is on its feet, then the attraction is light, and the reception at the mouth of the mother is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	 And if it is stuck in the belly or the breast, you must extract it with a cloth wrapped around your hand; and make an incision in the belly or the breast, until the moisture inside comes out; and if the other limbs are removed and the head remains, then the nurse places her hand deep into the mother's body, and pulls it to the mouth of the womb; then she puts one or two onions there, and pulls strongly; and if the mouth of the womb is narrowed due to a hot abscess that has formed, you should not struggle with it, but rather apply moist and fatty things; and the nurse prepares poultices and applies a softening and moistening decoction.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	 And if the child is on its side, and you can set it straight, then treat it as we have said for a living child; and if you cannot do so, then draw out the limb piece by piece, leaving nothing of the second joint.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	 And when you have done this, treat it as we have said for abscesses that come in the marrow; and if blood flows out, put it in boiling water to stop the bleeding, and apply other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	 And I saw a woman whose womb an infant had died in, then another came on top of it, and the other also died.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	 After a long time, an abscess came to her womb, and it swelled so much that it burst open, and she began to suffer greatly.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	 I was called to the treatment, and I thought for a long time, and the wound could not be healed.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	 I applied a strong drawing plaster, and an (first) bone came out, and after some days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	 I was greatly amazed, because the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	 Then I thought that these were the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	 I explored the wound and drew out many bones until the woman was in better health; and she lived for a long time thus, and it always exuded a little pus from that place; and I did not record this chapter except because, when the master finds something strange, he should know how to put help there.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	 To return the wound to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	 Here comes the form of the press, with which one uses the books; and at two turns are the two keys of the two locks.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	 Nevertheless, let the horns of the restrictor be more subtle, and made of ebony or boxwood; and let the mouth of the beam be two fingers wide, and the edge of the arbor one finger, and in length a palm and a half; and between the two locks there should be two adjustments of this same beam, which are fixed in one and the other, half a palm long or a little more; and these two adjustments are pushed into the mouth of the wound to open when one turns the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	 Another form, made more subtly and lightly from ebony or boxwood according to the appearance of tongs; and let there be two adjacencies at the two heads, as you see, one palm long and two fingers wide; and when you wish to open the vulva with the entire instrument, make the woman sit on a bed, her feet hanging and her legs spread, then push the two adjacencies together into the vulva, and hold the head of the instrument underneath between her thighs; then work your hand along the entire instrument, as you have done with the tongs equally, according to the amount by which you wish to open the mouth of the vulva, so that the vagina does what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	 This instrument is all superior, and their resemblances are multiplied; and when the master has prepared them, then the work is all the more urgent, and higher for men by their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	 Do not despair of the instrument until you have prepared it, for their necessity is not negligible.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	 When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze vigorously, and press your hands to her mouth and nose; and if she faints from this, it will be well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	 If not, then take a pot and make a hole in the lid, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the womb, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cinnamon, and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked in the pot with water over the fire; then place a tube or hole from the pot to the mouth of the woman, and hold it until the vapors enter the womb; then make her sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	 If the second bone jumps suddenly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	 And if it remains after this treatment and is not strong, command the maid to moisten her left hand in oil of sesame or muslin cloth with aloe vera, then put it into the vagina, and search for the bone; and when she has found it, take hold of it and pull it out little by little straight, so that the womb does not fall out during extraction; but it must be moved gently to the right and to the left, and then pull; thus it will come out and detach itself.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	 And if the mouth of the womb is tightly constricted, we have spoken of the treatment of sneezing and fumigation with herbs; and if it does not come out from all that we have said, be careful not to force during pulling; but it is necessary that he who is at the mouth of the womb tie it to the thigh of the woman, then administer a clyster of tetrapharmakon enema; thus it will rot and return, and become strong; however, when it rots, bad odor comes to the stomach and head, and harms the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	 If it is necessary, therefore, for fumigations suitable to this: some of the ancients have proven fumigations with watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	 The form of the instrument with which one fumigates a woman to retain her flowers and secondine is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	 And it is of glass similar to a vase, and one puts the subtle end in the nature, and the wide ends on the fire; and let the fumigation be over coals, and continue until the tinea is completely eradicated, and then begin another.
de percier lou fondement	 of piercing the anus
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Many children are born with their anus not pierced, but rather stopped by a thin membrane: it is therefore necessary for the midwife to pierce that membrane with her finger, and not pierce it with a sharp spatula, and take care that she does not touch it; then apply a linen cloth moistened in wine and oil, then treat with ointment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	 And if you doubt that it will not heal, put a plug of lead in the hole, and leave it there for several days, and remove it when the child wants to go into rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	 And sometimes this happens suddenly from a wound or abscess; then you must cover that sudden swelling: and it should be treated as we have said with the plug of lead.
de la fistule dou fondement	 of the fistula of the anus
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	 Fistulas that come from below the anus are nodules, and those that come beside the anus are outside, or in the space of the two parts, sometimes there is one fistula or several; and when this nodule is old, it works, and increases moisture, a foul-smelling pus, either white or subtle, and sometimes these fistulas are persistent; and they are known by the fact that there is discharge or gas during defecation, and perhaps some are painful.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	 And so for fissures that reach as far as the bladder, and to half of the penis; and they extend as far as the hip joint, and to the end of the thigh.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	 And thus one recognizes the fissure piercing through the anus, and not piercing: it is that you insert your index finger into the anus, and insert a fine needle of bronze or iron into the fissure when there is no convolution.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	 And if there is convolution, then insert a thin probe of lead, or a horsehair, until you feel the probe or hair with your finger; and if you do not feel it, and nothing comes out of the opening except air, know that it does not pierce through; thus hasten to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	 And when the fistula extends to the bladder or to the urinary tract, then the urine leaks out, and cannot be healed by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	 If it is perforated to the junction of the thigh, then the tent is coming to that place; if there is no tortuosity and the location of the pain around it, then it is that it exits always bowed, and neither ointment nor medicine by cautery helps; and in these penetrating fistulas there is no cure except labor, and the vanity of foolish physicians who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	 In that which is not penetrating and is not ancient, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have proven, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and raise his legs up to his thighs, and let his thighs be inclined towards his belly; then insert a tent of tin, or lead if there is tortuosity, until you know where the tent comes out.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	 If the patient feels it around the anus, then you must insert your finger there, and if you feel that the tent is perforated; and if it is uncovered where you feel between your finger the sphincter or the flesh, then know that it is perforated; do not work on it anymore as it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	 However, it is said that some can be healed well, but this happens rarely; and the aid that one provides there, is to heat the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as was previously stated; and insert it all hot into the fistula, until it reaches near the anus; and do this two or three times, so that you know that those charred hairs are burnt, which are like a feather of a bird; and then cure the moist tent with butter, so that that hair comes out, then cure the inflammation with ointment, healing flesh and sinew.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If he is thus healed, this is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	 If it is not otherwise possible to be healed in this manner; and if the tent enters, but does not perforate up to the finger that is at the base, and there is a thick covering of flesh or silk between your finger and the tent, and you see the fistula at that which follows the covering of the heart; then cut from the beginning of the fistula, and push the tent forward continuously, and then cauterize afterwards, until it reaches the top of the tent; and the tent will be delivered and fall; then clean those fleshy parts that resemble a bird's feather, and nothing remains.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	 And if the pus overcomes you, and flows between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	 Car the fire cautery accomplishes two good things: namely, the burning of these hairs adjacent to one another, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture; then the treatment of wet tents in butter or in ground substances, until the place gives off steam, and thus the burned hairs are in the steam; then treat the wound with pastes made from hard-healing plants, which are dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	 Car when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	 And if the fistula goes all the way to the bottom of the anus and is separated from the body, place your finger in the anus and search for it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	 And if you feel the tent and there are two things inside it, either cloth or silk or hair, which is close to piercing through, do not leave until you see a path of confidence and hope, by administering one of the three methods: either cauterize it as we have said, or cut it all the way to the bottom, or if you can place tents and treat as before; and do not go too deep that you do not cut the support which holds the anus, and the evacuation goes out without control; then treat as we have said; perhaps it will be healed, or remove that covering and clean it after it is cut near the anus, either by tent or by another pointed instrument; then clean that faulty hair that is in the wound, as much as you can; then strive to restore the wound and keep the fistula in the part outside the anus: this will be a lighter burden for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	 And sometimes fistulas are in this manner: and it is when you push the tent into the fistula, and it is at the side of the foundation near the skin above, then take a pierced tent at the top according to this shape:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	 And in it you put a twisted thread in two, and push the tent along the entire thread into the fistula until it reaches the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	 If it is protruding from the edge of the foundation within, then extract the thread from that opening, so that you push your finger into the foundation; and pull the head of the thread, and join the two heads together, and press one against the other, and leave it for a day or two; and bind it sometimes, until the thread cuts these vessels that are between them, and they bleed; then treat the wound until it is healed and healthy. ię If it is protruding from the edge of the foundation within, then extract the thread from that opening, so that you push your finger into the foundation; and pull the head of the thread, and join the two heads together, and press one against the other, and leave it for a day or two; and bind it sometimes, until the thread cuts these vessels that are between them, and they bleed; then treat the wound until it is healed and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	 If the fistula does not open, then have it pierced in all ways that you can, unless it is too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 For it is not appropriate to cover the opening so deeply for the healing, and then cure it, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	 The form of the sharp spine used to make the fistula is very sharp on one side and cutting; and on the other side not, so that one does not cut what one should not cut, as you see here:
des emorroydes	 from hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	 Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: either they are inside the anus, like grains of resin, and there may be small or large ones, and there is always a little blood near them, and there may be one or several, and they are outside the anus and at the edge of the anus; but those that are outside have less moisture, and always a little yellowish water or a little blood, and have the color of the flesh; and the cure for those who have them inside the anus is to instruct the patient to squeeze to go to the latrine until the anus protrudes and the threads appear; then hasten, and hold it with tweezers, or with your fingernail, then cut at its roots; and if the fingernails cannot hold them because of their moisture, take them with a cloth or with cotton, or with a piece of flannel; and draw them to your teeth, then cut them, and sprinkle some hot powders that should be in place of cautery; or cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cautery, then cure with other cures until healed; and if the anus cannot protrude, then enema the patient with a biting and harsh enema to clean what is in the anus so that it can come out openly; when the patient squeezes, and the threads are out of the anus, the cure is light; and it is to take them with your fingernail or with tweezers, and cut them, then cure as we have said until healed, and to avoid cutting with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, and then draw the thread through on top and make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread underneath the needle, making it wide; and then tighten the thread strongly, then knot the thread, and pull out the needle, and do this for all the others, leaving one to drain any excess blood; then place on top a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax, and place on top, and instruct the patient to rest; and then leave it until it festers, and when they have fallen, cure them with ointment and other care until they are healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	 when of dryness of the fire or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	 Often occurs dryness of the fire in the intestines, and by natural constraint, and when the illness is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then you must burn with the point of a spatula or your fingernail the skin above it so that it does not moisten; then treat it until it is dry as needed; and if it cannot be dried, then start the scraping again more strongly than before, until it bleeds profusely and is scabbed; then treat it until it heals.
dou fremit	 from trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	 Ants are small creatures that inhabit the body and penetrate very deeply; sometimes cold finds them, and they feel it just like a trembling death, and it spreads throughout the entire body, more in the hands than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	 And the treatment is such that you take a reed from a goose feather, or a strong feather from an ox, and place that reed on the tremor, until the ring grasps the tremor all around; then turn your hand with the entire reed until you cover the entire tremor, and put it inside deeply, and pull out the tremor from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	 And if you see this, then do so with a reed of bronze or iron according to this form, and let it be thin below and sharp above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	 nor should it be pierced to hold on the finger, and press more And if you see this, then cauterize the tremor as described in the chapter on cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	 of the form of the enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	 Sometimes one makes an enema of silver or copper, or melted iron or brass; and sometimes one makes them from these instruments small and large, according to those for whom they are prepared.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	 Therefore, those which are prepared for the treatment of children who are weak and sickly are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	 The form of the small and large enema is thus wide, where the stomach is tied in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	 and there must be an opening where the stomach is tied, as you see, and the end is pierced; and on one side there are two openings, and on the other one; and the stomach in which the medicines are placed should be of a beast’s bladder or parchment, and should be pierced all around with small openings, and there should be one fingerbreadth between each opening. Then insert into these openings a strong thread made of twisted wool, making an X or a circle around it; and tie the stomach like this as if it were a goatskin; and when the medicine is inside, then bind it to the instrument in front with a strong thread, then administer the enema; and that is the form of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	 And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clyster with oil or egg yolk, or similar substance, then insert it gently; then the servant expresses it with his two hands together, until it is all void, then remove the clyster, and have the patient raise his legs against the wall, and if the medicine wants to come out, then hold it as much as possible; and if he sleeps a full night, then it is of greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if you administer the clyster in an illness of a distended abdomen, and the medicine hastens to exit, then repeat it until it is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	 And if there are hemorrhoids or an abscess in the rectum, let the clyster be as thin as for a child; and this is the form of a thin clyster on which the skin is stretched:
des plaies	 of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	 We have already said in the division the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you the treatments of hands and medicines according to their uses.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	 I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made of, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and from what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	 The things by which wounds are made are by the fall of a stone, and by the cut of a sword or knife, or by a spear or club or arrow, or by similar things; or they are made according to the places of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or on the foot, or on the belly, or on the liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with the simple wounds of the head, because their treatment will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	 I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, take care if it is from the impact of a stone or similar things, and the skin is nevertheless torn and the wound is large, and you suspect hot abscess: then quickly cauterize with cephalic immediately if there is little blood from the wound, and let the cautery be on the opposite side of the injured part; and make sure the patient avoids overindulgence in wine and heavy foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if he does not want to cauterize, let his food be reduced, and let him drink no wine, nor eat any meat; and put on the wound, if hot abscesses come there, only cotton moistened in rose oil or stiptic wine; and if there is no hot abscess, put on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and not moved by air, powder that I will tell you a little later; and if the ars has moved it, put some ointments until he is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	 And if the wound is large such as from a sword cut and similar, and the lips of the wound cannot be brought together by tension, then sew them together, as I will say for wounds of the belly, with stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	 If the wound is open to the bone and gaping, and holds together only at one point, then cut away that point; then treat the wound with medicine, and replace hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as cheeses and cooked grain, as well as poultry, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	 And if you find rot in the skin that reaches to the bone, then cut away all the rotten flesh and cast it aside, then treat [the wound]; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein from which blood flows that cannot be stopped by medicines, then seek out the artery, and if you find it dislocated, bind it with a thread; and if this does not help at all, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	 And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is light: and it is that you put in this powder which heals before the fire has moved it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 And the manner of the powder is: take frankincense one part; dragon's blood two parts; quicklime three parts, and make it into a fine powder, and fill the wound, and press it firmly, until it heals well and joins with all its blood; and then bind it well, and leave it unbound if it does not swell; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	 And sometimes one does this only with quicklime, when one has no frankincense or dragon's blood, but that the fire has moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the fire has moved the wound, even in summer, do not put this powder on it; but put some cooked onions on it, or poultices made of barley flour with water and honey, until it flows out; then continue other treatments until he is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	 And if the break of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine forceps; and I will tell you later about the breaks of the head.
de la plaie dou col	 of the neck wound
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	 If the wound is in the neck and it is simple, then there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	 Si c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, and cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, and autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, and oignemens moistes.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the wound is large, sew it shut and bind with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	 And if the wounds are deep and it is cut and full of bile, then pierce it in a lower place; and if the artery is cut, and blood comes out, then suture it, and bind it, and cauterize it if necessary; and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the heart, and the conduit is protected, so that the flesh goes, then sew the heart onto the chain of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape; and then bind it firmly, and leave it for some days, then cure it with dry onions until it is healed; and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then search for it; and if there are pieces of bone, then draw them all out if you can, and those that you cannot have, then leave them until the wound rots, and is emptied and cleared of the issue; and if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle with powder onto the powder that I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	 And if there are bones in the wound and it has a fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	 Of the lance or knife wound
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	 And if it is a blow from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, observe if there is any foul odor coming from the patient: know then that the wound is mortal; and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not apply powder at the first hour, nor bind it tightly so that the blood does not escape deeply and returns to the heart, and kills the patient; but apply atractive ointment and bind it twice a day; and if you have no ointment, place old cotton in the wound to absorb excess moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more; so that spasm, tremor of the heart, or strangulation will not occur; and when you see favorable signs, know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	 Cure it with dressings and other treatments until he is healed; and if it cannot heal, and there is pus, then know that there is a fistula; treat it as necessary.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	 And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut and it is simple, either worse or on the back, then treat it with that which is in front; if it is large, with stitching; and if it is small, with powder, and if it is close to the bone and has struck pieces, then seek the wound, and remove the splinters if they are loose; and if they are not loose, then let the wound fester, which will lighten the extraction; and for other wounds on other limbs, the judgment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	 Of the rupture of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	 The rupture of the abdomen is great, medium, and small; in a large wound, sometimes the intestines or the nerves of the intestines come out, because of which the reinsertion of them becomes difficult; and often a small wound is worse than a large one, because it is more difficult to reinsert the intestines if they are not put back in immediately, for the intestines swell as soon as they feel the cold, and thus enter more difficultly. And therefore, a medium-sized wound is better, because it is easier to return the intestine to its place than in others II Know that the sutures of the abdomen are according to four kinds: the two common stitches occur during the stitching of the abdomen, and the stitches of other wounds of the body and two other stitches are common to other wounds; however, they are more specific with the stitching of the abdomen, and I will speak about each one and explain.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	 I say that when the wound is small, and something of the intestines has come out, and it is a great thing to put back, this is done in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	 And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: moisten one sponge or cloth in lukewarm water only, or boil cinnamon and cypress and cloves in wine, and bathe the intestine until the swelling is gone; sometimes this restraining wine is necessary, and it is better to use alone for reducing swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	 And when you see the swelling diminish, moisten the intestine in water where althea and mallow have been boiled, for by this means the entrance is made easier a little; and if it cannot enter, make an opening in the wound with the instrument used to cut hemorrhoids; and the first treatment is better than cutting, no one should cut without great necessity; and this is the instrument to split: cut inside the curve and not outside, and see here the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	 And when the wound is opened and the intestines jump out, place them back according to their natural form in their proper place, if you have the power, for this is useful.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	 When the wound is large, and it is in the lower part of the belly, you must make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, place the head and the breasts higher than the lower parts, and likewise if the opening of the belly is in one of the two parts, direct your attention so that the injured part is higher than the other; and thus you must administer as I say in large and medium-sized wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	 For small wounds, use what you have prepared, then take in your hands a careful minister who can dye the entire edge with his hand, and bring together the lips; this is the common method of sutures, and it is that you take one needle or several, according to the width of the wound, then leave two fingers' worth of space from the head of the wound, and insert a needle where there is good strong thread; pierce the two heads of the skin with the two heads of the hypodermis, which is under the skin inside, until you make it pierce on that side, and bring together the two heads of the hypodermis along with four together; then draw a double thread around the needle on both sides, then bring together the two heads of the wound in the same way, and then leave two fingers' worth of space, and insert another needle; then tie the thread as you did the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to what you need from the needles, until the entire wound is restrained; and let the needles be medium-sized, between subtle and thick, for subtle needles pierce all the flesh, and those that are too thick cannot enter well: therefore they must be medium-sized; and it is not necessary to push the needles too far from the flesh and skin, lest they pierce and work the wound before the suture; and then cut the heads of the needles, so that they do not hurt the patient while sleeping, and put bandages or cloths on the heads of the needles to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed; this method of suturing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because an additional needle is sufficient in a second suture, which is common, and it is that you bring together the two heads of the skin and the two heads of the hypodermis together at one needle where there is a good medium-sized thread; and when you have pierced these four heads together, then remove the needle to the part where you began, in the manner in which one sews clothes; and put space between each suture equal to the thickness of a small finger; this suture holds well, and I sewed a wound that a man had on his stomach, which was cut by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm in size, and two palms of intestines came out, and the wound was in the middle of the stomach.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	 Je lui remis les intestins après qu'ils eurent été hors pendant vingt-quatre heures, puis la blessure fut scellée jusqu'à quinze jours, et je l'ai soigné, et il a guéri.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	 And the doctors had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle; and I did not cure him with ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicines; and I put on the wound old cotton II times a day, and I washed it with honey water until he was cured.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	 Now I will tell you the II proper ways of stitching: take the needle and pass it from the outside to the inside; when it has pierced the heart straight through, leave the tip of the thread where you passed the needle, and make it come out on the other side from the inside to the outside; and the understanding of this stitch is that you sew like the furrier makes the furs, and that you leave one time the thread on one side, and take it back on the other, until the stitching is all done.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	 Li seconde maniere de costure, that is the second manner of stitching, which Galen mentions specifically, is done as follows: some people bring together the two parts naturally, and apply one end of the silk to the other end, in this manner: insert a needle at the end of the thread close by, and have it pierce only that place, and leave the two ends of the thread; then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the outer part until it reaches inside, at the two ends of the silk; then make both ends from the outer part reach inside, in two other places of the thread which are on either side; and this is the second manner of stitching and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	 Galiens says this word, and some attest to it: one should suture the belly with two needles, each with thread; and one must insert one needle from one side, and the other from the opposite side, in the manner of those who sew straps; and know that when the incision is in the middle of the belly, the suture is more difficult than in other places of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	 The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds: and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, before the fire has moved it, then you must cauterize the intestine and the wound; then apply a powder enchanting flesh, and if the fire has moved it, then apply some ointment that is present, until the wound heals; and sew the threads, and let the siphac and mirach be soldered; then treat the wound as others, until it is healed; and if you do not have medicines, then apply, as soon as it begins to cast pus, old cotton, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	 Car you do not need other medicine in many situations when the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound will spread to the main members, then it is necessary that you moisten a light cloth in oil of tempered heat, or in rose oil, and place it around the joints and under the armpits; and if there is pain or corruption in the bowels, which often happens, then give clysters of tepid black wine, and likewise if the corruption reaches the intestines; and pierce within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	 The intestine that is called "jeune" cannot heal when it is injured, and this is due to the thinness of the veins present there, and due to the subtlety of the whole body, and the closeness of its nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	 And if the intestine protrudes from the wound, replace it like the intestines while it is fresh; and if it is old and has turned black or brown, you must tie off the black part so that blood does not flow therein, for there are veins and arteries; then cut between the ties, and hang both ends of the section below the wound until they dry out to ease the extraction when the intestine falls back into place.
de la routure dou boueil	 of the bladder's rupture
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	 When the intestine is cut and the wound is small, it can be restored in some cases, for I have seen a man wounded in the belly by a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became infected and turned into a fistula, from which excrement and gas were emitted; I treated it as best I could and did not cease until he was healed and the place closed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	 And when I saw it heal, I feared that the patient might have an ailment in his belly; and there was no ailment, but he remained in better condition, eating and drinking; and some experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestines, it should be bound in such a manner: take large-headed pins, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the pin has opened its mouth, place it on the two lips, so that it draws its mouth up; and then strike the head, and this holds so that it cannot come loose, then place another pin afterwards in the same manner as before, until the wound is entirely enclosed; and stitch the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	 Those heads thus adhere in the intestines, and no harm comes to the patient, and one can tie the intestines with a fine thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal, in such a manner: take the head of this intestinal thread that is very thin, and then tie it at the end of this thread a fine twisted linen thread, then put the thread through the needle, and sew the intestines, and bring them back together; and this method of suturing for fractures is not beyond according to the way of faith and hope; and if the wound is great and wide, especially when it is in one of the hollow intestines, there is neither skill nor health, except for subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	 Of a fistula, wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	 Know that any wound or abscess, when it breaks open, is universally called a "fistula," and also when it bursts and exudes pus.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	 And a fistula is, in truth, a hard and white scar that does not cause pain, and it also bursts like the quill of a bird; sometimes it exudes clear pus, other times thick; sometimes little, other times enough; and I have already spoken about this in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh in it, it is not healed except by one of the NINE causes: that is to say, due to the smallness of the blood or body; or because of its malice; or because there is hard flesh within, on the lips, which does not allow flesh to grow; or there is too much pus; or the place is rotten, and the material is of bad quality; or the medicine in the treatment is not good; or because the corruption is a manner of plague; or due to the nature of the region, digestion is slow, and healing is delayed, and it is swollen by nature; or there are veins or bones: and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the medical treatments in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	 Or it is necessary that I make you know the cure of fistula which is made by the work of hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	 Know that fistula occurs in all members of the body; for there are fistulas which come to the large veins, and to the arteries, and to the nerves, or to the liver, or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and there are such that come to the property of the principal member, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	 And all the fistulas which are of this kind are of grave healing, and there is no remedy except labor and ignorance; and if there is any fistula which does not come up to the place that I have said, and you have confidence in the cure, and you want to know it, then take a probe of bronze or iron, if the fistula is straight, then seek it; and if the fistula is crooked, then search for it with a subtle probe of boxwood, because boxwood bends more easily around the tortuosity; and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot well seek it with probes, then irrigate it through one of the openings, for moisture goes from one opening to another, and cleanses it; then wisely seek it according to your ability, so that you may know if there is bone or nerve, and cut deeply into it, and ask the patient well about the pain he feels at the pressure of your hand, and the place where he feels it; and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint or a nerve or an artery or a vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have said, and remove the foulness and corrupt flesh that is within; and then cure it until it is healed, and if the fistula is very deep from the right place, then it is necessary to cut deeply into it, as much as you can, then put moist probes in medicinal vinegar, and pour them up to the head of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the superfluity which remains at the bottom; and then put dressing in fresh meat, until it is healed; and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupt from the fistula, then cut into it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If a vein or nerve is damaged in the main limbs, as we have said; and if the bone is exposed and there is decay and blackness, then scrape it until all the decay is removed, then treat with healing flesh until it is healed; and if it is not healed, and bleeds again as before, know that you are not yet at the source: uncover and seek until you reach the source, remove all the decay, then restore the place; and if it is thus healed, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	 If not, know that the decay is too deep for you to reach; then there is no other remedy but to leave it to nature; and if there is a little bone decayed, and you can draw it out with pincers, draw it out with an instrument suitable for this, and if there are many bones, draw them all out, do not leave any; and if moisture hinders you, and there is no error or fear, cut flesh and moisture and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	 And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then place on the wound something that causes putrefaction, and leave it until the place is rotten around the bones, and then the bones will more easily come out; and if it is a large bone, such as from the leg or thigh, then remove only the corruption until all the blackness is gone, then restore the wound; and if there is a great deal of corruption, and it reaches to the marrow of the bone; then you must cleanse and scrape all the way to the corruption, and then treat it until it is healed; and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take an example and aid in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	 He was a young man around thirty years old who had pain in his leg from something that came into the body, causing matter to accumulate in the leg and forming a large abscess which swelled up. There was no reason to open it; but the doctors in their foolishness kept working on it until the abscess burst open, and much matter flowed out. It became an ulcer with many holes that all oozed pus and moisture from the body. Many doctors tried to treat it for two years without any success, until I was called to see him. I saw his leg and the medicines they were using, as well as the large amount of matter flowing from the holes. The young man's skin turned red and had a citrine color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	 Je (I) boutai (pitched/set up) une (a) tente (tent) en (in) l’un (one of) ces (these) pertus (holes/passages), et (and) puis (then) cerchai (sought out) toz (all) les (the) pertus (holes/passages), et (and) trovai (found) que (that) li (the) uns (one) venoit (came) encontre (against/towards) l’autre (the other) de (of) toutes (all) les (the) parties (parts/sections) de (of) la (the) jambe (leg).
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	 Je me hâtai donc (so I hurried then), et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je découvris une partie de l’os (and dug into one of the holes until I uncovered a part of the bone), et le trouvai corrompu et percé (and found it rotten and pierced), et venoit la corruption jusqu’à l’os dedans (and the rot extended to the inside of the bone); je nettoyai ce que m’apparaissait de l’os corrompu (I cleaned off what appeared to be the rotten part of the bone), et crus qu’il n’y aurait pas d’autre corruption, sauf celle que j’ôtai (and thought there would be no other rot except for what I removed); et commençai à traiter la plaie avec des remèdes adoucissants pendant longtemps (and began to treat the wound with softening remedies for a long time), mais elle ne put cicatriser (but it could not heal); et puis recommençai (and then I started over again), et redécouvris l’os comme avant (and rediscovered the bone as before), et trouvai la corruption continuée dans l’os (and found that the rot had spread throughout the bone), et la nettoyai (and cleaned it off), puis l’ôtai (then removed it), et me penai de souder le lieu (and worked to heal the place); mais je ne pus tant que je creusai autour d’une palme de l’os (but I could not do so until I dug around a palm's width of the bone), et le traînai hors de tout son moule (and removed it from its whole cavity), puis le traitai avec des remèdes (then treated it with remedies); et il fut sain et soudez rapidement (and it quickly became healthy and healed), et ne fallut plus recommencer l’ouvrage, sauf pour la faiblesse du malade (and there was no need to start over again except for the weakness of the patient), qui ne pouvait supporter (who could not endure it), et pour la peur de la mort que j’avais de lui (and out of fear of his death that I had).
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	 Because of the evacuation of blood, he often bled profusely, but he was completely healed, and in place of the bone, hard flesh grew, and it was well-disposed and had no harm or contrary effect at all, neither going nor coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	 And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be set in this manner: take a bandage, and tie it at the end of the open bone, and command someone to extend it upward; and place another bandage of linen thicker than the first bandage, and tie it on the flesh that is above the bone, and stretch the top, so that you draw the corrupted flesh downward, and discover the flesh above the place where you want to set [the bone], so that the splint does not harm the flesh; and place a piece of wood or a board under the bone to move the corrupted flesh; and it is necessary to set as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and to set again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	 And if the bone is rotten and does not open, and the rotting is in the middle or in a part, then uncover all the flesh; then put a glowing ember underneath, and then saw through the rotten part from one side to the other; and let the saw be longer than the rotten part by a thumb’s width, as we have said; and if the rotting is at the joint, then cut off the rotten joint, and saw the bone on the other side where it is not rotten; and if the rotting is in the continuation of two joints, there is no other remedy than to cut; and if the rotting is in the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, this is a very serious matter; nevertheless, you must seek out this rotting, how it opens for you; and cleanse it in all the ways that you can, but let the vein or nerve not work against you; and know that the instruments for incising these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and delicacy, and their size and smallness, and their hardness; and therefore it is necessary to prepare for each similar task its instrument; and know that the work will show you the instrument of which you have need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases; so consider the instrument of which you have need according to what is required.
dou feu	 From the fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	 The head may putrefy from within or without; and when you have treated that corruption with the cure of medicines, and they do not benefit, it is necessary to amputate that limb up to the place where the corruption comes, so that the patient escapes death or the greater evil of the loss of the limb. The sign of this is that the limb becomes black, as if it were burned by fire, and then putrefies after the blackness; thus goes that corruption from limb to limb, and spreads throughout the body. Therefore, hasten to amputate, and if it is from the bite of some venomous animal, such as a sea scorpion or viper, if the corruption is at the fingertip, cut it off and do not give it space to reach the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	 And if it reaches the hand, then cut at the joint so that the corruption does not reach the arm; and if it reaches the arm, then cut with a knife; and if it passes the knife, it is death, and no treatment will help except in proportion to its virtue; and do the same when the corruption comes to the foot: if it reaches the first joint, then cut after the other joint; and if it reaches the foot, then cut off the entire foot; and if it goes up the leg, then cut at the knee joint; and if it reaches above the knee, there is no other remedy than to let the patient die; and the manner of cutting or sawing the limb is such that you tie it above and below, and extend one ligament downward and another upward, and you remove the flesh between the two ligaments to a width of half a finger, until the bone is exposed; then cut or saw, and place on each side a bandage of linen, so that the saw does not touch the healthy place, and thus comes another injury and abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	 And if bleeding occurs while you work, cauterize the place quickly, or apply some restraining powders; then return to your treatment until it is completed, then bind the injured member with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed; and I will tell you what happened to a man in his foot: there was a blackness that resembled a burn from fire, and this corrosion first came on his big toe of the foot, so much so that it spread throughout the entire foot; and when the man saw the corrosion, he hastened to cover his foot, and it was healed; and a long time after, the corrosion returned to the big toe of the hand, and he came to me, and I put on repellent things after cleansing the body, but the corrosion could not cease; and he asked that I cut off his hand, and I did not want to, for I hoped to drive out the matter; and I also feared that if I cut his hand, he might die, because the man's vitality was weak; and he became completely desperate, and returned to his land, and hastened to cover his hand, and it was healed; and I have told this story only so that others may learn from it, should they need to.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	 Sometimes an abscess forms in a fleshy place and stays so long that it causes a large gathering of pus; then it roars and bursts, and the pus jumps out, leaving the place empty, just like a vessel; and the skin on top is as thin as delicately woven cloth, and does not extend to the bone or nerve. Such an illness is called "health" and is not called "fistula"; but if it extends so much that it reaches the bone profoundly, then it is called "fistula"; and the skin is such that you can cut all around it, even when it is thin, just like delicately woven cloth; and it does not hurt because of its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	 And if you trust that the skin has healed, and the corruption is not deep, and the skin is thick with flesh, then cure it with an enema in this way: see if the breast is large, and the discharge from it is of foul odor, then enema with Egyptian medicine made thus: take asafoetida, oil, and lead, equally, and put to cook in a vessel over fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey; and then take some of this according to your need, and mix it in water and honey, and enema the breast, and close the orifice; and leave the medicine inside for II hours, then extract it by pressing; do this many times, until the breast is cleansed, and the pus is removed; and sometimes enema with ash water, when this medicine is not present, and it is that you take ashes of vine wood, and pour water over it, then strain it, and enema, until you know that the breast is well cleansed; and if the patient cannot bear it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the ash water, then enema with water and honey where there is a little lead powder; or enema with honey and mixed wine, that the honey may have the property of cleansing and washing, and the wine makes the wound dry; and when you have done this, and you trust that the breast is well cleansed, then enema with what produces flesh in it, and it is that you take definite plaster, and mix it with rose oil and in wine; or enema with some medicines and ointments, whose properties I have said in the treatise of ointments; and if the orifice of the breast is small, and the tube of the enema cannot enter, then widen it a little with an iron, and insert a tent of Egyptian ointment, or basilicon ointment, until it is widened; and if the wound is too large, then sew it up, leaving only one place where the enema can enter, and if the orifice that discharges bowel is at the top, then cut lower or in a lower place.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	 Car when the arrow is completely inside, it does not allow flesh to enter; and if you cannot remove the skin as you wish, then prepare in such a manner that the arrow goes to the lowest place where it is, for when the arrow is completely inside, it does not allow flesh to enter; and if you cannot remove the skin as you wish, then prepare so that the arrow goes gently downward, and leave nothing of the arrow; and take medicines that strengthen for placing on the wound, and stretch over a cloth of linen that covers all the wound; then cut strongly at the place of the breast, making the hole wider than before, then stretch a soft ointment on another cloth according to the size of the hole, and put it on the hole of the wound to lighten the arrow, and do not remove the large cloth until after many days once; and that which is on the hole of the breast, remove often to remove the arrow, and know what comes out of the arrow, whether it is poison or pus or enough, or digested, or undigested; and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not; and when your medicine has been extended in this manner and you see the nature that rises on the hole of the wound, know that the breast is already healed, and health approaches; and then remove it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you open the wound, then change another cloth, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	 And if the chest throws out undigested food after many days, know that the chest does not breathe.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	 And if subtle poisons course through after a long time, do not despair of health, for healing approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	 And if wounds heal slowly with the formation of flesh and some do the opposite; and if undigested food is ejected from the chest after many days, know that the chest does not breathe; and if the chest delays in breathing and is distant, then approach with drying medicines that are moist in substance but dry in virtue, as described in the ointment of diafin, for there is a large part of vitriol, which is the final medicine. Take diafin ointment and make it with rose oil and wash it with equal old wine in substance; then infuse and use it; and the same thing cooked and thickened works better when diafin ointment is not present. If you do not have mirrah and aloe and incense, take them and grind them into a powder on honey while it is on the fire; and then glue it with cloth and place it on the chest, and sometimes we administer long aristolochia root and celestial lily root, which are also like vetch flour and centaury. And use either simple or compound: grind them into a powder and mix with the honey I mentioned and use it; and if the cure is prolonged and not cured by this cure, then know that the corruption has reached deep, and presses on the bone, or on hard members, or on joints. Then cure the fistula as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	 of the fingertip abscess
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	 Paronychia is an abscess that forms under the fingernail of the hand or foot, or possibly in other places; and when it becomes old and neglected, there will be a stinking abscess, which runs and throws pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and possibly all the way through; and it eats away at the bone, causing a foul-smelling pain, and the tip of the finger is wide, and the color is red.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	 When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary that you cut off with an iron all the excess that remains from the nail, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The cautery is very helpful if the bone is healthy and the flesh is clean; but if the flesh presses into the flesh, begins to prick and wound, then you must place a razor under the nail that pricks the flesh, and push it up, and carefully and lightly cut off that flesh, and apply burning and corrosive medicines on top to remove everything; then treat with ointments until healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	 And if the corruption is in the bone, cut it out and draw strongly, for as long as the corrupt bone is there, it cannot heal; and if you see the toe begin to rot, cut it off at one of our fingers, as mentioned before, then treat until healed; and if it is struck, and swollen, and the patient feels great pain, then you must first stop the bleeding; then cut the nail with a sharp spatula by cutting diagonally on top, and ensure that the cut does not reach the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain; and if it happens, apply something soothing.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	 The pain of the shoulder of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	 The two thumbs that appear in the hands of some men by chance are all fleshy, and sometimes there is one with bones, and sometimes there is a claw. And sometimes they are born at the root of the joint, or the birth is in some of our fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	 That which is born in any knuckle of the thumb does not move, and that which is born at the joint of the thumb may perhaps move; the shape of the fleshy one is light, in this way: cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	 That which is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure; so hold yourself ready with the scalpel.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 In one who is born or should at the anus, you must first cut the flesh roundly until the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable saw, then heal it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	 The swelling that comes to both together comes from birth, or from the healing of a wound, or from burning by fire, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	 Then you must cut this swelling so that the parts may return to their natural shapes; then place between two tents or cloths moistened with rose oil, so they do not rejoin; or you place between two thin sheets of lead until the place is healed as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	 If swelling comes to one of his hands with the palm, cut this swelling as needed.
des vils	 of the vile
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	 Veins are large swollen and full of superfluous melancholic humors that come in many parts of the body; and it happens more in the legs of those who walk, work and carry things than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	 Therefore, you must administer some purging of bile to him, and then heal it with the balm of Mecca.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	 The treatment with iron is done in two ways: one is that they are cut and drawn out the black blood; and the other way is that you lift the vein and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	 The incision is done in this way: first, raise the leg with very hot water until the thick blood becomes thin; then hold the patient's leg from above the hip to below the knee; then cut the vein in one place, or two or three places, with a wide cut; then lift and draw out the black blood forcefully by hand, from one end to the other, as much blood as the strength of the patient can bear; and then bind it, and command him to eat foods that generate black bile; and repeat the evacuation and healing when the veins are full, and it will benefit the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The elevation of it is as follows: raise the patient's leg, if there is a lot of hair, then put it in a bath, and wash the leg with hot water until it turns red, and inflate the veins; and if you don't have a bath, heat it by the fire, and then cut near the vein from the hip to the knee or in the part below the ankle; then work the skin with scissors, and scrape the vein on each side, until it appears when touched; and one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems like a white cord; then push the thread down, so that it is raised from the skin, and then gently pinch it with tweezers, then cut in another place above three fingers; then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears, then raise it with thread as you did before, and pinch it with tweezers as you did first; then make another cut, or several if you need to, then raise it and cut at the toe of the foot, then draw it out and raise it up to the second cut; then pull it from cut to cut, until it comes out completely, then cut it; and if you cannot draw and raise it, put in a needle with one strong double thread, tie it and draw it, put it under a thread, and turn your hand from side to side, until it comes out; and be careful that it does not cut, because if it cuts, it cannot be drawn or raised, and it harms the patient; and when you have completely drawn it, put moistened wool in wine and rose oil on the place of the wound; and heal it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	 And if the face is contracted and twisted and wrinkled together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it obliquely, but do not chop it; and pull it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	 The form of the iron used to cut the face is curved and does not cut cleanly, so that it does not cut the vein; and it is thick, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein. But let it be thick as we have said, and here is the shape:
de la voinne civile	 of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	 This vein is found in the legs, in hot regions where no herbs or trees grow, and in dry land; and it may occur elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens due to the corruption that comes beneath the skin, as snakes and worms enter between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	 And if the sign of the beginning of this vein is such that it comes in the leg a very great inflammation, then the place changes, and the vein begins to come out, like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	 When the head opens, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of lead from one and a half to two and a half palms long, including the knot, and leave the lead hanging on the leg; and every time some comes out of the hole, wrap it around the lead and the knot. And if it is too long, cut off part of it, and wrap the rest, but do not cut at its base until it is completely removed; because if you cut it, it will enter into the flesh, and cause an abscess and rotting in that place, and a bad disease; for which reason it must be treated little by little until the end, and nothing remains in the body; and sometimes this vein, when it is drawn out five or ten palms long, and there was one man who came to me whose it came out ten palms long, and when you cut it, it spurts a stream or a hole, and pierce until the bottom so that all comes out; and clean out the material that is inside, and apply medicines on the place each day that prevent rotting, then treat it as for abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	 And sometimes at this vein there is little blood, especially when it opens in the joint of the foot or leg, and much blood comes out, and then it runs less; treat it then as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	 worms that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	 This disease is called in our land "cattle disease," because it often happens to cattle, and it is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes through the whole body up and down, and one feels it well when moving from member to member, until it pierces the skin where it was going, and then it comes out; and it is engendered by the putrefaction of some humors, just like worms and snakes and earthworms and ascarids in the belly; and one fears its malice, because when it goes through the body, and it reaches the head, and it comes to the eye, perhaps it enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens often.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	 When you see it being treated and pulled out, one cannot push it except when it moves: so it is necessary that you bind the place above and below with a strong rope tightly, then cut off above and pull hard; and if the tip is deeply embedded in the flesh and you do not find it, burn it with fire on top until it dies; and the greatest harm it does is to corrupt the eye, as we have said; and if you see it coming near the head of the eye, strongly tighten the rope below it, then cut off above and pull hard; and the patient must use cleansing of the body with dissolving medicines for evil humors that cause putrefaction, and avoid foods that cause putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	 From the pain that comes from flatulence
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	 This illness is called in our land "vakirir," and it is a pain that comes to certain members, and then moves from one member to another; and I saw what I say to you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	 I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and after a short time, I saw it rise like a worm to the shoulder, faster than anything, as if quicksilver when it runs from one place to another; the pain left that place, and stabbed into the shoulder, and then after a short time it ran through the whole body, until it came to the other arm; then she told me that it constantly circled around the body, just as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	 Je m'étonnais beaucoup de la manière dont elle passait d'un membre à l'autre, car je n'avais jamais vu cette maladie se manifester ainsi auparavant.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	 Cependant, j'avais vu beaucoup de personnes bien manifestées par la douleur d'un endroit à un autre, mais je ne l'avais pas vu, comme je l'ai vu chez cette femme; et je me suis dit que c'était parce que les femmes avaient des corps secs et des veines découvertes, et pour cette raison apparaissaient ces ventosités contraintes; mais elles n'apparaissent pas selon cette raison chez ceux qui sont délicats, ayant des corps humides et des veines répondues.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	 And when you see this disease being cured, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said, then bind it quickly on top and below, and then cut over it until that windiness is forced out of its place; and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your eyes, then cure it with those who dispel windinesses, such as stinking pills, and pills of serapin, and similar others.
des saiettes	 of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	 Arrows are diverse according to their kinds and according to the places of the body where they fall.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	 The diversity of arrows is such that there are those with large points and small ones, barbed and plain; and those with two edges, and those with tongues, and those which have parts; and an arrow which falls into a member falls in two ways: either into a principal member like the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	 When it falls in any of these limbs, and the signs of death that I will tell you about afterwards appear to you: then you should beware of extracting this arrow, for death follows in many ways; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not embedded deep, pull it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	 And the sign of the brain when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and jumps the bone that is on the brain, is when there is blindness and dizziness and fainting and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of the mind, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps there is a discharge from the nose or the ears; and perhaps he loses speech and voice; and from the wound there is white moist pus like egg whites, and it comes out as well as brain matter. And if these signs appear to you, hold back from the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is not in.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	 The signs of the seat when it falls on the heart are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were fixed in a hard thing, not empty; and by chance the seat moves like a finger, and black blood comes out, and coldness and cold sweat come, and fainting: know then without doubt that death will follow.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	 And the signs of the arrow that never leaves the lung are that without plain exuding foam from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and breathes heavily and seeks cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	 And if the arrow falls on the cover of the chest, it is near the small ribs; and causes great pain and great discomfort and heavy breathing; and all the members of the shoulders move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	 And if the arrow falls into the stomach, perhaps something of undigested meat will come out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	 And if the arrow falls into the belly, and a point of faeces comes out through the intestines, there is no hope for the cure, nor for the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	 And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and urine comes out and flows away, and the patient feels great pain, know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	 The other members, such as the thigh and neck and throat and shoulders and arms and spine of the back and chest and hips and legs, and similar members, are safe according to many conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	 When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not poisonous, as I will tell you that it happened to me, so that you may do the same.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	 It happened to me that an arrow fell on the brow in the root of the nose; I tried it, and drew it from another side beneath the fat of the ear, and it was drawn without harm.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	 And in another incident, an arrow fell into the fat of the eye beneath the eyelid, and the arrow was reversed, and I could only reach the tip near the shaft, and the arrow was as large as a Turkish bow, all iron except for the light feathers; the wound was healed, and no harm came to me.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	 And he drew an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ostrich feathers; I cut off his beard, and cauterized until I drew it out, and the Christian was saved.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	 And he drew an arrow from a man whose it had fallen into the belly, and I thought that he would die; and after he had passed thirty days, his condition did not change; I cut around the arrow, and cauterized it, and drew it out strongly, and he had no bad outcome.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	 And so I saw a man upon whom an arrow had fallen onto the back, and the wound had healed over; and the arrow remained inside him, and his natural dispositions did not change in any way, nor did he find any harm in any of his natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	 Et j'ai vu un autre homme, chez qui une flèche lui est tombée sur le visage, et la blessure a été soudée; et il est resté ainsi sans ressentir de grande douleur; et beaucoup d'autres cas similaires.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	 Et j'ai vu une flèche traverser un homme des princes du roi, qui lui était tombée dans le nez, et penchait légèrement vers la droite; et la flèche était entièrement enfoncée. J'ai été appelé pour la soigner après qu'elle soit tombée pendant trois jours.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	 I found the wound to be very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	 Je l'ai examinée de haut en bas avec toute ma subtile habileté, et je ne l'ai pas trouvée; et il ressentait une sensation de picotement et de douleur sous son oreille droite.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	 I thought it was from the arrowhead. I placed on the wound a poultice of absorbent and digestive properties, so that the place would not swell; and the arrowhead appeared to me.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	 I kept the poultice on for several days, and the wound healed again, and thus the patient remained for a long time until he felt the arrowhead inside his nose; and he told it to me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	 I put on the wound a corrosive medicine for several days until it opened up, and I probed it, and felt the tip of the arrowhead sticking in place; then I applied this same corrosive medicine to the opening of the wound until the tip of the arrowhead appeared visibly; and it passed well beyond three months, and then the wound healed so much that I put in tweezers, and tried to pull it out from one side and the other, but it could not come out; then I did not stop trying and devising ways to handle tools until I took hold of it with well-made tweezers, as its shape will appear at the end of this chapter, so much so that I drew it out, and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	 Et les médecins jugent que le cartilage du nez ne peut être restauré : j’ai cependant réussi à le faire, et la blessure a été refermée, et le patient a été complètement guéri.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	 And I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you can apply your care to what I do not say, for the book cannot contain everything; but a wise master learns well from a small amount, and from what is present and lacking, he finds new work and nine tools, in the handling of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	 I say that arrows should not be removed from the members in which they are embedded except according to two methods: either through the place where they entered or by another route; and those which come out by the way they entered, these are arrows entering into fleshy places, and sometimes now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	 And if it does not come out now, leave it until the flesh is rotten around it, and the opening is widened; and likewise if it is lodged in the bone, and cannot come out, leave it thus for some days, and move it each day; and then it will come out, and if it does not, pierce all around with a fine needle until the place around is widened, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	 And if the arrow is lodged in the skull bone and goes up to one of the ventricles of the brain, or any of the accidents that I have mentioned happen to the patient: do not pull it out, but leave it until it has been equalized after some days, for if the arrow comes as far as the brain, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	 And if the arrow is not stuck deeper than in the bone alone, and does not reach the marrow, and the patient remains for some days without bad accidents, then draw out the arrow.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if it is very deeply stuck and cannot come out by force, then administer tarres around it, as I have told you; then heal the place until it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	 And if the arrow is hidden in the body so that it cannot be seen, then search for it throughout the wound; and if you feel it, then draw it out with a suitable instrument; and if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, then widen the wound until it is large enough; and draw out the arrow if you can, and if there are barbs on the arrow, remove as much flesh as you can from both sides, and then break or bend the barbs of the arrow so that you can draw it out; and be careful not to break the arrow, lest you draw it out more painfully.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	 And if you cannot do it at once, leave it until the place around is rotten, then draw it out, for extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	 And if the flow of blood is against you, then proceed as we have said about the treatment in its chapter; and beware of incising the nerve or the vein, and devise a way how you can draw out the arrow safely, either quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow struck him, for this is the greatest help there is, and if you cannot do this, then place him as the signs indicate to you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	 The arrow that comes out from another place, or if something exits from it, or if the skin is swollen there so that it can be seen or felt clearly: cut open then, as much as the forceps can hold, and then draw it out; thus it will come out now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	 And if it is retained in the bone, then turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then draw it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	 And if it cannot come out, then leave it still, and then begin the extraction again until it comes out strongly; and if part of the arrow is there, push all the way to the shaft; and if the shaft has broken off, and you see that a push will be administered, then administer an instrument with a hook, so that the point of the arrow enters the hook of the instrument; and then push strongly, and if the arrow is hooked, then push the instrument with the point entering inside, to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	 And if the arrow is touched, you must cut all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as it should be done.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And if the arrow falls in the foot or in the stomach or in the bladder or in the side, and it is close to the surface, and you can cut above it, then do so; and be careful not to cut the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then stitch up the wound, if necessary; and treat until it heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	 The shape of the tongs used to remove arrows are similar to a bird's beak, and see here its form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	 And there are many kinds of them: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	 The shape of the tip is like the feathers of a bird, to push against the point of an arrow, as shown here:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	 The shape of the tongs for pushing and cutting is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	 common body veins
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	 The veins that one bleeds are XXXI, of which there are sixteen in the head, namely: two behind the ears called "herbaceous"; and the two arteries in the temples; and the two veins in the sockets of the eyes called "aspirants"; and the vein in the middle of the forehead; and the vein at the tip of the nose; and the two jugulars in the neck; and the two veins in the upper lip above the mouth, which are called "augeherich"; and the two veins under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	 The veins that are commonly healed are V in each arm: one is the cephalic, and it is located on the left side, and the common people call it "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "fast," and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic, and the common people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is also on the right side, and the common people call it "vein of the belly," and it is above the ulnar, and it is this one that is healed, which opens clearly at the wrist.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	 And the salvatelle is the vein that is between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has II branches; and in the leg and foot there are III veins: one is below the bend of the wrist on the left side, and the second saphenous is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein that is called "lesser," which is in the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg there are also III veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	 The bleeding of the wounds that are after the ears is useful for old catarrhs and for migraines; and the quality of the bleeder, as I tell you, is to raise the head of the patient, and to rub the place where the wounds are with a rough cloth; then the patient should stretch his neck with a screw until two wounds appear behind the ears in two places hanging from the head. Seek them then with your finger, and where you feel the pulse under your finger, press down; then take the lancet and push it through the vein to the bone, then lift your hand all along the vein, and cut and the skin and the vein well two fingers wide across, and let out as much blood as you wish; then compress and bind until it is healed. And I have already said the incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	 The bleeding of the two arteries that are in the two temples is useful for an old migraine, and a headache, and a customary cataract, and for the body of tears in the eyes; and the quality of the bloodletting is as I say: and it is that the patient draws his neck, so that the two veins appear clearly; and feel the pulse below your finger, and then sign with ink; then raise the heart above the vein to the top of your finger, and push the lancet underneath, and lift the vein up, and cut it, as you have done in two other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need; then release the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on top; and then bandage it well, and leave it until it is healed; and we have already spoken of their cutting and extraction at the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	 Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	 Et si li malaides ne se sent mieus aprés l'operaçon, ceste maniere de cure est molt boine por li.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	 Et se tu vues que ceste maniere de cure te coviengne por li malaide, si com nos avons deviset, et qu’il ne puest sofrire la paine du fer, si en pren l’uevre d’une verge de laurier qui est molt boine a ce.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	 The bleeding of the two veins that are in the two temples helps with the eyes, and with the tinea, and with the redness, and with the winkle in the eye, and with the diseases of the face; and the quality of their bloodletting is such that the patient twists his neck with some rope, as before; then bleed, and let the bloodletting be across, a little long from the flame a little wide, because there is no flesh there.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	 And if the flame is thin, perhaps it will break; then let some blood flow, as much as you need, and then tie with cotton, and bind well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	 The bloodletting of the vein in the nose is good for fever, and madness, and diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes to the face, especially when it is old; and the quality of the bloodletting is such that the patient twists his neck, then presses his nose with your left hand, and takes a thin, long flame, and places it in the middle of the lip between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open very well there, and the blood will begin to flow now; and do not go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your needs, then bind it for one night, because it is quickly healed; and this is the shape of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	 The bleeding of the two veins helps in the constriction of the artery, and at the beginning of mixing, and for many diseases, and for ringworm, and for corrosives, and for shingles, and for erysipelas; and the quality of the bleeding is such that the patient stretches his neck under one and the other, as we have said; and let the master be standing on the head of the patient, and the patient sit on a seat, then open the vein along the length generously, then draw the blood temperately, or as much as needed; then repeat the same in the other vein, then release the ligature, and press gently around all the veins, so that the patient does not strangle; and leave it until morning, so that the wound may be healed.
de la sainie des leivres	 of the bleeding of the liver
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	 The bleeding of the wounds of the lips above helps to heal in the mouth, and to corrupted gums, and to clefts of the lips, and of the nose and around it.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	 And the quality of the bleeding is to make the patient sit before you and tighten his neck as I have said; then turn the lip and look at the two wounds, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left, and they are recognized by the fact that they are black, and because around them there are small black veins: cut off both then, and if you do not recognize them and you are in doubt, cut the largest of each side, and do the same with the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	 Of the bleeding under the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	 The bleeding of the wounds that are under the tongue aids after the bleeding of the cephalic, and this is in the constriction of the throat, and in the diseases of the eye, and in the diseases of the mouth; and the quality of the bleeder is such that the patient lies between your hands before the sun, and he lifts the tongue, and looks under on each side a black vein: then bleed one and the other, and do not go too deep, for below are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	 The wounds of the blade with which one commonly bleeds are bled according to two methods: either by pricking with a broad flame-shaped needle or a subtle olive-shaped needle like cutting blades, and it is called "anesil"; and they are broad and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the wounds.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	 The form of the mermaid is very famous, and it is wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	 And it is necessary for opening full veins filled with thick and visible blood, and that contain thick and turbid blood; and this is the form of the flame olive:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	 and it is more subtle and pointed, and it is for opening subtle veins, where there is subtle yellowish blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	 The phlebotomy of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases under the throat and in the neck, chest, stomach; and it behooves the bloodletter to let blood wisely, and to beware of the artery that is beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	 And if it cuts the artery, and blood flows out, it must be stopped, as I have said; and the flame should not be pricking, but cutting like a needle.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	 And if the basilic does not open clearly, it is necessary that you pull it out and replace it with another; or you search for some of its roots, or you suture in its place a vein into the arm: it opens clearly; and cut it with the needle flame, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	 And if you see the place of the suture, it is necessary first that you pull up the arm until you touch the spot so that you recognize the pulse; then sign the spot with ink and then bind the arm, and cut the vein with the needle flame; and beware not to strike the artery when you see the spot swollen, for it is of the artery: avoid it therefore.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if you see it come out on top like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that this is blood from an artery: hasten then, and place your finger firmly, then remove your finger if the blood clots, which often happens; let the arm lie still, and do not move it until it heals.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	 And if the blood does not clot and it overcomes you, and the physician is not present, cut the artery if it is open, for the head of the arrow will recede; and clot the blood.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	 And take a piece of fig bark and split it, and take one half and bind it tightly until the next day; if the blood clots, that is good; if not, then cure it as we have said, with powders that clot blood; and the clotting is not difficult in many situations due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm's ligament.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	 The bleeding from the vein in the middle helps so that it draws blood from the top and from below, because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic, as we have said; and it is necessary for the bleeder to be careful about the nerve that is beneath, and if he pricks too deeply into the depths, and he finds the nerve, and it swells and the wound closes up, and perhaps it cannot heal; and this nerve opens often, and if it does not open in some men due to its delicacy, then you must bleed him with the anesthetizing instrument; and avoid the nerve as much as possible.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	 And if he has a vein between the two nerves, cut it lengthwise.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	 The bleeding of the cephalic vein assists in that it draws blood from the head and aids the eyes; and one must bleed at the tip of the olive groove or the mirtle groove, for this is the safest of all the veins, for under it there are no nerves or arteries.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	 Nevertheless, one must seek the lighter spot, and it does not matter if one misses the first time and tries again; and perhaps the spot swells in some men when one misses the first time, but it does no harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	 The quality of the bleeding depends on your thoughts.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	 The first thing you must know about bleeding is that bleeding is only administered to maintain health and to avoid future illnesses; and the bleeding should be done in one of the three veins which are as follows: cephalic, fastucal, and basilica; and one should bleed at the beginning of spring at a young age, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of fullness appear; and one should bleed on the first or third day, after two or three hours of the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	 The bleeding administered for illnesses has no set time, but is needed from day to night, at all hours and in all seasons; and it is not necessary to bleed children under fourteen years old, nor a woman carrying until the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	 One should not bleed the elderly who have passed sixty years of age.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	 If someone wants to bleed, in any manner, they must first cleanse the intestines with a light enema, if they have retained much feces, so that the veins do not draw the harmful superfluities from the intestines to the principal members; nor should one bleed those who are too full of food, or drunk, as long as they are intoxicated, nor hydrocephalus. After colic attack, vomiting, and diarrhea, and the multiplication of birth in women, and labor, vigil, and fasting, and all that weakens the entire strength, either by something from a weapon or the body; then subtilize the humors if the blood is thick, with foods, drinks, and medicines, if you have power over them; then enter the bath, if nothing hinders it, to subtilize the blood. And bleed in the morning around the third hour, as we have said; and guard that day from work, and pain, and lust, and similar things; and be joyful and glad, and let the bleeder stand higher than the one being bled, and rub the arm two or three times, then draw the skin moderately, for if it is drawn too tightly or loosely, the blood cannot flow; and then rub the place with the hands, until the veins swell and are felt; then moisten the hand of the bleeder with a little old oil, then put his left thumb on that vein under the place where he wants to bleed, so that the vein does not flee or shrink at the time of bleeding.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	 Car there are veins that flow like cords in the archer, and there are such that are full of windiness, so that when one raises the flame, it draws back from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus it is with some; and if he opens the vein, then the wound is too narrow, because of this, it is necessary that the archer be advised in these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	 And if the vein opens the first time, it is good; if not, then one must again try a little lower or higher, if the place is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	 And if the place is swollen and the patient is frightened, let him leave it for one or two days and do not bind the arm: perhaps such abscesses will come; do not enter into a bath, then resume the bleeding if he wishes; and if the opening is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it will not come out as much as you want, then strike in this same opening with all the flame straight; and work a little quickly, before the place swells; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	 Si tu vois le lieu enflé, ne recommence pas la saignée, et mets-y un peu de lie d'huile, car elle allège le corps du sang, et il est mieux dans ce lieu que l'huile; et ainsi administre la lie d'huile dans chaque saignée que tu pratiques sur les veines, pour arrêter le flux du sang; et cela même fait triacle et boisson d'eux, quand on le met sur le lieu; si subtilise le sang et s'éparpille quand il est trop gros.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	 Et s’il y a un gros abcès, ce qui arrive souvent, surtout lorsqu'on n'a pas beaucoup saigné et que l'ouverture de la veine est petite, alors fais vite et mets une éponge mouillée dans de l'eau chaude et du sel sur le lieu pendant une heure; et il faut faire cela après la sortie du sang de la veine, et s’il y a encore au bout de quelques jours quelque noirceur ou verdâtre, ce n’est pas grave; et si tu vois cela, mets quelque chose d'aloès ou de myrrhe dissous dans du jus de calament, mastic ou similaire.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	 Et often occurs abscess and appearance at the draining of the bladder: put then your hand there, and if you find the place soft upon pressing with the hand, that appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then avoid putting anything of what we have said on it, for perhaps it will burst from the artery; but make a dry plaster to harden the place, then treat it with another treatment, until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	 And draw from each according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	 For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	 And for one who is full and strong, and has a need for bloodletting, make the wound larger, and let the flame be wide; and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and it must be bled little by little often, and it should be bled by cutting across, not by pricking; and this manner of bleeding is safe from excessive bleeding and nerve damage, and is worth more than a long or wide bleeding.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	 And for one whose body is lacking in blood, give him moist bread soaked in pomegranate juice; if he is hot, draw three or four times the amount of blood. And if he has a cold temperament, let him chew before bleeding some moist bread soaked in muse syrup, or aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	 And if he faints from blood loss, after much bleeding, it is necessary that he drink broth of meat and subtle, fragrant syrup, and use other remedies that we have mentioned in the section on syncope, for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	 And if he wants to open a vein in his arm and bleed again, it is necessary that when he is weakened by great bleeding, he bleeds little by little, according to the amount of his strength continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	 And whoever wants to open a vein in his arm after the first bleeding and he has a strong body, let him bleed seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	 And whoever wants to heal from another place, so must heal on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	 For there is much blood within the body that is already heated and causes fever; therefore, it is necessary to draw out a great quantity, and widen the opening until it exudes into pamsun; then when you have considered all the conditions of healing, and place your hand on the patient's pulse while he heals, so that death does not come in place of pamsun. This often happens when the healer is negligent; and it is not right to release the arm, and cause blood to exit a second time, and if the opening is closed, do not press too hard; nor if it is crooked, let him extend his arm hastily, for that would be bad; but leave it until it heals a second time; or you may prick with the point of the flame, until the congealed blood at the vein's opening issues forth, and place a piece of silk soaked in water, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	 And if the vein is swollen, leave it alone and do not restrain it, until the abscess is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	 And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, then drain in the same place or in another vein or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	 The veins in the arm are drained at the place of the chief vein because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	 And the manner of draining is such that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the little finger becomes red; then it should be bound moderately so that the vein appears well; then drain from across, not broadly or lengthwise; and the opening should be wide, and drain close to the joint of the hand; and if blood does not come out, then put the hand back in hot water, and let the blood run into the water until you have enough; and if it is summer, do not put the hand back in hot water, because one puts it more in winter than in summer; and draining from this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve there. 》
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	 The bleeding of the salvatele of the right hand is worth all liver diseases, and this is how it is done: hold the hand, and put it in hot water, until the vein is swollen, if you see it; and if the blood flows obliquely, and you cut all around it, then there will be no harm; and do not go too deep, for the nerves are under all the bare flesh, and then put the hand back in hot water, if the blood clots in the wound, and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	 And when you have drawn as much blood as is necessary, then put oil and silk on the vein to close it quickly, and do this with each time.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	 The flow of blood into his left hand is as valuable for the treatment of leprosy as that which flows towards the right, just as I have told you.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	 The flow of blood from the spleen is as effective against all diseases below the chest, such as illnesses of the womb, retention of flowers (menstruation), diseases of the kidneys, hips and old legs, and similar illnesses.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	 And the nature of his blood flow is such that the patient should place their foot in hot water and rub on the vein until it bursts, and bind above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and many veins run up the foot; so heal then in the widest vein or at the ankle, which is more effective.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	 And if you cauterize on the foot, beware of the nerves below, and cauterize through them as if cutting; and let the flame pass swiftly.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	 And if the pus cannot come out, then put the foot in water, and leave it to drain well from the vein.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	 And if the cauterizer fails the first time, then start again the second time a little higher, for the place is salty; do not fear the nerve, as we have said, and do the same with the sole of the other foot likewise.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	 The place of the sciatic vein is at the ankle, and its cautery is worth for the pain in the hip, when it is due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	 And the quality of its bleeding is such that the patient enters the bath, and twists four fingers above the ankle, for otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, then bleed in all the manners that you can, and by crossing; and it is better that you cover it, for the place is hollow, and it is very responsive to many men.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	 And if you do not find it, then bleed some rain from him that opens on the back of the foot, towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves; and let the blood flow as much as you see fit, and then untie the ligature, and put cotton on it and tighten it; she is now bled.
des sainies de ventouse	 of bloodletting by cupping
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	 Cupping glasses are made of horn, or brass, or glass; and cupping is done in two ways: either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	 And this cupping which is without pricking is done in two ways: either with fire or without fire; and the cupping that is done by pricking and extracting blood is done in fourteen places on the body, one of which is entirely at the top of the head; and another is in the neck; and two others on each side of the neck; and the cup under the chin; and the cups on the two shoulders; and the cups on the loins; and the cups in the two arms; and the cups in the two legs; and the cups in the two ankles; and this cupping does not draw blood, except for the small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and therefore it does not weaken anyone, as is done with venesection; and it should not be administered, either with fire or without fire, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the entire body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	 And if for necessity of illness it is necessary to bleed, or due to habit, we administer it at the beginning of the month, in the middle, and at every time; because there are such people who, when they need to bleed, have a heavy head; and there are those who find fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness in the eyes; and there are those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and their tongue is swollen, and they spit blood; and there are those who dream, and see nothing but blood and wounds and dead things and similar.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	 And when we see these signs, especially in the middle of the month, we order to bleed after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	 The bleeding of the nose can also help with the heaviness in the head ... that affects the eyes, and it is not necessary that this be done after the evacuation of all the body; and this venting is in place of the cephalic bloodletting, and it is not necessary for those who have a cold complexion to use it, or who have catarrh, because it does great harm to them; and for this reason, it is not necessary for the elderly to use it, nor those who have cold diseases in the head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	 And those who bleed often, become faint, and therefore it is necessary to place the cupping glass a little lower due to the fear of fainting.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	 The venting in the neck is in place of the bloodletting of the head and the basilica, and therefore it is good for constrictions of the bladder, and for fissures of the urinary channel, and for jaundice, and for repletion; and it should not be applied too strongly, because if it is held too firmly, it can cause faintness in the stomach and the heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	 When ventosating at the second ribs of the neck, it is effective for headaches, migraines, and strangulation, and for toothache pain; it is in place of bloodletting from the basilic vein. And you must instruct the practitioner to press his hand firmly when inserting, so that he does not cut the artery, and blood does not flow uncontrollably.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	 Ventosating under the chin is effective for mouth diseases, and for gum infections, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; it is in place of bloodletting from the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	 Ventosating at the shoulders is effective for diseases caused by heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	 Ventosating at the ribs is as effective as bloodletting from the three major veins of the arm, for it draws blood from these large veins; and instruct the practitioner not to strike too deeply, for the site is devoid of flesh, and lies beneath nerves and arteries. ︎
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	 The cupping glass on the rump is good for hemorrhoids of the anus and for diseases below, and it is necessary that the cupping glass be large and made of brass, for it must draw well; and by chance, if it were delicate, it would break; and it makes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	 The cupping glasses on the legs are openly healing because they draw blood from the whole body and are good for old pains of the kidneys, bladder, and spleen, and remove phlegm; and they are placed in the area of the two sophenes and the two ankles, but after long use, they weaken the body and bring on lethargy in many constitutions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	 The manner of placing the cupping glass is such that you first place it empty and suck immediately, and place it hastily, and move it evenly, and do not cease from doing this until you see the redness and swelling of the area, and the redness of the blood appears; then strike, and replace the cups, and take care in the arrangement of the body, for there are those who have dark flesh and clear pores: in such cases, it is necessary to strike only once, and make large wounds, and very deep ones; and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	 And if the vein is large, it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to make the path of the large blood thin.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	 And if the vein is very thick, it is necessary to strike a third time; and when we want to draw a little blood at a time, we should only allow one strike.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	 And if we want to draw much blood, then we do so frequently; and if the blood is thick, we strike deep into it, and the end result is that the heart may be pierced suddenly. It is necessary for those who have thick and hard skin, and whose pores are narrow, that you anoint the places of the cupping glasses with penetrating and dissolving oil: if it is in summer, with violet oil, or almond oil, or cucumber seed oil; and if it is in winter, with cresson oil, or lily oil, or camomile oil, or another similar one.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	 And if the excess is thick and cold, then take bitter oil, or balm oil, or dill oil, and similar ones.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	 And if the one whom we heal has tender flesh and wide pores, then it is not necessary to put oil on it, but it must be washed after being ventosed with rose water, or cold water, or mallow water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or other similar waters.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	 And those who have much moisture should be lifted with asphodel, or myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	 And those who have large superfluities should be lifted with old wine, or water of succory, or decoction of dill or chamomile, or other similar things; and it is not necessary to heal with cupping before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and he must not sleep after being cupped, and it is necessary that he wash, when he should be cupped and when he has been cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	 And beware if the one who is healthy is choleric, and if his blood is too hot and inflamed; then he must take cold things, such as crab apples and endives and lettuce in vinegar, and similar things; and eat pomegranates, and roasted meat, and moist foods.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	 And the one with a cold complexion should take syrup of honey, and medium-aged wine that is between old and new, and eat pears, and eat pomegranates and small birds and thrushes; and on the day he will be ventosed, he should drink more than eat; and it is necessary to give some men sometimes triacle or musk before ventosation, or after, to strengthen the main members; and the blood must be made subtle, but it is not fitting that those who are hot should drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	 The ventouses that are placed without wounding are those placed on the liver, and the spleen, and gout, and on the stomach and bladder and kidneys and hips, for these members cannot be wounded with eyes, and we do it only to draw blood from one member to another, as we place them on the breasts when the nipple bleeds; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we place ventouses on the stomach and bladder to reduce the member; and removes pain, when there is swelling or stone, it may remove the swelling by its attractive virtue, or dry out the stone from its place; and so it does when placed on the liver and spleen when there is retained wind, and these ventouses are administered empty only to suck; and sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes full of hot water, as in pleurisy illnesses, and in such a way that one fills the ventouse with boiled herbal water.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	 Li forme
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	 And let it be two fingers wide and half a palm deep, and have on the side around the middle a small hole, like for inserting a needle, and let it be of brass, soft in front so that it does not wound the patient when placing on the limb; and let there be in the middle a rod of brass or iron to hold a cloth, both large and small according to the illnesses and the age of those who use them; for the cups of children are different from those of the old, and of the thin from the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	 And one should place this cup on the limb in this way: take a cloth of wax or linen and place it inside the cup across the rod that is inside the cup, so that the brightness is at the bottom of the cup so that it does not burn the patient; then place it on the limb, and let your two fingers be on the hole that we have mentioned, so that when one wants, the vapor goes out, and remove the cup; and take the linen as before, and often repeat it if you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	 In the cupping glass which is prepared in the disease of pleurisy, there is no reed or hole, and it is not prepared except when it is full of water, and it is placed on the member only; and this is its form.
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	 Sleeve worms are only prepared except in members where one cannot put cups because of their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and in fleshy places without skin, such as fingers or noses, and other similar ones; and the quality of use is that when you find sleeve worms that are in clear water without dirtiness, take them; and put one in clear water until they are accustomed, and have nothing in their bellies; and then let it be bled from a vein and with a cup, then rub the member until it becomes red, and place the sleeve worms on it; and when they are full and fall off, if it is a place where one can put a cup, put one on, for that is very valuable afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	 If not, then raise the place with oil of easel, and then with water, very well, and then press it; and if the place bleeds too much after the leeches, then moisten a linen cloth in cold water, and place it on top, until the blood is stopped; and if the blood is abundant, then place on vitriol powder, or gallnuts, and similar things, until it is stopped; or you may place half-peeled beans on the place, and leave them until they dry up at the place, which will stop it now; and if you need more, take other leeches.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	 And if the leeches do not want to attach, then rub the place with fresh blood, or you may insert a needle until the blood comes out, and then place them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will stick; and when you see that they are falling off, then sprinkle on a pouch of powdered aloe and celandine, or ash, which will make them fall now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	 Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	 This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it deals with the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	 Know, dear son, that the foolish doctors who neglect this chapter have never seen any of the old books nor read any letters from them; and because of this, the science is strange in our land, for I have never found any good ones here; and I know nothing about it except through the science of the old books, where I have studied so much that I have acquired the knowledge, and by experience, and by the habit of my life; and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained therein, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, as I did in these II chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	 It is necessary therefore that we speak in the prologue of this book about the sums of knowledge and the chapters where the wise man places his understanding, and dwell on the truth, so that those who are proven may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	 I say that when fracture or dislocation or torsion or breakage occurs in anyone, you must hasten to heal the patient from one side and another, if nothing else hinders you completely, such as physical weakness, childhood, old age; or if the time is not very hot, or too cold; and use cold foods, that is, cool drinks, and bird meat and rabbit, and drink no wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill yourself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt of a hot abscess, or of the spread of matter in the limb; then the patient should return to his former way of life.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	 And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that the patient be fed with foods that cause heavy nourishment and have viscosity, such as wheat cooked in water, rice, heads, feet, cow stomach, eggs, fresh fish, strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	 For with such nourishment the bones heal faster and sooner.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	 And know that the broken bones of old and withered people cannot heal well or mend according to their nature due to the dryness of the limbs, nor those too soft, such as the bones of small children; but don’t worry, set the broken bone with strong splints that hold and join the limb together until it heals as before; and if not completely, then for this reason they must be fed with substantial foods, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	 Et sachez que les fractures sont diverses en maintes manières.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	 Et sachez que les fractures du crâne sont différentes des fractures du pied ou de la jambe, et je vous dirai dans ce chapitre toutes sortes de fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	 Car il y a des fractures qui vont vers le haut, et d'autres en s'affinant, comme la pointe d'une plume pour écrire.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	 Et il y a des fractures avec plaies, et d'autres qui sont juste de fines fissures.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	 Et chaque type de fracture a son propre dispositif et instrument pour la réparation, selon ce qui ramène l'os à sa place; et une fracture de l'os est reconnue parce que le lieu est tordu, et cela s'ouvre bien en dessous, et résonne sous la pression de la main; et lorsqu'il n'y a ni torsion ni résonance au toucher, et que le patient ne ressent pas une grande douleur, il n'y a probablement pas de fracture; mais il peut y avoir une torsion, ou une fissure, ou une petite fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	 It is not necessary for you to move it by hand, but rather apply medicines that will be mentioned later, and then delicately reset it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	 And know that the fractures that go in width, and are the two parts disjointed, you must now join them equally before an abscess comes there; and if an abscess comes there, let it rest for some days until the abscess is calmed; then join it to the bone as lightly and wisely as possible, and know that the restoration of this is lighter than the restoration of that where there are pieces; then reset it, as will be explained later.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	 And if the bone is broken into pieces, and there are two parts, whether it is in the hand or foot, or at your hand if it is a small limb, or with two cords, or with one cord and at your hand; and set the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the limb are released, you rejoin all additions in their places to the bone as best as you can, and be careful that through your work no injury or pain comes to the patient; and properly join the two ends of the bones according to the best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	 Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, and do not press it too much, as some do in their work, bringing about hot abscess and contraction in the limb, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	 And when the limb is in place, admonish the patient well that he not move it, neither while waking nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other manner; and ensure well that the limb is so secure that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	 For when he feels any pain, it is not in place, and it must be put in such a position that it feels no pain; and ensure that it is set straight, so that there will be no deformity when it is restored; and the quality of the broken limb is as I have told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	 Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	 Et se il i ad apostemes ou enfleures, si covient que tu li mueves les membres brisiet a une partie de leu ou le membre ne soit pas trop gros, et quant il sera en tel lieu qu’il n’i aie fors tant con lou meinbre est sainz, adonques met ton bendeil sus la place des apostemes, puis torne entor liiens larges et durs, et lie bien estreint, si que li membres soit tenuz de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il ne se puist mouuoir ne aucunement.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	 And if there is inflammation or an abscess, apply something that soothes the abscess and removes the inflammation, and leave it thus for some days; then draw forth with your tweezers, and let them be of half the width of a reed, skillfully made, or of wood from which they make wedges, or of palm leaves, and let them be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	 But the tweezer that is placed on the fracture must be a little larger and wider than the others; and it should be as long as needed for the member, whether small or large; then draw forth with the tweezers as you did in the first turn, then bind above with thread, as was done in the first turn on the fracture; tighter is above, always less so; and the threads must be moderate, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen. For if the threads are thick, as I have seen the work of fools who make their bindings with twisted ropes of hemp, it is a great error, for the binding cannot be even if it is too tight, and it should not have less than two fingers' width between each tweezer.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	 Et si le malade est blessé par les têtes des étoiles après l'extraction en ses veines, il met dessous elles des éponges de lin ou de la laine déchiquetée, afin qu'il ne saigne pas.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	 Et si la blessure est accompagnée d'une fracture, et que le cœur est percé, je dirai comment la soigner par la suite.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	 Et sache que l'on ne doit pas extraire immédiatement toutes les étoiles des membres cassés le premier jour.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	 Car lorsque le membre est grand, il ne faut pas mettre des étoiles avant le cinquième ou septième jour, ou même plus selon ton jugement sur l'apparition de l'abcès ; et voici la manière des anciens emplâtres pour restaurer fracture, dislocation et torsion : prends de la farine qui est conservée contre les murs du moulin, et mélange-la avec beaucoup d'œufs, puis applique cette préparation, ni trop claire ni trop épaisse, et utilise-la. C'est la manière commune de l'emplâtre pour restaurer la fracture dans diverses situations, et particulièrement chez les femmes et les jeunes enfants, car il n'est ni trop chaud ni trop froid.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	 Other manner of plaster for restoring the fracture and dislocation and torsion: take aloes and ladanum and enula and asafoetida and gum arabic and mastic, in quantity X З; myrrh and aloes, in quantity V З.; garlic IX З.; make them into powder, and mix with the white of an egg. If the man's complexion is hot, use this plaster, for it is well-composed and quickly restores broken bones, and is beneficial to many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	 Another plaster method for torsion: take mastic and mallow, in quantity X З; myrrh and aloes, in quantity IX З.; acacia VI З.; Armenian bole X З., grind well, and mix with water or the white of an egg, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	 Other method of plaster for joints and dislocated bones from their place, and it soothes the resulting pain, and cuts into the bone, and the fracture: take new wool, wet it in vinegar and cooked oil, and apply on the spot.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	 This plaster does not restore [the bone], but it is good for soothing a hot abscess and removes pain properly.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	 Another method of plaster to restore broken bones: take dried fig leaves and groundsel leaves, grind them together and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	 Another method of plaster for the restoration of bone fractures and to soften the remaining abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	 Take the root of mallow, chamomile, violet flowers, pea flour, one part each; and grind, and infuse with wine, and if the member is heated, infuse with moist coriander water or water, and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	 Another method of plaster stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	 Take the root of mallow, flaxseed, mullein, yarrow, and black nightshade, and violet flowers and chamomile, one part each; and grind, and infuse with salt water, or fresh water, or wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	 Ypocras says in his book that on a broken member one should not place anything to restore the strength except for a salve made of wax and oil, and nothing else besides, and he said it should be between two (things), neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	 And it seems that Galen believes one should place on the broken member, to restore it, dry things that are a little hot, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	 Another way of making a poultice that helps with injury and pain: take mugwort and chopped onions or bird feathers, and borage, and sealwort equally, and grind them, and make a poultice and apply it there.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then dislocate a little after, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, or if the bone has moved from its place; do not dislocate for many days. And if pain comes to the place, or itching, without rest or swelling, then hasten, and dislocate, and remove the poultice now; and take a light cloth, and a damp sponge of sea water, and dip in water, and lift the place, until the itching ceases, and the pain is calmed; then let the member rest for an hour, then apply dry linen, moistened in water or rose oil, and bind on a nut, until you are sure that the hot abscess subsides; and the inflammation of the member rests, and the pain is removed, then resume the subtle liqueur, and a little poultice, and do not hold it as tightly as before; and continue subtly until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	 And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen, you have removed it all; and if you need a plaster or bandage, start again as you did first equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	 And if it does not come to the limb as we have said, do not release it until after three days or four or five or seven; and sometimes leave it twenty days, depending on what you see, until the break is healed and the adhesion of the flesh approaches; then restrain it more than before, and thicken its flesh, as I have said above. And if you see the place drying more than necessary, know that nourishment cannot come there; therefore anoint it with warm water every time you release it, and this should be every third day, and loosen the bandage slightly; through this work, nourishment comes to the limb, and corrects hastily what foolish doctors do, who wrongly return the limb: this is bad, and such works are fearful, and I see nothing else but to leave it and work correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	 Of the various ways of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	 There are many ways of fractures and diverse shapes, and the causes are distinct; for there are fractures that are made by the impact of a sword, and the bone is completely removed up to the marrow which is below the bone, as an axe or log does; and therefore this manner of fracture is called "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	 When the sword strikes the bone from above without piercing it, and this manner of fracture is called "absolue"; and the wound from these two fractures is either great or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	 And if there is an enclosed impact, or a split, or a blow from a stone, or from falling on stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	 Et si il a une fracture saillante,
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	 And if there is a hairline fracture, which is as subtle in the bone as a hair, and the break is small, this type of fracture is called "capillary"; and if the wound is caused by being struck by a stone or by falling or something similar, and it drives a fragment of bone downward, and the place where it happens is sunken like how blacksmiths hammer on anvils; then the stone enters inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	 This happens more often to those whose bones are soft in the head, like a child's skull; and it occurs in all these types of fractures, where small fragments break off like splinters; and I will speak about this later.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	 And we recognize all types of fractures by inspecting them, and by probing with needles, and by the corrupt flesh that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	 The resemblance to hair is known by this: when the bone is exposed and rubbed upon, the fracture appears black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	 In the treatment of a fracture, beware of the patient's symptoms, and if you see any bad symptom, such as black vomit, loss of consciousness, paralysis, weakness, fever, eyes coming out strong and red, and other similar things in various states, then it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	 And if you do not see frightening symptoms, and you expect recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	 And when the wounded person comes to you first, and this is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	 And if this is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, lest the flesh beneath the bone becomes corrupt, and the accidents that we have mentioned occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	 And if the bone fracture reaches the skin that covers the skull, then you must split the broken part as follows: and it is that you take the head of the wounded person, and uncover over the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound more gently than you can, and if bleeding occurs when uncovering the bone, or an abscess like this, then help him with what he needs. And it is that you fill the place with cloths soaked in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the abscess subsides, and be assured of bleeding; then begin to remove around the bone, and this is done according to II ways of work: one way is that you cut with a narrow cut beforehand, and this is the form.
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	 And then there he makes another cut larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	 And the second manner is such that you have a number of diverse cuts, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and made of Indian iron; and work lightly, so that you do not harm the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	 And if the bone is out and hard, then you must bore around it, before making cuts with trephines, not so deep that they do not pierce through the skull, and above the point there should be a margin or circle, so that the point does not pass beyond the bone; and you must have several of them, so that each comes to its place on the thickness of the bone, so that you have trephines for all skulls; and this is the form of the three types of trephines:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	 Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, and turn it with your hands until you know that the bone is pierced; then put the awl elsewhere a little later, and do this all around, then cut with the incisors the space of the bone that is between the holes, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, so that you draw the bone to your hand, or any of the instruments you have such as tongs, tweezers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the sinus.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	 Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, and drawn, then it is necessary that you use the scraper which remains from the bone with all other instruments similar to an incisor, but it must be thinner and more subtle than the other incisors; and if any fragments of small bones or scales remain, remove them lightly with one of the instruments; then treat the wound with lint and onions as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	 Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, and c’est sa parole.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	 It first requires that you uncover a part of the bone where the fracture appears open, so that when you have uncovered that part, place beneath the head of this lenticular cutter, which has this shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	 And do not cut on one side only, and the part is sharp on two sides, so that the cutting edge is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer on top, so that you gently tap all around the bone, and be very careful of the cloth that is underneath; if it is too thick for the bone, remove it lightly, because it can be removed without harm, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	 And if the bone break does not reach to the skin, and the bone is only broken on top, with small fragments, then you must smooth over those rough edges, and remove the scales with a fine scraper of which you should have various amounts, to adapt in each place the most suitable one, according to the work and the shape of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	 Use first large scrapers, and then finer ones, and do not stop doing this until it is good.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	 In each of the other delicate incisions and subtle breaks, you must adapt according to its nature; and this is something that is not taught to those who have studied this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	 And if the ulcer is uncovered, then you must take a linen cloth according to the size of the wound and moisten it in rose oil, and place it on the wound; then take another cloth folded in two or three, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth; and do this as lightly as you can, so that you do not burden the ulcer, then apply another ligature on top, and tighten it only so much that it touches the wound alone; and leave it like this for one or two days, until the swelling has subsided, then remove it, and apply medicines such as lily roots, vetch flour, frankincense powder, arsenic, and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and place on the wound, and always apply non-irritating medicines; and ensure that the wound is always clean, so that you do not leave any oiliness, nor allow pus to collect, for when pus collects on the skin of the brain, it runs and bursts, and great harm comes to the patient; for when a mordant substance is placed on the ulcer, it poisons above. ︎
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	 Pren warde donc, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if darkness comes other than from the medicine placed on it, which has such power, then you must take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil and mix them together; apply this ointment to the syphilis; then treat in various ways as needed until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	 Know that sometimes the two upper parts of the nose are broken, one alone or both together, because they are bones; and the lower part is made of cartilage and does not break, it only causes swelling or bruising, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	 And if one of the two parts is broken, then it is necessary that you push your little finger into the hole of the nose, and place the break evenly inside your index finger, and push out with the thumb, until the nose returns to its natural shape; and do this gently, and make sure the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	 And if the break is in the upper part of the nose, and the finger cannot reach it, then you must place a small amount of wax at the tip of a reed.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	 And if the break is in two parts, do the same thing again, and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can; otherwise, after seven or ten days, when this swelling has subsided, then push a cloth of linen at the tip of the nose, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	 When you strike one against another, if there is a fracture within; and let the tents be so thick that they fill the holes of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	 And some say that one should soften the tents in butter and change them daily.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	 It does not seem good to me, but they should be moistened in a mixture of egg white and flour; then leave the tent until the bone is healed and the cartilage is hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	 And sometimes one puts goose quills in the nose instead of tents, and then there is a soft cloth around it, and if it is a fracture, and the patient blows through it; now do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	 And if such abscesses come to the nose while you are working there, put a poultice of cotton soaked in rose oil or a small amount of alum on it.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if such abscesses do not come to the nose, apply a poultice from outside, made of sesame flour and frankincense powder, mixed with egg white, then place light dressings on top, and do not bind the nose; and if the fracture of the nose is small and it is broken into small pieces, reduce it with suitable instruments, then sew up the split, and treat similar soft tissue injuries and wounds, such as appropriate poultices and ointments; and if there is no wound inside the nose, treat it with tents, and place lead plasters until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	 Of the dislocation of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	 When the jaw is dislocated below, and there is no wound except that, and it is broken only slightly, and not broken in two, but only splintered inside, then one recognizes it easily.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	 It is necessary that if the fracture is on the right side, you put your index finger into the patient's mouth; and if the fracture is on the left mandible, then you put your index finger of the right hand, and push the fracture gently inside, and adjust it with the other hand from outside, and make it equal.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	 And if the jaw fracture is split into two, then you must provide extension from two parts until it is equalized.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	 And if movement of the teeth occurs, or loosening, then bind them with a thread of gold or silver or silk; and put on the broken jaw cerote, and put on a double cloth; and put on the cloth a large well-made bandage, or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it above as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	 And if you see that the swelling changes, then remove it on the third day, and then apply at the point where it changed; and put a plaster on top, of mill powder with plenty of egg or sesame flour, after you have removed the cerote; and put a light cloth on the plaster, and if the plaster becomes hot, and the condition of the patient does not change, leave it until it heals; many times it is healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	 And if such abscesses come, then administer as we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	 And if there is a fracture and wound together, examine whether any piece of the bone has been removed; then remove it with suitable instruments.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	 And if the wound is narrow, widen it with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when you have removed all these pieces and none remain, then close the wound if it is wide and place upon it suitable plasters to promote healing until it is healed.
de la forcele	 of the cautery
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	 The cautery breaks in several places, near the shoulder, and the fracture occurs in three ways: either it is broken and separated into two parts with pieces, which is easier to restore; or there is a fracture with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	 And the work is such when the fracture is without a wound, that you have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder that feels the broken force; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then place the fracture equally between your fingers, so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance or misalignment.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 And if you need to extend more, place under the patient's shoulder a round ball of cloth or wool, and let it be thick according to your needs; and extend and lift the broken bone, and press the ball with your hand, so that you place the fracture equally as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	 And if you cannot pull the head of the broken bone for lack of strength, because it comes too deep, then it is necessary that the patient lies down on his back, and place a pillow under the shoulder, and let the assistant push the shoulder down until the bones of the fracture are raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	 Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois,
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	 And it appears like a spoon, and is not cut, and let it be as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work; and it has two heads, as you see, and one should be wide, and the other narrow, like the shape of the wound you made when you removed the bones; and when you are sure of a hot abscess, then close the wound, and if the opening is small or you doubt a hot abscess, then fill the wound with cloths and bandages, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	 And if hot abscesses occur there, then soak a cloth in rose oil and aloes and wine, and apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	 The setting of the bone, when it is without wounds and without splinters, is that you place on the bone a poultice made from flour of the mill and the white of an egg, and put light wadding on top, and place a ball under the shoulder blade if necessary; then take a very wide bandage of one palm's width, then place a double cloth over the wadding, and the poultice; then take a fine strip of three fingers' width and length, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the ends of the bandage hang down; and place the strip on the fracture, and turn the bandage up to the neck, under the shoulder blade, under the patient's arm; and bind each part separately, and when you see that the bandage holds the fracture well, and you see clearly that the strip does not move over the broken bone, then unwrap it each day, and when the bandage loosens, then re-tighten it; and make the patient lie on his back, and put a small pillow under the shoulder blade when he sleeps to lift the shoulder up; thus the fracture will lighten by the lifting of the shoulder, where you tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless an evil accident occurs, for twenty days; then reapply the poultice, if you see that it is necessary, and bind it and leave it so, until it is healed; and it is healed in most cases within twenty-eight days, and in less time in some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	 Of the fracture of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	 If the shoulder is broken in a wide place or middle, and it is not known by touch; then prepare it according to the shape of the fracture, and set it according to its natural form, in all ways that you can; then put on the place powder from the mill with plenty of egg, and light stuffing, and put over it a double cloth; then put over a wide and thin board, a little wider than the shoulder, and if there is sinking in any place under the board, fill this cavity with linen stuffing, so that the board sits evenly; and then bind it all tightly with a great bandage firmly, so that the board does not move from its place, and check the bandage every day; and each time it weakens, bind it again, and make the board equal if it is out of place, and let the patient lie on his side; and the shoulder will be healed in 20 days or 25. And when this number is completed, release it, and be sure, for this is not bone that can easily be displaced.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	 And if a piece of the bone protrudes forward, and touches beneath the heart, it causes an elevation, and removes it, and does as we have said in the breakage of the rib to treat a hot abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	 of the fracture of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	 The foot is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks at the forefoot.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	 And when it is broken in the middle, it inclines downward, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of breath, and dizziness, and perhaps vomits blood, and opens the chest in the broken bone, which one can clearly see.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the restoration is such that the patient lies on his back, and one places a cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders together, and joins the ribs from the second rib to the hands, and subtly positions them equally in all manners as you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then place splints and cotton on top of a thin layer of salt or other light wood, and wrap it in a cloth, and bind it tightly to the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turn the bandage smoothly around the back, and tighten it carefully, and check each hour if the binding is loose; and if it loosens, then tighten it; and if it needs to be loosened, due to softening or itching that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, then hurry and loosen it, and remove the splint, and treat what has come in manners of cures; then replace the splint, and tighten it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	 of the fracture of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	 Know that the fracture of the ribs occurs only in large places after the back, and at the top inside, and they only bend because they are slippery; and one feels this well during examination on both sides.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 And the remedy is that you set the fracture straight, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	 Then apply a plaster and hold it in place with a bandage, if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	 And if the fracture of the ribs is inward, the patient feels very great pain and pressure, as with pleurisy, because the bone points at the lung; and he breathes with difficulty, and vomits a large amount of blood, and this is serious, and the ancients have used great ingenuity for it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	 And there are those who say that it should be administered foods that inflate the belly to push out the fracture.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	 We do not do this, lest hot abscesses come, unless they are already there.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	 And if they have come, then heal it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	 And some say that one should put cupping glasses on the place to draw out strongly, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the cupping may attract superfluous things to the place due to the weakness of the constitution.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	 And some say that one should cover the place with cloth moistened in hot oil, and one puts tents between the ribs to make the breathing equal all around, then one is cured by the treatment of pleurisy, with food and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure from the bone that pierces the flesh, and there is doubt for the patient, it is necessary to make an incision over the broken rib, and one must place an instrument underneath to guide the splinter; and then one should cut the bone, and gently pull, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat with poultices until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if such an abscess comes, place moist cloths soaked in rose oil on it, and put on the affected area; and treat the place as one would for an abscess, and let it lie gently on the affected side where it should be, until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	 of the fracture of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	 Sometimes there is a fracture in the bones of the neck, and it can happen that it bends; and likewise with the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	 And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then take notice if you see their hands become soft and swollen and numb, and they cannot move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	 Know that he is mortally wounded in many ways, and if he moves them and feels well when they are pressed or pricked, know that the bone joint is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if one applies treatment to it.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	 And if a similar thing happens to the spine of the back, and you wish to know if it is healthy or not, then take care if the feet are numb, and if there are accidents that are in the hands, and on the back there is windiness and involuntary defecation; and when one has shaken it over his belly, there is involuntary defecation.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	 And when he is shaken on his back and he wants to sit up, he cannot do so.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	 Know that it is fatal; therefore, do not labor in his care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	 And if this accident does not happen to him, then the matter is less serious.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	 And the cure is such that you should see if there is a hot abscess, then put on the spine rose oil or egg yolk oil, until it is soothed; then apply one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not let him sleep on that part where he feels the pain, until he is healthy.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 Et si aucun os est déplacé, il faut couper au-dessus de la courbure; puis enlever l'os, ensuite réunir les deux lèvres de la plaie avec une couture, si elle est grande, puis soigner avec un onguent cicatrisant jusqu'à ce qu'il soit guéri; et si la tête de l'os est cassée, qui est appelée la "tête du coude", alors insère ton pouce de ta main gauche, et le mets égal à l'autre main à ton poing, puis applique le pansement et le bandage dessus, si tu en as besoin; ensuite maintiens-le, et s'il y a un déplacement d'os, alors fais une incision au-dessus, puis enlève-le, et soigne la plaie jusqu'à ce qu'elle soit guérie.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	 Of the fracture of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	 It often happens that the hip bone is broken, and if it is, then there is usually only a slight diminution at the head; and it breaks lengthwise, and declines towards the outer side, and the patient feels pain in the place, and tenderness, and swelling like that of a break.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	 And the treatment is that you place your hand above, so that you are above the break; and know what kind of break it is and its shape; and if the break is only at the head, then set the break equal, until it is naturally shaped.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	 And if the break is lengthwise, where it declines inward, then make the patient lie on their stomach, so that you may be prepared for the treatment of this break.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	 And when you have set it equal, place the poultice on top, then place a splint of wood or horn, and secure the break, so that it does not move; and fill the place under the ribs, until the joint is level.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	 And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side, or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	 And if abscesses like this occur, do not touch them until the abscesses are relieved, and place on it what we have said before; then return to the restoration, and secure it as needed, unless there is any adverse incident; and that is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	 of the shoulder fracture
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	 The shoulders are what are between the shoulder and the head of the arm, and if they are broken, they should be restored according to one of the two methods: one of which is that you take a pole full of moderate thickness, according to this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	 And put on each of the two heads two ties, and raise them up, and make the patient sit on a seat; then throw his broken arm over the pole, until it reaches the armpit, and in the middle have a hook of wood, then pull down some heavy thing where the assistant stretches down; then put the master the break equal to his hands together, so that the break returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	 And the other method is that one makes the patient sit on his heels, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands two assistants that one holds what is above the break at his hands, and the other holds below all the way to the wrist, and each extends at its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	 And if you see that the extraction is stronger, then hold the ligament below the break and above the break, and extend each of the members to its proper place.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 And if the break is near the shoulder's head, then you must place one ligament in the middle under the armpit and another towards the back, below the break; and similarly, if the break is towards the back, then you must place one ligament lightly, without force, until the break is level with the joint and the back; then set the break as it should be and hold it, so that a boil does not form there.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	 And if such a boil forms there, do not hold it until the seventh day, and place a moist linen cloth with ass's milk and rose oil on it until the boil is appeased; then hold it, and the manner of holding it is that you place the plaster on the break, then bring the arm to the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or breast; and put the bandage on, and hold above the shoulder and the arm, so that the arm is in its proper place, unless something prevents it, or unless the bone has moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	 And if you doubt that the bone will move, use splints, and place on the fracture a splint wider and stronger than the others, with two fingers' width between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it passes beyond the fracture by three fingers on each side; then draw up the splints as I said at the beginning of the chapter above the fracture, more strongly and less widely apart.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	 And if you see the positioning of the splints and the tightening as we have said, at the hour when you restore the broken limb, and you doubt that there is a hot abscess, let it be bound until the seventh day as we have said; then check the bandage every three days to ensure that irritation or swelling does not occur in the place, lest nursing cannot come to the limb because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	 If he receives it, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	 And if no such accidents happen, do not untie it before after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on their back, with their hands on their stomach; and place one cushion full of wool under the shoulder, and watch every hour of the day or night that the shape of the broken limb does not move, nor is the ligament weakened; so receive it by the power of medicine, and give him the food that we mentioned earlier, in such a way that the food is first fine; and when he begins to regain strength, let it be coarse.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	 And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be taken for forty days in total; and then one should untie it and administer a bath and ointment medicines to heal the place.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	 And if the stricture is ugly and clogged, then it takes I day or II months to untie.
de la brisure du bras	 of the break of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	 The arm is composed of II bones, which are called the two "foscile," one of which is small, and it is the one that follows the wrist; and the other is large, and it is the one that is underneath, towards the little finger; by chance, only the large foscile breaks, or the small one, and sometimes both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	 When the small foscile is broken, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when the large one is broken, then the healing is bad, and more serious than when they are both broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	 If it is the small bone that is broken alone, then you should stretch it slightly and set it straight.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	 And if it is the large bone that is broken, then you must pull it more strongly; and stretch it on a cushion, and hold the little finger of the hand higher than the others, and the small toe lower than the other toes, and let the patient be cross-legged over himself, and the cushion in front of him higher so that the patient suffers no labor; then the assistant stretches his arm towards the part below his hand, or at the ligament, and another assistant to the other above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	 Then let the physician set it straight, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	 And if in the break there are fragments, then place each one in its proper place; and if any are protruding that touch the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut above and remove it, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	 And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in a particular chapter; take care of it.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	 And if in the beginning of the restoration apostemes appear, apply a cloth made of rose oil and white wax, not too hard nor too soft; and bind the cloth gently on top until those apostemes are soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	 And then remove the wax cloth, and apply a poultice of mill powder with plenty of egg, then put on bandages, and let the bandage on the fracture be always thicker, and a little wider than the others; and know that it should have six bandages on the arm in various positions: whether the fracture is in one of the bones or two; and tighten more on the fracture than elsewhere, and always less towards the extremities, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the cloths on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough; and let the thread with which it is bound be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	 Et, after healing
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	 Et si cil prurits ne volt pas estre apaisiez de l’aigue chaude, si aroses le membre d’aigue froide; et se ne volent pas les prurites passer d’eux, si prenes la mervelle de la pome de terre, et fai ung petiz mucielx de celes merveilles et l’osse al membre qui a cil prurits.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	 Et se li os se velt desevrer de lien, si covient que tu adresses la cicatrisacion en tel manere com devant dist.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	 Et se il ne volt pas venir a ceste manere, si mettes le membre en eaue froide, et laisse le membre en l’eaue jusqu’à ceo qu’il soit recomfortes de la norrissement, et puis l’estraint.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	 And if none of these things happens to the patient, then do not unbind him for up to twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	 And if it is in the neck, then let him place his hands on his neck, and let his collarbones be equal, and he should avoid movement and jerking, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in thirty or thirty-five days, and by chance in twenty days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	 On the breaking of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	 Know that on the back of the hand and at the base of the fingers, there are few breaks, and only many dislocations occur.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	 And when the palm of the hand is broken or dislocated, it is necessary that the patient sit cross-legged, and sit upright in front of him equally; then place his hand on the outstretched table, and let the assistant straighten the broken bones, and let the physician set them straight until they are well joined; and apply the poultice and wadding, if abscesses do not occur, then place a bandage according to the size of the location; and let it be wrapped in one linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	 And if the break is around the heel of the foot, make a sphere of cloth, and instruct the patient to press it onto his broken heel; and then secure it with a long strip of cloth, and let the knot be as large as the palm of the hand, and tie it, as needed.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	 And if the break is in the finger, you must place a bandage on top and another underneath the foot, so that the hand remains open and straight, then tie it all around the hand, and secure the knot between the toes.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	 And if the break is in one of the toes, whether it be in the big toe, set it straight as needed; and secure it with the foot, and if you wish, place a small straight bandage to elevate the break, ensuring it does not move; and if the break is in other toes, such as in the thumb or one of the others, set it straight and bind it with the healthy toe next to it; either bind all together in one turn, whichever works best, or place a bandage on top, as for the big toe; and take care in the restoration and disposition of an abscess, and support those who come, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	 Of a broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	 The bone of the thigh is often broken, and it is well seen when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is that one binds a ligament above the break, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	 And the patient lies on his face, then each attendant extends his ligament to its equal part; and this is when the break is in the middle of the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	 And if the break is near the root of the thigh, then one of the ligaments should be towards the knee, and the other ligament below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	 And so if it is near the knee, then let one of the ligaments be by the knee, and let the extension be downwards; then let the surgeon place the bone equally with his two hands, so that it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the poultice, and bind it, unless a pustule should come there.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	 Et s’il y a un abcès chaud, alors laisse-le se calmer avant de revenir à ton travail et à ton traitement; le pansement est fait de cette manière.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	 It is necessary that you wrap on the break a bandage doubled in two or three layers, leaving the ends hanging; then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the nail, and put a long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and let the ends of the thread come up above; then wrap the bandage around the leg and thigh, then place on the break splints, and put one splint on the bone of the leg; then fill the space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloth to even out the tightness, then begin to tie strongly three or four times on the break; and as you go higher on the break, tighten less; then seize the two ends of the thread that you have put between the leg and the thigh, and tie three splints that are above, then return below to the end of the thread, until you come near the foot; and tighten it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, because no abscess or swelling or other similar thing will occur.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	 And if it happens, dislocate it and address what comes of it, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that prick, one must remove them, if possible; and if not possible, then one must split the place, and draw out strongly; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	 And sometimes the thigh is broken in such a way that one places splints in it, as in the shoulder and in the arm; however, in this restoration the patient does not limp.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	 And know that the thigh is restored within five days, or a little less or more, depending on the diversity of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	 of the tendon of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	 Know that in the knee joint there is little fracture, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	 And if it breaks, it is only a crack or a hole, and this happens in any wound, and without wound, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the restoration is such that one puts equal parts around what is broken to its two sides, so that they are assembled together as much as possible; then apply the poultice, and if necessary, place a round bandage on it, and bind it as needed, then follow all the procedures that we have mentioned in other fractures, such as for abscesses or similar things; then for each accident, apply what is appropriate until it heals.  ?>
de la brisure de la jambe	 of the leg fracture
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	 Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called by its proper name "tibia", and the other is called "fibula"; and all fractures occur as they do in the arm, and for this reason the restoration is equally so, and the work is entirely the same. And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns in all directions.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	 And if the thin bone is broken, it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	 And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain and sees it well; and it turns downward.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	 Then apply traction, and align it well, and bind the splints evenly; but nevertheless, if the fracture is ugly and there are several fragments, let the traction be lesser and lighter; and adjust according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;
de la brisure des os dou piet	 de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, and aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust,
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	 At the ankle, there is no fracture, but in the foot bones there is sometimes a fracture and in both sides, and it happens more often than dislocation in various positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	 And if there is a fracture in the foot bones, and you see these bones overlapping each other, then place the patient's foot on the ground, as if he wants to go, and now put your foot on top of his, where the bones are raised, then press until they return to their place; then apply a poultice and wool on top, and place a small board with two flat feet underneath the sole of the foot, then bind it evenly around the foot, after which you wrap bandages and other necessary things.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	 And when three days or four have passed, then untie the bandage, for you will find the bones even, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	 And if there are any of the two bones broken, then set them as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then place a splint on the broken bone according to its length, and it should be a bit wider; then place under the foot the board that I mentioned earlier, and bind it tightly; and if there are two or three, or more, broken bones, then place a splint on each bone according to its size, wrapped in a linen cloth, and bind the board under the foot; and let it rest on top of the board outside the belly of the foot, so that it holds well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	 And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, just as we have said; and treat each incident as appropriate.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	 of the bone of the elbow
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the bone of a woman's nature is broken, have her sit with legs spread apart, then lean her back towards the posterior part, and let it be held from behind; then fill the woman's natural cavity with cotton, and put in as much as I (the author) do; then raise the woman up, lifting the buttocks little by little, until the cotton jumps up to the entrance of the nature, and the bone returns with the stone; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and after she has urinated, put it back, and do this for 7 days or thereabouts: the fracture will be healed, and if you wish, take a sheep's bladder, and attach a reed to its opening, and inflate the entire bladder inside the nature; then blow strongly into the reed, so that the bladder is fully inflated within: the nature will also return the fracture; then fill it with cotton, and leave it thus for some days until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	 And when the bones of the man's fist are broken, or those of the woman, then restore them as we have said in the hip bone; and these fractures are not hidden from those who apply their study and practice to it, and understand my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	 For the fracture signifies in many dispositions the right way of restoration: pay attention then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	 In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose’s throat and put the penis into it; then wrap cloth around it, and leave it there for three days, and it will be healed quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	 of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	 It is necessary for someone who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, like the thigh bone or shoulder blade or similar, to be cauterized now, so that the cauteries we have mentioned testify to it.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 Et si la plaie est saine, retiens-la avec du vitriol, si tu n'as pas autre chose. Puis recommence à restaurer la fracture en cette même heure, ou ce jour-là, si des abcès ne se forment pas là.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	 And if such abscesses come, then leave the restoration until the next day, as long as the abscess is appeased, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would cause harmful accidents to occur.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	 And if the broken bone appears protruding from under the skin, it is necessary that you delicately bring it back into place with your hands, with a slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	 And if the extension is not suitable for you to bring it back into place with your hands, then use this instrument of iron, which has VII or VIII inches in length, and its width according to the size of the wound; and therefore it is necessary for the physician to have III or IV of these, as needed for each fracture cure; and let it be round and a little thick, so that it does not bend under pressure on the limb during your work, and let it be pointed at the end, and thicker towards the middle, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	 And it is called "palainche," for which the curved head must be placed on top of the visible bone; and push once, until it returns, and let them be equal one to the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	 And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot well grasp the bone, then you must cut the head of the bone so that the instrument has power over it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	 And if you cannot return the bone as we have said, then cut it with an appropriate instrument, either a knife or saw, to your ability; then raise that which remains in the bone of roughness and small splinters.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	 And when the bone is returned, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	 If it is so that he is in his place, then moisten the bandage in black stiptic wine, and properly if it is in summer; and do not put on the wound cerote or any other thing that has oil, for it will bring putrefaction and corruption; then administer splints when you have reset the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut the covering all around, according to the size of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not constricted with the fracture; and many times have foolish physicians done this, and brought upon the patient either death or putrefaction at certain times; and let the constriction be gentler and softer than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	 And if the wound is bad or large, and you fear that evil will occur as we have said, and you find pain in the place, then you should not apply bandages; but instead, wrap around hard cloths in place of bandages, and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	 And when you see after one day or two the swelling increase in the wound, remove all that you have put on the wound, and apply a healing ointment to the wound, such as the ointment tetrapharmacon and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	 And it is necessary that you unbind the limb twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is healed and cured.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	 And it is necessary that the limb be positioned in such a way that the swelling drains downward gently.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	 And if many days pass, and he cannot heal but returns always bowed, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which you must seek the wound with a tent, and remove all these loose pieces that cause this pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	 And if a fistula comes to the place, or another manner of corruption, then you must cure it, according to what is said in his chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	 And when the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, like the thigh or shoulder bones, and other similar large limbs, do not extract it, for many times death results, but leave it until it rots; perhaps it will fall out after 20 or 30 days, then cure the wound if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	 of the blows that come upon the shoulder
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	 We often see this after the healing of the break, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a terrible thing to see the shape of the limb; and perhaps the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 Therefore take care if the wound is fresh: and administer astringent medicines such as aloes, frankincense, myrrh, sarcolle, acacia, and similar others; and choose one of these or all together, and make them into a decoction with stiptic wine or with plenty of egg yolk or with mustard; and place them on the knot in lint, and bind it well, and do not untie for many days; and then unbind, and start another, until the nodule is gone; or you can apply it to a piece of lead, well prepared; because the property of lead is such that it removes all swellings on the limbs; and if the nodule has already turned into hardness like stone, and it needs to be removed, then scrape it off, and make the superfluity apparent; or you can give it to a surgeon, until it is removed, and treat it until it heals.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	 Of the limb which is weak after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	 When the fracture of the bone is healed, and afterwards the limb remains weak and thin, this happens for many reasons: one reason is that it was bound too tightly and was not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings and nourishment could not reach the limb; or due to excessive bleeding; or due to excessive movement, not at the right time; or because he has little blood in his body, and so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	 And the treatment is such that you make the patient eat and make his body soft, so that the blood may increase in him; and administer baths, and give him joy and merriment; then apply pitch to the limb, so that the pitch attracts great nourishment to it, and frequently wash it with warm water, until the nourishment reaches the limb; and it returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	 When a limb is twisted after health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	 When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone is open, and the form of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function: therefore do not believe the fools who say that one should break the limb anew; and many foolish doctors have done this in our land; and these actions are blamed, and great evils come from them, and perhaps death; however, if the nodes and tortures are fresh, it is necessary that they be anointed with hot water, or softening herbs be boiled, such as leaves of comfrey, and roots, and melilot, and similar things; and make a softening plaster, such as well-made diachylon, and take the muslin of comfrey, and mix it with goose fat or sesame oil, and make a plaster on top; or take ripe figs, and grind them with colon powder, and similar medicines that reduce swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	 And sometimes the dislocation is removed by continually and for a long time rubbing with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	 And let there be gentle movement to the limb each hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	 And if the twist has worsened and hardened, like stone, and needs to be removed with an iron, it must be cut down to the bone with a fine incision; and apply caution and skill in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	 Here begins the book on dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	 A dislocation is a joint moving out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb becomes misshapen, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	 When a dislocation occurs to someone, it must be immediately reset without delaying.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	 Car if one delays, then the place swells, and perhaps it is only with difficulty that one can reset it to its place; therefore, it is not appropriate that one moves it when it is swollen: many times this brings on spasm and other pains; however, when this happens, let the patient be bled, then leave him until the abscess has subsided; then raise the member with hot water and oil, then reset it lightly, and treat each member as it comes into its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	 And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations from the head to the feet.
des mandibules	 of the jaw
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	 It often happens that the jaw is dislocated downwards, and the dislocation of both occurs in two ways: either they are slightly displaced from their place and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated and hang towards the chest, and saliva runs from the mouth so that it cannot be held back, nor can one close the mouth, and the tongue is wrapped up with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	 When the dislocation is small, it returns by itself in many ways.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	 And if it is whole and complete, then you must quickly reset it, without delaying; and in such a way that the assistant holds the patient's head, and the practitioner puts his finger into one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is from two parts; and let the other two hands be free to balance; and instruct the patient to relax his jaws, and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	 And the practitioner should keep it balanced until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	 And if returning is difficult, even if it is the two jaws together, then apply hot water and oil until you can easily reset them; do not delay in returning them, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	 And when they are brought back into place, and the patient's mouth is closed without softening, a bandage of moistened cloth in cerate made from rose oil and wax is applied, then it is lightly tied with soft ligatures; and let the patient sleep on their back, with their head resting between two cushions, so that they do not move to the right or left, nor should they try to chew, but rather take light food until the pain subsides, and the jaws are firmly fastened; then let them gently masticate whatever they wish, and do not struggle to open the mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaw is well fastened and healed.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	 And if the two mandibles cannot be reset precisely in one hour, and are not returned to their places, then fevers and accustomed sweats result, and perhaps an upset stomach, and perhaps pure bile is vomited.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	 And when you see this, then know that it is fatal; and many times the one to whom it happens dies within nine days.
de la forcelle	 of the hammer
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	 The hammer cannot dislocate from the hip joint, and is sometimes dislocated at the thigh, which is well felt.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	 And the restoration is such that the patient often lies on his back and stretches out his arms; then press strongly on the place with your palm, and it will return; then apply a poultice and bandage tightly; and the head that is towards the outside cannot dislocate; if not, and if it sometimes dislocates, then reset it to its place, as we have said; then apply a poultice and the bandage tightly, and command the patient to rest until healed; and similarly the shoulder joint is restored when it has left its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	 From the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	 You should know that the shoulder is dislocated only in three ways: one is that it dislocates towards the lower part of the armpit; and the second is towards the chest; and sometimes it dislocates upwards, which happens rarely; and it does not dislocate backwards due to the shoulder, nor inwards due to the nerves. And many times it dislocates downwards towards the armpit, especially for those who have little flesh, because for them it goes quickly; for those who have enough flesh, it goes with difficulty and returns with difficulty.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	 And it happens to some men that they receive a blow or break, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	 It is therefore necessary that you examine it thoroughly until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	 And the dislocation is known when it goes down towards the shoulder blade, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find manifest diversity between them; and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the shoulder blade on the back the head of the shoulder, as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move in any way; and so too, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you find it clearly on the back; and this manner of dislocation is not difficult to reduce when it is new, or if the child is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	 And the manner is that the servant takes the hand of the patient and raises it up, then places his fingers under the arm, and lifts the joint with force up to its place; and the servant raises the hand and extends it up, then places it underneath; thus it will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	 And if it does not come as we have said in a few days after, then the patient must be bathed in hot water; and the servant should prepare a softening and soothing mixture, such as a decoction of althaea and fenugreek and melilot in water, and apply it; then let the patient lie on his back, and place under the arm a pad of wool cloth, neither too soft nor too hard, then the physician places his heel on the pad, and raises the head of the shoulder skillfully, and pulls the hand of the patient; and another servant holds the head of the patient so that it does not move down; this shoulder will return instantly, and if you see it thus, reset it in this manner: and it is necessary for you to have present a man who is larger than the patient; and let him stand straight beside the patient's side, and push his shoulder under the patient's arm, and raise the arm up so that the patient hangs in the air; and another servant pulls the hand of the patient down towards the stomach.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	 And if the patient is too light, then have them carry something heavy with them, and the dislocation returns immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	 And it can also be reset in another way: and this is done by driving a long stick into the ground so that its tip is as round as a piston, neither too thick nor too thin; then place the patient on top of it but with soft cushions underneath, and have the patient stand along the length of the stick; then extend his arm downwards on the other side like this, and the joint will return to its place immediately; and if it does not want to return for all these reasons that we have said, then perform this cure: take a stick two arms in length and four thumbs wide, which has a round tip to enter deeply under the armpit according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	 Then take the patient and place him on the crossbeam of the scaffold below, so that the beam does not injure the patient. Then place it under the patient's seat; extend one arm along the beam, tie the shoulder to the beam, and the arm at the head of the hand. Then place the arm on the step of a wide ladder, and let the hand hang down, and leave the body hanging on the other side: the joint will now return into place.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	 And when it is back in place, by whatever means, it is necessary that you put under the seat an equal piece of wool, then apply the bandage prepared with mill dust, with incense and egg white, on all the shoulder and around, then securely bind it under the seat, and wrap the ligature over the bandage, and embrace the hand to its neck, and let the hand remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	 And it is necessary that he rests, as long as the limb is comfortable, for it will heal faster; and then rest more after V days or VII, and move it; and if it is immobile and not softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	 And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come there, or for any other reason, it is necessary that you apply cautery at three points, as described in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	 And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after VII days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift his arm above, then know that the nerves at the top of the shoulder are cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The dislocation which is towards the foot and breasts, or behind, it is made by impact and extension of the hands, and another method is administered; and cured until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	 And if after healing comes stiffness to the member, and gradually in movement, then the patient should bathe many times until that stiffness is relieved, and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	 of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	 Know that the shoulder joint is easily dislocated and easily returns; and if it has dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not returned, for one sees it well and feels it well; and it dislocates according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	 And when you join the sick person with the healthy one, you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	 Because the joint is dislocated and he cannot bend his arm or touch his shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	 And you must reset it before any abscesses come there, because if abscesses came there, it would be difficult to reset; and perhaps it cannot be fully reset, especially when it is at the back; this is worse than other dislocations and causes greater pain, and sometimes death occurs.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	 And the restoration is such that when it can be reset, you extend his hand with your two hands; and let his arm be spread, and the hands of the patient according to the course around, above and below, and push the joint back together, or at the base of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	 And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand on his hand, and strikes with the root of the palm where it is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	 And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong extension; and it is good that two men extend the arm, and hold it together, so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm from one side to the other, after you have wrapped a double-long and wide cloth around it; and when the patient joins the joint to his hand, then anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then push the joint strongly, until it returns; and when it is in place, then put on a dry plaster with egg white, and hold it firmly, and bind the arm around the patient's neck, and leave it for some days, then remove it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	 And if the joint is fixed in its place, then unbind the ligament and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, then reapply the bandage and the ligament, and leave it this way for some days, until it is firmly set; then unbind it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	 And if he feels pain after the joint has been reset and it moves, then bathe and rub it well, and press until it is soothed; or place a greasy sheepskin on the joint, leave it there for a day and a night, then remove it and have him enter the bath; and when he sweats, rub the joint gently, then place the sheepskin back on, and have him re-enter the bath; and do this two or three times until he is healed; and if you see [it is not healing], then place warm, moist cow dung mixed with butter on it, and bind it up; thus it will return to its proper position.
li dislocation de la main	 The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	 The joint of the hand is dislocated, and its return is light, more than other joints However, it must be returned to its place quickly, in the same hour that it is dislocated, lest the place become swollen or a hot abscess form.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	 And the return is thus: you place the injured hand on a table, and the minister extends his hand, and the physician places it equally, so that he places his palm on the appearance of the joint, and pushes until it returns However, it must be seen if it is well in place; then let the patient place the back of his hand on a table for extension and return.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	 Et si la dislocation est au dos de la main, que le patient place le dos de sa main sur la table, et que le médecin place sa main sur l'apparence de la jointure.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	 Si elle revient à nouveau, c'est bon. Sinon, appliquez des emplâtres calmants sur les abscès et laissez-les ainsi sans recommencer.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	 Si le patient ne peut pas supporter cela, et que vous ne pouvez pas le remettre en place après quelques jours, alors la jointure reste tordue ; et cela ne nuit pas au patient tant que sa main est humide et qu'il ne peut pas saisir quelque chose : dans ce cas, sachez que les nerfs ou les artères sont coupés ; il n'y a pas d'autre remède que de pratiquer une cautérisation à cet endroit, et peut-être que cela n'aura aucun effet.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	 And when the hand is in place, then apply the plaster that we have mentioned, then restrain it and leave it for five days, then release it and let it be thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if he cannot move it well and there is some stiffness, then moisten it with hot water, and rub it until it is supple.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	 of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	 Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated at each part, sometimes at the back of the palm or at the front; then stretch out the finger and push the dislocation towards your thumb until it goes back, then support the head of the finger and bend it towards the part where it is disjointed; and leave it for two days, then on that day make it even again; and tie it as we have said, and untie it daily, and make it move, and retie it at night; and do this often, until it is healed, and do the same if it is dislocated at the front of the hand, and do as you did before, until it is supple; and do the same when it is dislocated on another side.  ?>
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	 of the dislocation of the spine of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	 When the spine of the back or the neck is dislocated, and there are many dislocations, there is no cure, for death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	 And the sign of this is that the egestions jump out without will, and he cannot hold it in, and often some member is softened, either the two thighs or the two arms or one, and often the spine moves in four parts; that which moves to the back is called "gilbositez": the cure for this is that you turn if the gilbositez comes from childhood: then there is no cure nor healing of all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	 And those that come from falling or blows or similar things, the ancients speak of cures in grand words, where there is not always great benefit; but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and I have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	 I say that in the jaundice that comes to the chest first, there is no sense or health; and also that which comes directly on both sides, and one cannot cure except that which properly comes to the back, as I say; and let the patient be stretched out on his back in an equal place, and have support beneath him so he does not injure himself; then drive a stake into the ground at the head, and another at the feet, and tie a ligament under the bed of the patient, and another at the hips, and the knees, and the ankles; and two assistants know how to tighten the ligaments, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two stakes; and let them be well secured, the stake as we have said, and the healer places his palms on the spine firmly, until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	 And if it does not return with this treatment, take a board three arms long, and place it beneath the surface, and have the patient lie on his side, and push the head of the board beneath the surface, then place the middle of the board upon the spine; and let the physician put his feet upon the other end of the board, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see fit, do the same with a tourniquet that turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	 And it is that you insert two stakes at the patient's head one arm's length apart, and towards the feet two others, with half a palm's length between each stake; and let there be in each stake one hole, through which the tourniquet runs, and let the stakes be firmly planted in the ground so that they do not move; and between every two stakes place a turning stake on which the ropes turn, and let there be in the two turning stakes two small stakes of half a palm's length to turn the tourniquet; and then tie the rope that is among the stakes to the tourniquet towards the head, and the other rope towards the feet to the other tourniquet, and each of the assistants turns his tourniquet with all his might, and the master places the spine as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	 And when it is equalized, then apply a drying plaster with plenty of egg, and then the wool, and then the bandage of a tablet of III fingers in length, which should cover the place of the yellowness and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a string, as we have said, and let the patient use gentle nursing until he is cured; and if something happens at the end of the cure, then you must administer softening and soothing medicines, with the bandage that we have mentioned before; sometimes they administer a piece of lead, and sometimes it appears in the back vertebra of the spine, and one might think it is a dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, which is why one should not be presumptuous: perhaps it would bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	 Of hip dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	 Know that in the joints of the hip and the shoulder, dislocation only occurs, not as in other joints; and the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, and front and back; and it is more dislocated on one side than the other, and rarely in front or behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	 And the recognition of its dislocation inside is that when one joins the leg of the patient with the healthy one, it is longer, and the patient's knee opens more than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend his knee; and the place where the hip comes is swollen with an abscess, because the head of the thigh bone goes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	 And the signs of those to whom it happens due to lack of strength, these accidents are contrary to the previous ones.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	 And the signs of those to whom it happens in front, is that they hold their leg well according to its length; however, do not bend the knee with pain, and if you want to make him walk, he cannot move forward, and retains his urine, and the ankle swells, and when walking, passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	 And the signs of those to whom it happens in the rear, is that he cannot extend his knee, nor bend it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the hip is located below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	 The treatment of this type of dislocation is such that you must consider whether the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its condition, then there is no cure; and it should not be presumed.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	 And in the case where the dislocation is fresh, which is one of four types of dislocation, you should hasten to return the joint, and place it inside and out, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will return, and no other treatment is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	 And if it does not return in this manner, then you must summon a strong assistant, and place the leg strongly with two hands, or with one hand tied above the knee; and another assistant should extend his hand above in such a way that he pushes his hands under his armpits, then pulls a soft ligament on the thigh; and another holds the end of the rope; and they all pull up and down together at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground in one go, and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	 This manner of extension is common to four similar cases, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	 If not, it is necessary to apply the remedy accordingly When the dislocation is in the hip, it is necessary that you support the patient on their healthy side, then place the ligament on the root of the thigh, and the place that is under the groin, then extend the ligament upwards towards the groin, and towards the pelvis; then take another assistant his arms, and embrace the large part of the unhealthy thigh, and stretch it strongly: thus it will return to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	 And if you cannot clamp it in this manner as we have said, then you must tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong, soft ligature above the two ankles and above the two knees, and the injured leg should be extended two fingers' width more than the other; then let them hang from the top of a pole, and let it be two arm's length off the ground; then command one assistant to embrace the thigh at the hip, and let another assistant hang with the patient, who embraces the thigh strongly, for now the joint returns quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	 And when the dislocation is at an end, let the patient lie down as we have said for those with scoliosis, and tighten the ligature on the injured leg properly, and on the foot likewise; then place two splints, one at the head and one at the feet, then insert a splint between the thighs of the patient in this manner; and let there be placed damp cloths around it, lest the patient be hurt, then let each assistant lean towards him, and the physician should place his hand equal to the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	 If it returns, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	 If not, place him on the table and press as we have said in the section on dislocation, with the patient lying on his sound side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	 And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the affected leg quickly, according to what I have said; and let the doctor place his foot on the affected ankle, then press with the other hand, extending down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 And if the dislocation is behind, it is not necessary to extend the affected limb downwards or raise it from the ground, but it should be as if the hip were dislocated behind, as we have said about lying on both hips; and let him lie on his face, with the cord extended as we have said before, and someone should press on the joint against the table; and it will be ready when the patient extends his legs and they are even; then bring the thighs together, and apply a poultice, and bind tightly with a bandage so that the hip does not move; and let him rest for three days or four, then unbind him, and apply another poultice; and if you see that they are even, bind again as before, and leave it for three days; then unbind him, and make him walk well, until the limb is comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	 Of the knee dislocation
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	 The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inward and outward, and backward; and it does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 And the sign of this is that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at his thigh, and if it does not approach his thigh, know that it is dislocated; and the reduction of all these is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back on his face, and put his foot on your feet; then take his knee in your palms, and draw between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the knee strongly; and another assistant extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that it approaches his thigh easily; and apply a plaster, and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and bind them together firmly for three days or four, then unbind; and let the patient not work at walking, as long as the limb is comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	 And if the limb is not at all, then administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed
de la dislocation dou talon	 of the ankle's dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	 The ankle is sometimes moved, and sometimes fully dislocated, both inside and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	 And the signs are that the ankle is swollen and bent forward at the dislocated part: the reduction is easy, and one should extend it gently with their hands when it is only sprained.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	 And when it is fully dislocated, then you must make the patient sit upright and have the helpers stand by the leg above the ankle; then pull the foot towards yourself with your right hand, and then to the left twice, then extend it upwards, and nicely push the foot upwards; and do this two times, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, then begin again, for it will return; and if it cannot return thus, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and drive a firm stake into the ground between his thighs, and tie cloths around, so that it does not hurt the patient; then let the helpers take hold of the thigh, and another helper extend the foot in their hands or with one cord, which they tie above the ankle of the foot; then let each helper extend equally, and the stake should always be between the patient's thighs to hold the patient when extending; then the physician should put the dislocation equally in his hands, and another helper take hold of the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	 And when it is ready, place the dressing and bandages on top, and bind it very tightly, and tie the foot to the leg, and protect the nerves that are above the ankle in the back, so that the binding is not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the binding softens, bind again; then unbind at the third or fourth day, and prevent the patient from walking for four days; and if he walks before this time, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if there are abscesses present, it is necessary that you heal them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
des dois	 of two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	 When the shoulders are dislocated, it is necessary to straighten them nicely without difficulty, and this is easy.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	 of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	 When a wound comes with dislocation, and you want to restore it, it often happens that the patient dies; so do not be presumptuous in the cure if you are not wise in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not merciful and compassionate and cautious, but bold; and at the beginning use soothing remedies for the hot abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place before the hot abscess comes there; and when the limb is in place, administer soothing remedies for the hot abscess, and treat the wound as necessary with dried onions; and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and small bones are broken apart, then remove them, and do what we have said in simple diseases; and beware of entering into a way of fear, according to what I have said, for this avails you according to your Creator, and for the wisdom of your arms and body.
Amen	 So be it
