O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	 O you, most dear son, I have completed this book which is the end of the science of medicine with its accomplishment, and I have made the end through its explanations and by its revelations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	 And it has come to me in a vision that I should complete it for you with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	 And because the work of hands is neglected in our region and is foreign to all, thus the science has perished and decayed, and nothing remains of it except for the small descriptions in the books of the ancients which the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	 And from this has come error and vanity, and intentions are closed and science is distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	 Or it seems to me that I wish to revive the ordinance of this treatise according to the way of explanation and declaration and brevity; and I will come with the forms of the cautery irons and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	 And for the reason that no good masters of surgery are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	 And he who undertakes it must excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the limbs, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and tendons and the number of them, and their movement and resting, and the place of their origin.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	 And therefore Hippocrates said that the name with the name is much, and with the work is little; and likewise in the art of healing.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	 We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable in the aforementioned matters, let him beware lest he fall into error and harm people; as I have often seen many who engage in this science and abandon their own knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	 Because I saw a foolish doctor who cut into an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and he cut the arteries of the neck; because of which so much blood flowed out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	 And I saw another doctor who removed a stone from a man with water, and the stone was large; he took away with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	 And I had already been called for it to be drawn out, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if they cut into it, he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	 And I saw another doctor take care of the Duke of our land, whose leg was broken and with the break he had an open wound; and the doctor, full of ignorance, pressed the fracture onto the wound on both sides with great force, and left no flesh at all to the wound, and left it like this; and commanded that it should not be unbound; and so he stayed until the leg was completely swollen and the foot came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	 I was called to come to him, and I hurried to go unbind the leg; and when I unbound it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	 But still the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, and could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease spreading throughout the limb until the limb was completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	 And I saw another physician who cut open an abscess and then inflamed it due to the evil of his rule.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	 For a chancre, when it is filled with melancholic humor, one must not touch it with iron unless it is in such a place that one can entirely remove what is corrupt.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	 And therefore, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: namely, work where there is danger in many ways; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	 Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos - For this reason it is necessary that you protect yourselves, so that the foolish physician cannot speak ill of you.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	 Galen said in some of his admonitions: "Do not take on a serious illness unless you are called a fool.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	 I have composed this treatise according to III chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	 The first chapter is about fire cautery and medicine cautery, and this chapter is arranged from the head to the feet; about the shapes of instruments, and about the tools for cauterizing, and about everything that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	 The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cupping and wounds, and about the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and this chapter is arranged with the shapes of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	 The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and sprains, and similar things; and it is arranged from the head to the feet, and about the shapes of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	 So that we may remember the work, it is necessary for me to speak of the nature and harmfulness of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	 I say that the nature and harmfulness is the longest speech and most subtle science and secret response; and many of the wise have spoken about this, and they agree on it; but their words suffice me little, for I fear the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	 I say that cautery helps universally for every complexion where there is material, except for two complexions: namely, hot complexion without material, and dry complexion without material.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	 In the hot and dry complexion together with material, some discuss and say that cautery is of great help there; and others say the opposite: that cautery does not benefit a disease that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	 Because the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to treat a hot illness with heat or drying; and he who says otherwise says that cauterization is of great help in treating hot and dry diseases in the human body.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	 For when you compare the human body and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	 And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	 For I have found it to be true through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	 And yet, do not attempt this except for those who have proven it, and who know through long practice the chapter on cauterization, and the diversity of human complexions, and their dispositions and causes of diseases, and their outcomes and the duration of time; we should not fear other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases. ︎
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	 And all the doctors gathered and agreed on the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	 And know, son, that fire cautery is among the secrets of healing, and more effective than a burning medical treatment.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	 For fire is simple, and does not affect anything other than the member that is burned, unless there is little room for it to do so.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	 Burning medicines pass from one member to another and cause disease in the sick member; and by chance they kill the patient. Fire, due to its high nature and the goodness of its substance, does not do this, unless there is an excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	 And thus have I found it through experience and the length of my service and study in this art, based on the truth of things; and for this reason I apologize for the length of this discourse, because I do not wish to deprive you of the secret that lies in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives away bodily ailments, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; now receive it into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	 And know, son, that they agreed upon what time the cauteries should be done, and chose patients.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	 And I say that cautery is suitable in all seasons, because the harm that occurs is remedied by the help of cautery; and likewise if the cautery is necessary for pain, it must be done immediately and hastily so that the member does not await the time when greater evil may come.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	 And never think of it thus, dear son, as foolish physicians do; for the disease that is healed by cautery does not return; and they say so; but it is not as they believe, because cautery is nothing more than a medicine that changes the complexion, dries the humors that cause pain, and is more effective than medicine due to its swift action, and the virtue of its work and dominion.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	 And it is possible that the disease comes sometimes according to the complexion of the patient and the place of the disease and its strength; and in him are gathered superfluities by the consumption of food and similar things, unless there are cauteries administered in the place where there is little superfluidity and moisture, such as tooth-cauteries for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	 And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and this is true; but they do not believe that cauteries are valuable after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are the last resort of medicine because when we administer ways of cures in some diseases and they do not work, then we administer the cautery, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	 Then it is clear that cautery is the last resort in medicine, not according to the intention of foolish physicians.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	 The ancients said that cautery with gold instruments is more effective than iron, and those outside the field said this only for the quality of gold and the height of its substance; but they were wrong because I have proven it, and found that it is true in some men; and cautery with gold is indeed more effective than iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	 Yet when you heat a gold instrument, you do not know when it is hot enough by the color of the gold, and it cools quickly; if heated too much, it burns in the fire; and thus there are many hindrances.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	 And because of this, we use fire cautery which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	 I have organized this chapter from the head to the feet so that it will be easier to find the way.
dou cautere olivaire	 of olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	 This cautery is effective for moisture and cold on the head, and there are two ways to do it due to a disease called "soda," and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes and ears, and due to excessive dreams and toothache and sore throat, and above all for all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	 The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged with a dissolving medicine that cleanses the head three or four times, according to what the virtues and age and habit of the patient can endure; and then make the head of the patient sweat.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	 And then make him sit crossed between your hands, and place his hands on a light weight; after that, put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and there where your middle fingers come together, let it bleed, and heat the cautery which is called "olivare," this is its form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And place it on the designated spot, and in descending and tightening your hand bit by bit while turning; then lift your hand quickly, and check the spot if you see the bone one sole size small; and if you do not see it, repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; afterwards take a pouch of silk, and put soft cotton inside, and place on the spot, and let it stay for three days; afterwards put a damp cloth with butter; and leave it on until the burn is healed; afterwards treat the wound with an ointment called "tetrafarmaçon," until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	 And the ancients said that when the wound remains open longer, it purges more; therefore, they use movements.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	 And some of them said that the cautery should be left on until part of the bone is burned; then scrape off what has been burned from the bone, and it should be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	 And the others said that one should leave the cautery on and press so hard that a piece of bone is removed as wide as a spindle, which women put in their distaffs, so that the humors flow out more easily; and one must leave the wound open for a long time; after that, one should cure and sew it.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	 And these two methods of cautery do not seem to me to be good at all, except in some people where there is a sign of fear; and I think that I must leave it; for the head is weakened by continuous secretions of nature, as we see in other members; and also when the patient’s head is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more healthy and beneficial to me, I use that work therefore together with safety.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	 Of the ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	 When chronic pain comes over the whole head and lasts long, the patient should use herbs and pills called "cochie", and purgatives for the head, and oils and poultices; and if he undergoes the cautery that we have mentioned before and it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	 Take care if the patient's head is of strong nature and not too cold; then cauterize a little under that which we have mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	 Afterwards, make the cautery on each horn of the head down to the bone, as we have said before, and make a cautery in the place which is called "vasselz"; and there is the place where one puts cupping glasses; and raise your hand so that you cannot see up to the bone: the patient feels much more pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere; and the cauteries of the horns must be more subtle than those used for the middle part of the head, and this is the procedure.
dou cautere dou chief	 Of the cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	 When there is sudden pain in a part of the head and the disease spreads to the eye, and the eye is purged with purging medicines, and other treatments are done as I have said in the division of diseases, and all this does not help: then he makes cauteries according to two methods, that is to say with watery medicine and with fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	 The cautery with watery medicine is such that you take a pod of garlic, and remove the skin and put it in two eyes, and then open the temple where the pain is so that you can place the pod of garlic under the skin; and when it is placed, bind and compress it well and leave it like this for twelve hours; and then unbind and pull out the pod of garlic, and leave the wound like this for two or three days; then apply a linen cloth soaked in butter until the pus comes out.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	 Après le cure d'oignement tant qu'il soit sané;
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Et quant il sera assez chaut, metes en li l'ung des deux poins dont je t'ai parle.
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	 Et si vint il assez chaut et ne te brusle les mains, si le met sor la plaie que tu veis.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	 Et saches que li culterares ne doivent pas touchier l’os.
de emigraine	 Of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	 When you treat migraine as we have previously said in the division of diseases, and it does not benefit, and you see that the cautery previously mentioned of medicine and iron is not sufficient for it, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery which is called «cultellare» until it is white; and thus on the painful spot, a line of half an inch in length, and remove your hand once, and hold so that you do not cut the artery and do not go as far as the bone; and beware of the jawbone that moves when one eats, and let the nerve have no regard for moving or spasm coming to the patient, and beware of bleeding from the artery when it is cut, where there is great fear in cutting, and also for him who does not know about it, and who is not a student and experienced; and leave the work halfway; but I will tell you how one stops blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you at the appropriate place in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	 And if you see that this cautery does not suffice for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you wish, apply the cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter on artery extraction, with a cautery that has two blades; and this cautery is better and more helpful than that one.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	 of the ear pain due to cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	 When ear pain comes from the cold, and one has worked with dissolving medicines and other cures that we have mentioned in the division, and the pain does not cease, then heat this cautery which is called "point", of which here is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After piercing all around the unhealthy ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and you move away a bit above the root of the ear after having marked the place for incision; and have ten punctures around each ear; then treat the place until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	 Of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	 Torture that must be treated with cautery is not outside of those caused by phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not perform cautery on similar ones that come from drought and nerve spasm.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 When you treat this type of torture that moves from phlegm of the throat and cleansing of the head and gargling, and it does not help, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and another a bit outside the temple, and the third between the two lips; and place the cautery in the part that appears healthy, and make the cautery on the top of the ear a little below the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as a finger; and leave the cautery until half the head is burnt; this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And it is similar to the cutler we mentioned earlier, but it is a little more subtle and requires the knife to be a little larger; after curing the place as I have said before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	 When apoplexy is chronic and you treat it as we have said, but it does not help, and the patient has no fever, then make four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one on the place called "vassal" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the stomach’s opening; and treat it as we have said before.
de litargie	 of lead
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	 For this illness, you must give the patient large pears and pills to cleanse the brain; afterwards, wash the entire head of the patient and place on the back of the head a plaster of mustard seed as described in the treatise on plasters; and this is the manner of cautery: do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	 If it is healed in this way, it is good; and if not, make III cauteries on the middle of the head descending to the neck, with a distance of I two between each cautery; and treat it as the others, and if you see it approaching, and the patient can endure it, make I cautery in the middle; and if necessary, II more on the two horns, and treat until it is healed; and let the cautery be called "olivare", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	 from the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	 The head should be purified of hair and of what we have said before; then anoint the patient's head, make a cautery in the middle of the head and on each horn, and I behind, and III on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient can endure it, and the disease is gone, make IV cauteries on the spine of the back; and let it be until the most of the heart is burned, and lift your hand; then treat it until it is healed, and let the cautery be called "olivare" as we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	 Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	 The epileptic must not use fire cautery except those who are phlegmatic, and first one must moderate the brain with years and other treatments which we have mentioned in the division when the patient is large and capable of taking medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	 And if it is a child who cannot tolerate it, one makes him gargle and chew to moderate the brain often with good food; afterwards raise his head in the middle, and there make a cautery as we have said before, and make a cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is robust and can tolerate it, make the cauteries as I have said for one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	 If the patient is a child, perform the cautery in a subtle manner as follows:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	 When due to melancholy there are superfluous or corrupt humors and thick phlegm, then use the same cautery as we have said for those who have paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	 And if due to melancholy the superfluity inclines towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him something to drink that will purify his brain, according to what was said earlier in the section.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After washing the patient's head, make a linen bandage well-shaped like a circle and place it on the head. And let the patient sit with legs crossed and be held firmly from all sides; then present the ointment, which consists of the juice of old sheep’s butter mixed with burnt wine; and heat it gently over a moderate fire so that the fingers can touch it without burning. Afterward, remove the circle from inside the head and let it cool down; and do this for the patient once a week with other good treatment until he is cured.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	 And if you see the patient being cauterized, making several points throughout the entire cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	 This method of cauterization softens the brain equally; and then place moist cotton soaked in butter and goose fat on top.
de l’awe des eulz	 of the pain of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	 When pain first comes to the eyes by the signs I mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something that cleanses the head, and protect it from all moisture, and make him sweat several times in a bath while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	 Then instruct the patient to shave his head, and cauterize in the middle of the head, and make two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of pain is in both eyes together, or one if it is in one; and cut all the veins and arteries that are under the skin during the entire cautery, and let the cauteries be long according to the width of the temple; and guard against too much blood flow, and if you see too much blood coming out, then compress with such power as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	 Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.
dou cors des larmes	 of the body tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	 When the tears from the eyes are long-standing and habitual and are on the veins or near the arteries that appear on the outside of the head; and one sees that it is from cold, phlegmatic superfluities, then he makes the cautery that I have mentioned at the beginning of this work on the eyes: I make a cautery in the middle of the forehead, and II cauteries on each temple, and II cauteries on the bridge of the nose below the two bones; and if there is further need, then he cauterizes wisely on top of the eyelid with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	 from the body's tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	 When you treat him according to what we have said in the section and it does not help at all, then give the patient three nights of cupped bloodletting; afterwards cleanse his head and make a cautery in the middle of the forehead; and make two cauteries of the type called "clavilis" on each eyelid, a little below the eyebrows; and beware of the artery that you do not cut it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	 And this is the form of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	 When the membrane of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then use this cautery called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	 which has this form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	 And if you see it, make two cauteries on the two temples as long as the temples are; and do not leave your hand until a third of the membrane is burnt, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	 of the hair that pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	 Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes turn towards the inside and prick the eye, and then one makes cauteries in two ways: that is to say, by fire or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	 For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 When they grow and are even, then place the patient in your care; afterwards make on the skin of the eyes a figure that is similar to the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs; then put moistened cotton with egg white and musk oil on the eye, then heat the cautery whose shape is this:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Afterwards cauterize over the figure that you have drawn little by little many times, so that the hair is burned in that place; and the sign of the healthiness of the work is that you see the skin retracted, and the hairs raised to the height of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it thus for III days, then put moistened cotton with butter until the burn is healed; afterwards continue the care of ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	 And if after that the hairs come back, and the skin is softened, then begin the cautery again in the same place, as you did first; and if the hairs are lacking, then cauterize until the skin returns to its natural place, is even, and the hairs do not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	 The burning cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow large and even, then make from parchment the shape of a myrtle leaf; then take French soap and quicklime, each one .З., and grind them well together; and do it hastily, so that it does not cool; then spread it on the form you have made like the myrtle leaf, and place it on the skin of the eyes; and if the disease is in only one eye, then one should work in one, and if in both alike; and place moistened cotton under the eye with egg white; and let the patient's eye be in your health and put your finger showing on the medicine, and press one end and the egg white every time the patient feels the burning of the medicine, for they feel the burning as from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	 When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	 And when the inflammation has passed, lift the bandage from its place, and inspect if you see the skin raised as if it were raised by constriction of fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If not, then apply more medicine to the place where the medicine has not worked, until your workings are equal and your eyes focused; then place cotton soaked in butter on it until the burned heart falls off, afterwards cure the place of the inflammation which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	 And if you need to protect yourself well during your work with great care that none of the medicine enters the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	 And if the paper becomes soft afterward, and the hair pricks in the eye, then begin the medicine again on that spot which has been softened by the paper, just as you did before; after the cure until it is healed; and this is the shape of the myrtle leaf:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	 And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and in smallness, and according to this will be your constraints; and do not answer the straight path for him who is studying this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	 Of the cure of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	 When you cure fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your cures are not beneficial, then it is necessary that you make a cautery according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	 Command the patient to place his head in your hand; and let the assistant hold his head between your hands so that it does not move or lower his head; then put moistened cotton wool in vinegar or juice of parsley on the eye; afterwards, heat the cautery which is thus: and it is shaved on the head like the feather of a goose, along with which is the cautery; if you wish, let it be pointed from one end to the other, and if you wish, let it be like a tent; but nevertheless, this one which is shaved is worthier for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	 Then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the putrefaction, and dry it; and if it is closed, then work on it, and draw forth the pus; afterwards, place a very hot cautery strongly, and hold your hand to the cautery at the part of the neck above the eye, so that your hand does not move foolishly; and put the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	 If you approach the beginning of the cautery down to the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	 If not, then start the cautery again once more, and another if necessary, and let it be for III days; after which apply a piece of cotton moistened in butter, and perform the drying ointment cure until it is healed, and if XL days pass without healing, then apply a corrosive medicine so that the bone may be exposed; and act accordingly as it would come in its chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	 And there is a manner of cautery for fistula, which some of the ancients said.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	 Cut into the fistula and open the place; afterwards put into the opening one subtle piece of wool of this form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	 And they do so in the amount of one .З. of lead; and hold your hand firmly on the cautery, and let the patient not move at all, until the melted lead runs into his eye; and it is necessary to place a dampened cotton cloth soaked in egg whites or vinegar over the patient's eye: the lead thus heals the fistula, and the healthy area by marvelous health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	 And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	 If not, then it is necessary to administer a perforation at the nose, and return the fistula to the body of the nose according to what is appropriate in its own proper place.
des crevaices en levres	 of cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	 Mouth
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	 When you treat these cracks as we have said in the previous sections, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cautery knife like this:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And place it immediately into the cracks until it reaches the bottom; then treat the area with wax until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	 of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	 When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the gum, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, and it festers and rots and becomes inflamed and turns into a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in previous sections, and it does not help: then it is necessary that you have a cautery according to the size of the fistula; then burn or perforate the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the fire reaches to the bottom of it, and to the surrounding area; and do this once or twice, then treat as we have said in treatments, until it is healed; and if it is treated thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the area and remove the corrupt bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	 of the movement of teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	 When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure them with medicines and it does not work, then place the patient's head in your lap; afterwards heat the cautery in such a way that you put a reed on the tooth; and quickly put hot cautery inside, and hold your hand steady so that the patient feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth; afterwards remove your hand and repeat the cautery according to your desire; afterwards let the patient fill his mouth with salt water, and keep it there for an hour and then spit out.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	 And in this way the moving tooth is confirmed, and the softened gum is restricted, and the corrupt moisture is dried out.
de la dolor des dens	 of toothache
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	 When toothache comes from cold, whether there is cold or snow, and medical treatments are ineffective, then it is necessary to use cautery in two ways: cautery with butter and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	 Cautery with butter is such that you take butter from a cow and put it on the tip of an iron or bronze spoon; then take cotton and wrap it around the point of a needle, and dip it in boiled butter, and place it quickly on the aching tooth and hold it until it cools down; and do this often until its power reaches the root of the tooth. And if you see it moistening wool and cotton in cold butter, place it on the aching tooth, and place a hot iron on it so that the fire reaches the end of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	 The cautery with fire is such that you take a rod of iron or copper, and it should be thick enough that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient; after heating the cautery, which will be formed later, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; do this often, for the pain will be relieved that same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 And it is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with good butter before this cautery, and then rinses vigorously; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	 And make a cautery of whatever part you wish, according to what you are able; and this is the form of the rod:
des scrophules	 Of the scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When scrofula are of cold and moist phlegm, and do not respond to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery as indicated below, and have two openings for the smoke to escape from the other part of the cautery; place the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice, as needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess and leave it for three days; then place moistened cotton in butter until the burn is removed; after that, treat the area with onions and bandages until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	 Li: The (or "the")
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	 Quant: When (or "when")
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Quant les chenals dou pormon sont plains de chole, adonques covient que tu te garde que tu ne fai mie cautere a la racine de la gorge, mes fai I autre cautere as espanoles dou chief ou il covient.
de la toust	 Quant li chenals du pormon est plains de sanc, adonques covient que tu te garde que tu ne feis mie cautere a la racine de la gorge, mes fai I autre cautere as espanoles dou chief ou il covient.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	 Quant tous les chenals du pormon sont plains de flegme, adonques covient que tu te garde que tu ne feis mie cautere a la racine de la gorge, mes fai I autre cautere as espanoles dou chief ou il covient.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	 And if you see it, make a cautery by pricking the entire cautery which is called "point" from which the form comes before in the disease of the ears; and let the points be up to XXX, or thereabout.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	 After curing the place according to what was said before, and let the cautery be at three times according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	 And because the cauteries are lighter, therefore you make them three times in succession.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	 of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	 When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	 After the patient has been anointed on his back and sides; then lift the heart which is inside the tickling of your left hand's fingers; and if the joint is dislocated inwards, heat the cautery that has two branches like this.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	 and cauterize the heart until it pierces through to the side, and three more cauteries will follow; this cautery is made with the three-branched cautery, which is why the figure of the cautery consists of seven branches; and the branches are according to the subtlety of a tent, and that is the form of the three-branched cautery.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	 And sometimes it is placed on this one branch, which is why there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	 After place the cautery on, crush with salt; after that make the patient rest, and let the limb not be moved for a long time until it is well-settled.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	 And if it is dislocated above, which happens rarely, then make a cautery on the thick part of the shoulder, or with many cauteries by pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	 Because the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	 When in the stomach come coldness and much moisture that they pull it to its complexion, and there are many catarrhs for him, and according to the accustomed manners of cures, if he does not profit at all, then it is necessary that the patient be turned over on his back, and stretch out his legs and his hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	 And for this, he makes three cauterizations: one under the cup of the foot through the quantity of a finger, throughout the entire cautery is clavicle, and two cauterizations on the two sides so that the shape of the cauterizations forms three angles, and there is such space between them when they emit pus that they are not joined together; and let the cauterizations be so deep that they reach the two parts of the heart, and let the shape of the cauterizations be according to this form without adjoining:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 And if you want to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and whoever is afraid of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and signing on the stomach at one point according to the quantity that you wish to increase; then cauterize the entire cautery which is called "point.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the treatment of the previous treatment, until it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	 When pain comes to the liver from cold and moisture and great windiness, so that it is very much displaced from its natural complexion by superfluities; and the patient is treated with what we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit him at all, then it is necessary for the patient to be cauterized on his liver; and there should be a sign of three cauteries according to this form and this figure and this amount on the liver, beyond the hypochondria, where the ribs of the man come; and there should be a space between each cautery the thickness of a finger; and the cauteries should be long in the body, and do not press too hard with your hand over the entire cautery; and let only half the head be burned, and let the patient lie on his feet; and if he cannot, then let him lie down, and extend his legs, and raise his arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	 And if it pleases you, cauterize these cauteries of the cuticle, if you are skillful and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn the entire heart, for you would dry out the whole body; and let it not reach the boil, for the heart is very delicate in that place, and know this for certain.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	 When there is an abscess in the liver, and you wish to know whether it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient does not feel pain too severely; and if it is in the membrane, they feel insane pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	 And then, when this cure should be performed by the doctors, it is necessary that the patient be laid on his back; and then sign the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which is similar to a grape, as here is its form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	 And you should cauterize with the cautery until the heart is burned, and it comes to the spleen, so that the entire tumor is destroyed; after the cure according to the cure of the swellings, until he is healed; and it is not necessary for this cautery to be used by anyone but one who has studied long in the art of medicine, and through whom few of these diseases have run their course.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	 Then he can boldly work, nevertheless it seems to me that it is better to leave him.
dou cautere de pleuresin	 of the cautery of pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	 The ancients said that one should make for pleurisy cauteries of the roots of aristolochia, and in this manner: take a long root of aristolochia, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and as thick and as long as your fingers; and moisten it in oil, and grasp it with fire, and cauterize I cautery between the sternum and the neck, and II small cauteries a little below in the part that is under the beard; and II cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, slanting behind a little; and I cautery in the middle of the chest, and I another on the stomach, and I between the two shoulders, and II on the sides of the chest opposite the cautery which is between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, but do openly as if smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	 And some ancients say that a man uses fire cautery similar to a razor, and heats it and places it between the ribs, until it reaches that abscess; and then the pain ceases, as we have said in the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	 But in this work there is fear that the patient may die now, or a fistula may develop which cannot be healed.
de la mice	 from the bladder
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	 When you treat the disease of the bladder according to what we have said in the sections on treatments, and it does not improve, then there are three methods of fire cautery which are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	 One of the methods is that you make three cauteries, or four, in a line according to the length of the bladder, similar to the liver cautery which we have spoken of before; and do not press your hand onto the entire cautery, and let the patient lie on his back. Another method of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the skin which is near the bladder, towards the left side of the patient's ribs, and the lifting should be according to the ribs, according to the length of the body, and the cauteries should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	 After, he introduces two inflamed nerves until the heart is pierced on the other side, and then pulls out through the cautery, and thus there will be four. And if you see fit, cauterize the entire cautery with three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	 After treating when he has had pus for a long time, and this is worth more than the other treatments mentioned earlier.
de ydropisie	 of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	 Cautery is not good for those with dropsy, except in the manner called "ascite.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	 When you treat according to the methods we have described in divisions, and your treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the navel, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the bladder, two behind the back on the spine, and one near the breast; and let the cautery be very close to the thickness of the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	 After leaving the cautery open to release pus for a long time, do not neglect the care of the patient after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and the two intentions will be together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	 The form of the cautery for the abdomen should be a hook as we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, as is shown before.
de l’enfleure des piez	 of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	 When the feet are swollen in those who have dropsy and are full of yellow bile, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and raise your hand with the cautery without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	 And do not enter too deep inside, for it would draw out the yellow bile, and let the cautery be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	 After that, make two cauteries on each of the two legs at the tip of the calf muscle; and let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries open for a long time without curing, so that the humors can come out; after that, cure as we have said for the other cauteries. 》
de la menoison	 of the wound
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	 When indigestion comes from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by other means; and you see the patient bearing it well and of strong virtue, then make one large cautery on the stomach according to what has been said before about the stomach cautery, with a circular cautery; and four subtle cauteries around the navel, at each cautery a subtle clavicle, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	 And if you see the moistures abundant and the patient tolerating them, make a cautery on the elbow, and one on each eye, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, because the cure is beneficial when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	 of the treatment for hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	 When the hemorrhoids are in the anus, one or several, and are old and consist of thick, cold, and moist corrupted humors, and have been treated as we said by division, but it is not effective, then make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, placed entirely under the navel, a little at a time in a triangular pattern, and one cautery below the anus two fingers; and if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the food does not cook, and you see the face swell, then make one large cautery on the stomach as mentioned before, and another on the liver, and another on the bladder with all the cauteries open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After care for the place until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	 of the flesh, which is called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	 When you cut the flesh called "thelul", heat the cautery which looks like a razor, and then place it entirely lit on the cut flesh; and keep your hand there until the cautery reaches the base of the vein from which the blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is a lot of flesh, cauterize each one as we have said; after the cure with beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on flesh, it will be more helpful.
de plaie mal curee	 of a poorly healed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	 When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will relate in its place, then such a disease occurs that cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	 When someone has a fistula and it is open and excretes foul and corrupt moisture, then you should test the whole tent carefully, and ensure that you know how deep the tent is throughout.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	 After heating the cautery that appears like a razor, and introducing it into the fistula according to the depth that the tent has entered, and renewing the cautery until that rotten and corrupt body is burnt once, or twice, or three times, depending on how much is needed; and beware of burning the nerves that are in it, and the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	 si li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine,
de la maladie des reins	 Of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	 When pain from cold comes to the kidneys, and with large flatulence, and there is no desire for women, then you must make a cautery on the kidneys on one side and the other with the clavicle cautery that we have previously mentioned; and if we cauterize in the middle, it will have three cauteries in a row, and they will provide greater help.
de la vessie	 Of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	 When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cautery on the lower part of the bladder where the pubic hair begins, one to the right and one to the left, and each cautery should be as long as your thumb up to the first joint; and make one cautery below the back, or two if you need them; and let the cautery be clavicle according to the previously mentioned form.
de la marris	 of the illness
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	 When the womb is cold and moist, and does not permit conception, and the menses are corrupted and their terms delayed; and when they come, it causes great pain: then it is necessary that one makes three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries on the back; and let the cautery be clavicle, as we have said.
de la hainche	 of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	 When the viscous moistures descend to the hip joint, and because of this it moves out of its place, and the sign is that one thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and if the place of separation is found visible, then you must cauterize the patient on the hip joint with a cautery resembling a circle, and let it be in front of the place around the hip as it turns, so that the hip joint is within the circle; and let the cautery be such as that used for the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Et si cist cautere ne t'est present, fais-en III du grand olivier, et que le cautere soit aussi profond que tous les coeurs; et guéris jusqu'à ce qu'il soit guéri.
de la dolor de la hainche	 of the pain in the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	 When pain comes in the hip joint from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured by what we have said in the division, and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of gross humors with fetid pills or other similar good pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	 After that, make a cautery; and the manner of the cautery is in two ways: that is to say with burning medications, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	 Cautery by fire is done in many ways, one of which is as follows: you should make three triangular cauteries on the hip bone according to this shape, and make each one deep and large; there should be the width of a finger between each cautery, and let the cautery be olive-shaped. Sometimes a cautery is made in the middle on the top of the hip, for which there are four according to this shape:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	 And if you see this, then cauterize with the circular cautery that we have mentioned before for the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circle encompasses the entire hip, and all the hollow parts are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	 And this is the way it is done in sciatica, when the pain is in the hip and does not reach the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 And if it reaches the thigh and the leg, make two cauteries where the patient says the pain is located, and one cautery four fingers above the ankle on the left side, a little; and let the cautery be cutaneous, and burn the thickness of the skin; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two toes or near there, cauterize there three or four times with the cautery that is called "point".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	 And if necessary, do more; and if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, make a cutaneous or circular cautery, and be careful in all your cauteries not to leave the cautery so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and do not cause the patient greater harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	 Et moi-même j'ai vu plusieurs qui ont fait une cautérisation sur la cheville du pied, et ils l'ont laissée jusqu'à ce que la jambe soit tout enflée, ainsi que le pied, et tout le pied a été percé et corrompu.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	 After a stomach treatment from which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	 And if the pain is in two parts together, make a cautery on one and the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	 And the wise say in the cautery of the hip, for which this is the manner, make one such iron and let it be at the tip as thick as a thumbnail or a little less, and let it be pierced and from one perforation to the other let there be the width of a nut; and let the perforations be on two sides, and let them also be like noses, and let there be one handle of well-made iron; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And let it be heated until it is all red and thrown down, and then put it on the box of the sick hip, and turn it to the healthy side; and cauterize once I cauterize again, and leave it for III days; and then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the care of ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	 Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its appearance, and if we see little used, and nevertheless it is of the good cauteries, which can be borne, and in the place where it is needed.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	 The cautery of medicine that burns is such that you make an instrument with crossbars on which the margin of the door descends, and it should be of brass or iron with one long wall, and in the height it should have II noses, and between each there should be the thickness of a finger; and they should be open from within and above, and they join together according to this shape:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	 After placing the box on the hip of the patient lying on his sound side, press your hand hard on the box of the hip; then throw between the two circles of hot water heated in a pot over the fire one bag, and let it stay for an hour, and let the patient suffer the heat and burning from it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 For there is a burning sensation as if by fire; and when the burning has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and lift the hip in warm water, and leave it this way for three days, and place on it butter so that the blackened part of the burn may be removed; and let it stay like this for three days until the putrefaction comes out; and this would be the final treatment after the cure of onions until it is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	 And if the pain has spread to the thigh or to the leg, make an instrument that holds according to what you have done for the hip likewise; and this is the manner of the hot bandage, and I have written about it in the treatise on the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	 Take quicklime and slaked lime, as much of one as the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	 And make a small hole in it so that the tip of a razor can enter; and put on top of this pot another well-leaded pot, and put quicklime and slaked lime and soft bandage on top, until there are two fingers' width above the powders when you have well pressed it with your hand; and leave it like this until watery and soft moisture descends into the leaded pot, then take all that moisture and throw it onto quicklime and slaked lime as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	 And then it will be very hot and is prepared in many ways of medicine and with other members' cauteries; because it does a similar work as fire, and there are other medicines with which one can cauterize the hip well, such as terebinth, honey, anacardium, and alkali mixed together with soap.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	 And Galen tells us of a cure by which a man was healed of the pain of the hip and the sciatic vein, and he praises it greatly, and says that no other cure was done, and that he was healed at once when this cure was done, and he was bathed as he teaches hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	 And he says that you should take fresh and dry green silver, grind it very finely with a little grease, and place it on the hip and thigh and leg where the pain is, and bandage it; and leave it there for three hours, so that by its quantity the patient no longer feels the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	 And then make him enter the bath until his body is somewhat warm, and then put him to bed, and all pain will go away and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	 And know that no one should use such a cautery with these medicines except after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	 And Dioscorides says that when the varicose vein is cauterized with the hairs of a goat, it helps greatly; and the cautery should be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	 Take linen and soak it in old oil, and place it on the hollow that is between the big toe of the foot and the other one called "foscil.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	 Then take dry goat hair and press it in the fire until it becomes charcoal, and place it on the linen, and leave it until it is burnt; and do this again, and do not stop doing so until you feel by sense that it reaches the hip, and that the pain ceases; and this type of cautery is called "goat cautery.
de la dolor dou dos	 of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	 When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or from a blow or from too much bleeding, or from the appearance of cold matter spread throughout, for none of these reasons is cautery valuable except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	 It is necessary that, after the patient has been purged with stinking pills or other similar things, one should make on the back, where the pain is located, three lines drawn with ink, and in each line V or more cauteries according to the strength and quantity that the patient can bear; and let the cautery be made according to the cautery which is called "poins"; and if you wish, make III or IV cauteries with the middle-sized cautery according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	 Many times this disease comes to small children, and the sign of its beginning is that they have a narrow forehead when they stand up, and fear; and you find at the back of the neck an appearance which comes on top of the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	 When you see this, and you wish to heal it, then cauterize it with the cautery of silver according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	 So that the cautery touches each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	 And if you wish, then cauterize around the spine with a stinging cautery two or three lines wide, and let the points be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	 After healing the place until it is healed according to what we have said, beware that you do not administer a cautery in haste which may affect the sinew.
de la dolor des jointes	 Of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	 When the pain of the joints is due to moisture that spreads to every member of the body, and when the pain comes in the feet, which physicians call "podagra" properly, and when it is caused by cold and medicines cannot cure it, then it is treated with cautery in this manner: make many cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	 And if there is a need for you to act on the surface of the foot, then do not make a complete cautery, but what is called a "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	 And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, which happens many times, then make three or four cauteries on each knee, olive-shaped all around; and if you need more, then do more, but keep your hand there only until the depth of the iron is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	 Et si les douleurs descendent jusqu'aux genoux et au dos, administre-lui le cautère tel que nous l'avons décrit dans ce chapitre.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	 Et si les douleurs sont aux mains, fais des points autour du poignet sur deux lignes; et s'il reste encore de la douleur dans le dos, fais des points sur chaque articulation et sur la paume de la main; et si les douleurs montent jusqu'aux côtes ou jusqu'aux épaules, cautérise chaque partie, et prends bien soin du malade et donne-lui des médicaments.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	 Et car si tu lui donnes de bons soins et que tu purgues la fièvre, il guérira avec l'aide de Dieu.
de la routure dou syfac	 of the wound of the syphilis
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 When the wound becomes angry, and the bubbles descend to the kidneys, which is new, it is necessary that when you see him being treated, he should not eat that day; and that he use things that open the belly, so that the feces come out of his stomach; after that, make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his leg until the bubbles have returned, and bring them to your fingers, and sign under the wound on the bone of the wrist, and all together in such a way that it is similar to half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery as I have shown you the form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	 until it becomes white and casts off splinters.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	 until they return to their place; and let the assistant hold his hand so that they do not return again; and well work the thighs of the patient, and put a cushion and a strap on the thighs, and another on the foot which holds the hands; then put the cautery on the sign all your hand, and your right and your left until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, start again another time until you come to the bone; and be careful that the joint does not protrude when you make the cautery; lest you burn it; and thus the patient may not die, or suffer other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	 And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	 And it is necessary that the cautery of children be subtle according to their size, and also large for adults according to their size; after three days cure the place of the cautery with butter until the burn is gone; then cure with other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is well closed; and it is necessary that his care be prolonged so that the boils do not appear when he wants to go into rooms.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	 And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, let him be given a well-made bandage, and carry it for another forty days; and let him have good rest, that he does not work much and guards against excessive drinking and eating, and high laughter; and when he follows this teaching, then he is completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	 And I will say hereafter the treatment of cutting in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	 of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	 When ruptures come in other bellies and are noticeable, and you see that they no longer grow, if the patient is to be treated with cautery, do it according to its size, and burn one third of the core; then treat it as we have said; and some of the ancients have said one should cauterize with a three-pronged cautery like this:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	 but first mark the place above and make a line along the width over the rupture, and another one opposite it, and then put your hand in the middle of the entire cautery device.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	 But the first cauterization is lighter and milder.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	 Of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	 When pain comes in any limb, from falling or striking, and this pain lasts a long time, and medical treatment is of no use, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "poins," and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb, its smallness, weakness, strength, twisting, and pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	 If he is cured by the first cautery, that is good; if not, begin another cautery on top of it, for such a custom is that it must move to the nearest limb, which is why you must make the cauteries until the patient is cured.
de meselerie	 Of mixture
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	 The noses are helped sometimes by cautery with great assistance, and likewise the diseases that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	 If you see it being cauterized, be careful if the disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not subsist nor remain, and you doubt that the corruption will spread throughout the patient, then make five cauteries on the head: one in the middle of the head towards the nape, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair; and two on the two corners, and one behind on the hairline; and leave your hand there so that the cautery reaches to the bone, and until the scabs come out such that the vapors of the gross humors can escape; and cauterize on the nose according to what precedes.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	 And if the mischief is spread everywhere; and it is clearly lost, then you must cauterize with these cauteries that we have mentioned above, one cautery on the tip of the nose, two cauteries on the spine of the neck, six cauteries on the spine of the back, one large one on the buttock and another nearby, two on each shoulder; two on each rib, two on the tendons of the foot, one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are on the lower part, lest you burn them; sometimes one cauterizes on the bone of the wrist, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	 And know that the more I do of cautery, the more help I give, and I move its benefit; and know that the patient does not feel pain at the cautery as the healthy ones do, because the body is already all corrupt.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	 And it is necessary that the cauteries be great and small according to the members and the joints, as you will find them in the manner of irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	 After curing, treat the place with flour of vetch mixed with honey and other cures until it is healthy.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When swelling occurs in any member and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it does not heal, then I make cauteries on the member according to its size, and let the cautery be a little into the thickness of the skin; then cure it with onions until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	 And sometimes a cautery is done on the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb; and thus the swelling is removed; however, no one should attempt this unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	 from a scar
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the disease called "albaras" is inflamed and medicinal remedies have no effect, then cauterize it with a small but deep cautery, according to the size of the vessel, until the whiteness disappears and its color changes; then treat it with flour of peas and lentils mixed with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of pigeons and almonds, each one part; and mix everything together, and bind with a cloth, and leave in place until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	 The treatment of cancer by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	 When cancer first appears and you see it arrested, then cauterize it with a cautery that resembles a circle, all around the cancer.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	 However, the wise say that one should also make a cautery in the middle of the cancer; nevertheless, this does not seem good to me, because I fear that it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen it happen sometimes; and it is more appropriate that it be cauterized around [it], with the cautery that is called "circular", as we have said in many [instances] of cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	 Of the swelling that cannot be healed
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	 When someone has a disease called "adubelati," and it delays healing either because of the excess fluid it produces or due to the weakness of the patient when he is very old and has little blood, or because of the length of time [it has been present]; and you see that it hastens to heal: then cauterize it around with many small cauteries by pricking; after that, leave it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	 Because it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 And if you see it pierce through the entire cautery, heat the cautery with this form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	 And put your hand in the middle of that illness which is called «adubelati» until the cautery has pierced the heart, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it on the outside in such a way that the course of the corruption is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 After the cure until it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	 The cure by fire with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	 There is another manner of illness called «corrodens», which is nothing other than the consumption of a member, for it consumes the members just as fire consumes dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	 If you see this disease in a place that can withstand fire and cautery together, then heat the cauteries very small and large accordingly to where the disease is; afterwards cauterize from all sides until you remove all corruption, so that nothing remains of it, and all that is corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	 And then let it be for three days, and place on the cauterized places a plaster with oil until the burns of the fire are removed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	 After the treatment of burning wounds that generate flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	 And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not appear, it is good; and if not, then renew the cautery on what remains of the corrupted place.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	 And this swelling is sometimes cured with cold medicine instead of fire cautery; nevertheless, fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already said the cure for cold medicine in the division: take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	 of nettles that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	 Very often it happens that on the soles of the feet there arises a disease which we call "clot", and it is a large fleshy thing that wounds the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	 And the cautery for this disease is in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	 That is to say: fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	 Fire cautery is done by heating a cauterizing iron like the feather of a goose. It should be made of good iron and shaped so that it can fully cover the clot on all sides, with fine edges; then place it very hot on the clot, and turn your hand completely around the clot until it reaches the bottom of the clot; and leave it like this for three days until it begins to emit pus; then make a poultice of crushed wild mallows mixed with honey, and leave the poultice on all night, and the clot will fall out and be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat the place of burning with fresh meat until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	 And if they are converted outward on the body, and this often happens in hands and feet, then you must bring hot water cautery to it. And it is done this way: take an iron or copper tube, or a goose quill, and place it over the nail and wart; that is to say, for warts. And put the tube so that it touches all around, then put a little bit of hot water on it, and hold your hand well, and press your hand turning so that the edge of the tube comes to the root of the nail, and let the hot water find its way deep to the root; and let the patient endure the scalding for an hour; then leave it like this, and it will uproot itself completely from all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	 So do one after another, until you have removed all from the body, then treat the wounds that cause flesh.
li cure dou trembler	 The treatment of the shivering
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	 When someone shivers from cold of the nerves, or quartan fever or another cause, you must make four or five cauteries on the spine of the back, one between each vertebra; and one on the foot, and one on the stomach at the olive-shaped cautery; then the shivering will stop, and the health of the cold disease will improve.
des pustules puans	 Of stinking pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	 Sometimes appear on the surface of the body baths, or stinking pustules, which come from large corrupt substances.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	 If it is necessary at first when they appear that one makes a cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery of boxwood, of which the point should be set on fire, or of long root of arum, or on the lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	 And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow further, but the superfluities from which they come are removed, and they are healed; but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	 When the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	 Often there is a great flow of blood from the artery that is cut in the wound that comes forward, or from the incision of the abscess, or from the cautery on the limb, and similar things; and it is a very serious matter to stop it.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	 And yet when this happens to someone, hurry to place your finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it very much so that the blood is calmed under your finger, and no drop comes out; then put in the fire several olive-sized cauteries, both small and large, until all are red; then take one, either great or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is routed, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery there so long as the blood is congealed.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	 And if it jumps out when you remove your finger from the vein and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another one from those that are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	 And do not stop doing one after the other until the wound is healed; and beware that you do not burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be healed well, especially if the artery is large, unless it is by one of the four ways we have said: by cautery, or by extraction if it has not been treated, or by tight bandaging with thread, or by medicines applied which have the power to heal blood; and it should be bound and held appropriately.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	 He who will administer healing by tightly binding with cloths or placing burning things on it, or other similar things, if it does not benefit, then it cannot be done.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	 And if this happens to someone and he has neither physician nor medicine present, then he must place his finger on the vein wound as we have said, and well extend it until it is constricted above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the finger, but apply cold water frequently so that it becomes very cold until the blood is frozen and swollen and constricted; and make preparations for this, with what he needs in cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	 Here begins the second book of the cures of wounds
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	 We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases for which it is necessary to cauterize with fire or hot medicine, and their occasions and causes and instruments and forms of cauteries; and I placed that chapter from the head down to the feet, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same path so that one may find more easily what one wants.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	 Et avant que je commence ceci, il est nécessaire, cher fils, que vous appreniez que dans ce chapitre il y a plus de danger et de peur qu'au premier des cautères, et pour cela il faut plus grande prudence.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	 Because in the work of this chapter, there is often evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	 And I warn you not to undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	 Because many kinds of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	 If such people are so afflicted with their illness that they die easily due to the madness it causes and the severity of its wickedness, then one should fear them.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	 And there are those who give you their senses and say: "Wait, I am cured"; but the disease is spiteful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	 It is not fitting for you to agree with those who come to you with this manner, but rather put more caution in your honor than in your greed, and do not act foolishly but wisely concerning that of which you are certain and from which you can gain a good reputation and praise; and use prognosis and diagnosis in the treatment of your patients so that health may be restored to them; and this will help you acquire a good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	 Tres cher fils, Notre Seigneur vous donne bon entendement et droiture, et si vous voulez respirer de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	 Or je vous ai ordonné ce chapitre en discutant par chapitres, selon ce qu'il est devant ce chapitre des cautères, que je vous ai expliqué du chef jusqu’aux pieds, afin que vous trouviez plus facilement ce dont vous aurez besoin.
dou chief plein d’aigue	 dou chef plein d'eau
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	 Sachez que cette maladie vient souvent aux enfants lors de leur naissance, et quand la sage-femme serre trop fort la tête de l'enfant; et parfois cela arrive sans cause apparente que l'on puisse savoir.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	 And I have never seen this disease except in children, and all those that I saw rushed towards death; and therefore it seems to me that it is better to leave the work in such cures.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	 And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the skull swelled each day to such an extent that it could not support itself; and the moisture grew so much that he died, and this moisture is collected under the bone on the sinciput, between the brain and the bone; and the work is thus: if the moisture is between the brain and the bone, and the abscess is small, you should make a wide incision in the middle of the skull; and it should be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture may drain; and see here the form of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	 If the moisture is more prevalent, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, following this pattern:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	 And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see the commissures of each part open at the head, and when you press it with your hand inside, the sharp part does not respond to you: then you must make three incisions in the middle of the head in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	 And after the incision, extract all the moisture completely.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	 Afterwards, dress the incisions with cloths and powders, and apply wine and oil to them; leave it thus until the fifth day; then unbind, and treat the wound by tenting and dressing, and let the head be held evenly, and give the patient dry food of little moisture as long as the member is comforted and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	 And another way of incision is that you look at where the opening of the abscess is, and the collection of pus; for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	 Therefore, cut where the abscess opens and the pus collects, and make the incision according to your ability; and be careful not to cut the artery; and if blood flows out, so that the patient dies from blood loss and moisture evacuation.
de reume	 of a tumor
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	 When it happens to someone that there is a disease called "catarrh" in the eyes or in the bladder, and the illness is old, and the medicine does not benefit, then the last cure is the cautery with which they will cut the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	 It is therefore necessary, when you see them covered, that the patient puts his head back; then rub the place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then have the patient pull their neck taut with the cloth; then look where the vein beats, and the place of one and the other are after the ears, and few are answered; then mark the places well, then cut both with a sharp spatula of two parts, until the cut reaches the bone, and this should be as wide as the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	 And if you see, put the spatula under the artery and cut above it, cutting as if two fingers across the width.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	 And when the vein is cut, the blood will jump out continuously upward.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 And if the artery does not open to touch, then you must measure the length of three fingers, then cut inward and reach down to the bone; and as for what should be drained outside, it is six c/, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the fullness of the artery; then examine the wound: if there remains on the bone a point of syphac, then cut it so that such apostemes do not come there, then hold the wound and bind it, and the treatment of poultices until it is healed.
de emigrainne	 Of migraine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	 When migraine comes on and an acute catarrh, due to the moistness of tears and the heat in the temples and ancient frenzy and similar things, and he is treated by various medical treatments and all these do not benefit him, then we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	 And the method of their extraction is such that the patient shaves the hair from his temples, and attends to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well by its pulsation, and it is little hidden except in some men who are too cold; and if it is hidden, let the patient then stretch his neck with some cloths, then rub the place with some rough cloth, and wash the place with hot water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatula of which there is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	 then lightly scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then draw it up with forceps, and separate it well from the tissues that are beneath it on each side; and if the artery is fine, then twist it around the tip of the hook, then cut off that part according to the amount of two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	 Because if it is not cut, the blood does not flow out completely.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	 And drain the blood from the VI/C vein up to III; and if the artery is large, you must tie it in II places with a strong double silk thread, so that no infection comes before the wound is healed, and let the blood flow out gradually; then cut the excess that is between the II ties at the same hour, and then, if you wish, you can cauterize with a lancet up to the bone until the head is cut; and this is the better work if the patient has no fever and is of hot temperament.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	 Because the cautery is useful for finishing moisture, therefore it is more helpful with moistures.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	 Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries, one should fill the place with old cotton and put well-made compresses on top; and when they are removed, they should be cared for with dry medicines that produce flesh, and with compresses, until they are healed; and if blood comes from the artery as much as you work there, hasten to stop it with a hot iron or cautery, or fill the place with vitriol and press it in your hand so that the blood is coagulated; and if you do not have this present, then put your finger on the place until the blood is congealed, and wash the place with cold water until the bleeding stops, and press as needed; and it is better and easier for the extraction of the artery to cauterize the wound with this cautery, cutting in two parts, but the cuts should be well spaced to preserve their heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	 For when the instrument is too thin, it retains less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 And it should have between the two knives one thumbs width of space, and then when you have closed the two places, and you measure the burning iron up to the point where it reaches the bone, and you cut the vein in two places; and let them be far apart from each other because it is not wholly sealed by this cautery altogether; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	 tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	 When tears flow from the eyes into the veins that are on top of the head, and medical treatment brings no benefit, and you see the patient's face turn red, and they feel feverish in the forehead; and their eyes are thin and moist so that the hair of the eyelashes falls out, and the eyelids are heated and scorched by the heat of the tears, then this treatment is needed.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	 Et l'apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	 From the first incision that is near the temple to the second incision; and scrape all the heart that is between the two slits on top of the bone, then do another part from the middle incision to the other second one, and then remove this thin piece.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	 put into the first slit the instrument called "scalpel," which is very sharp on one side and soft, not sharp, on the other, and it looks like this:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	 And put the sharp edge towards the flesh of the heart, and the soft edge towards the bone, and push it until it reaches the middle slit.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes so that the incision is continuous until it opens the heart, and then do another part in the middle slit to the other side; and then draw blood equally, and press the place for the blood drawn; then put a tent of old cotton into each slit, and put wet cloths on top with wine, oil, and vinegar, and make sure no abscess comes there; and on the third day, loosen the bandage, and apply a large quantity of boiled water, then a basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other treatments used for wounds until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	 Of the pain of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	 When cataracts come to someone suddenly, and you see the eyes dim and small, and vision is weakened, and the eyelids are burnt; and hair falls out, and there is sharp pain in the head, and the patient sneezes; then know by these signs that those substances and that cataract do not come from one vein, but from many. And the treatment for it is this:
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	 And so you instruct the patient to shave their forehead, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another one from the hairline.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	 And begin the incision from the left temple to the right temple, and let the cut go down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the temples’ nerves that move when eating; and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, then insert old cotton and linen between the two lips of the incision; then bind over it cloths soaked in wine and oil, and beware of hot abscess; when it is removed, it is necessary that you rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat with drying substances that make flesh grow.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	 En such manner: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, make a poultice from them; and apply it to these wounds to promote the growth of flesh throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	 of the blockage of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	 All that falls into the ears is one of four things: either grain, an animal, a mineral stone or something similar like iron; or seed, such as barley, beans, peas; or a fluid thing, such as water and oil and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	 When something falls into the ear that is not compatible with it and does not grow in the ear, such as a stone or any other kind of thing, put the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	 If you see the stone, drop a little bit of violet oil or sesame oil into it, then apply extraction; and make him sneeze by blowing in his face, and block his nostrils when he is about to sneeze, and wrap around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and stretch the ear upwards.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	 Much of the time fever occurs with this treatment; and if it does not occur, then use fine forceps for extraction, which is the form here.
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	 If the fever comes with forceps, it is good; if not, then use a fine extraction hook of small thickness; and if it does not come with that, make a tube of brass and insert the end of the tube into the ear hole strongly, and stop up what is around the tube with soft wax so that the wind cannot enter with the tube; then pull fever strongly, for much of the time fever comes in this way as we have said; and if the fever does not come in such a manner, then take glue as birds take, and put it into some instrument which is suitable to do this, and put a little cotton around it; then press the glue on the stone or whatever it may be, and pull fever.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Et si elle ne saut pas de toutes ces choses que nous avons dites, hâte-toi de fendre l'oreille avant qu'un abcès ou une crampe n'y vienne. La manière de la fendre est ainsi : fais d'abord saigner le malade par la céphalique, et tire du sang selon la mesure de sa vertu ; puis fais asseoir le malade entre tes mains et tourne l'oreille vers le haut. Fais une petite fendre à la racine de l'oreille dans la graisse ou le lieu voisin ; que la fente soit comme un croissant, jusqu'à ce que tu atteignes la pierre, puis retire-la selon ton pouvoir et suce hâtivement à ta bouche ; et fais la cure jusqu'à ce qu'il soit guéri.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	 Et si c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si administrez extraction;
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	 And if it is a grain that is inside and it swells, administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then perform a subtle and thin incision on the grain according to this form:
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	 But do not do this when you think the grain is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract it with subtle tweezers and a suction device, as we have said, so that the extraction may be easy.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	 In water that falls into the ear, it is necessary for the patient to first sneeze by inhaling condiments, and then clean the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	 And let him lie on the same ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	 If it leaps out through the sky, that is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	 If not through the sky, then take many small and light pebbles according to the length of your thumb, heat them a little in the fire; and put one into the patient's ear where it hurts, and let him jump on his feet on the other side, and strike with another stone on the stone that is in the ear; and do not cease doing this from stone to stone until all the water comes out, and so it jumps out completely; and if you see, take a reed, put one end into the ear, and hold the other end in the fire until the nearest part of the reed burns; then repeat with another reed until all the water comes out, as we have said in the case of stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	 In the extraction of the beast, if it is small in size, like a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is large enough to be felt, then use the extraction of pincers; and this is the lightest thing to remove that is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	 In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and the cure does not benefit, then you must look at the ear in the sunlight: if any worms appear, extract them with fine pincers; and if they do not appear, take the hair of which this is the form.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	 And let it be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	 And pour the most subtle liquid into the ear according to the quantity of the patient's suffering, then draw out all the wax; do this often until all the worms come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	 And if they do not obey in coming out, then plug around the wax with cotton as I have said in the stone; and if they do not come out strongly as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the killing of worms, and you will find them in the treatise on distillations; and thus distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all this instrument, which is shaped like this:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	 And whether of silver or bronze, place under a small opening, and above to drip; and for pressing during the distillation, use a well-made bronze tool for this purpose; and if you wish, take a scraper and wrap cotton around the tip securely; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever medicines you have in the funnel, and let the funnel be in the ear; then put inside the scraper all the cotton, and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled into the ear canal; and let the patient feel it inside, and let the distillation be a little warmed over the fire before being distilled in the ear; and ensure that it is not too cold, for then the medicine would not be as good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	 Of ear piercing
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	 No child is born without any hole in their ears; and the same thing happens to adults due to piercing of a wound, or of flesh growing inside the ear, and this piercing sometimes goes deep into the ear, so that it cannot be seen; and sometimes there is not enough of an opening, and one can see it well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	 Therefore, if it goes deep and cannot be seen, it is of grave significance in many ways, and in that which can be seen, you must place the patient's ear in the sun; and look inside: if you see the hair appearing, then perform this operation with whatever tool forms this.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	 And let it be sharp and cutting both in front and behind entirely, so that it does not wound the ear; if the incision is from flesh born or from the body of the ear, then hold it with fine tweezers, and cut gently, until all that flesh is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	 And if the incision goes deep into the ear, then take a subtle and light razor and heat it slightly over the fire, then place it in the body of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	 If you feel the incision which causes the patient pain to touch, puncture lightly and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear; then place in the ear a tent according to the width of the opening, and soak it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Do this every day until the wound is healed: take a tent and soak it in rose water, then sprinkle powdered vitriol on it. And if you see the ear swell, you must remove the tent and replace it with another tent soaked in wax made of rose oil and beeswax, until the swelling is gone; then continue the treatment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	 And if blood comes out, take a sponge and soak it in cold water, then place it on the ear, and use other treatments that remove the bleeding, which are discussed in the treatment of distillations.
de la char des papieres	 from the flesh of the papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	 This althelul that comes from the eyes of birds when they are wet and dry, you must pull them out with tweezers and pinchers, then scrape off a piece of its root with a spatula; then place powdered vitriol on it.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	 Et se sans en decort, then scrape off the skin, and cauterize it with a subtle lenticular cautery, and after the incision, it is better to move; and often they return, when some root remains; and when they are cauterized by fire, then those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	 of gravel
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	 Many times there come to the eyes certain things that resemble gravel in shape and hardness, and therefore this disease is called "grandine," and it is a thick gathering of moisture above and below the eye; the treatment is such: take care if the grandine moves from one side to another, which is an easy thing to know; then make an incision wide enough, then scrape each part lightly, then grasp it with forceps, and cut it off.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	 If you cannot cover it without piercing the skin a little, it does not harm the patient; and if the tear is large, join it with a stitch, and treat it until it heals; and if it is small, do not use force, for the ointment restores it quickly and regenerates flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	 And if the hail descends into the ear towards the upper part, invert the skin and stretch the hail with tweezers; and cover it and press from both sides; and if the skin is separated by the incision, it does not matter; and when the hail is covered, lift the eye of salt water, and treat the place with that which regenerates flesh until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	 Of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	 Of the exanthema is a fat that is secreted into the tissues of the eyelids, and this happens more in children than in any other people, and it greatly afflicts their eyes, and they get catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the sunlight because tears hasten to their eyes; and for this reason they always lie on their faces, and sleep on them, and their eyelids under their eyebrows are moistened by the exanthema that opens in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	 And when you press your fingers against it, you feel the exanthema between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	 And the manner of this procedure is that the patient puts his head in your hands; and then take a cloth of linen, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity contained by exanthema from each part, then place it on him; and press with your fingers on one side and the other, so that the exanthema is gathered into the circle; then make in the middle of the moisture with a sharp spatula a slit wide enough, but not larger than the incision made for venesection; and pierce the skin through to the exanthema; and in many cases it comes out from the slit, according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	 Pull out then all in one piece of cloth between your fingers, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is scattered; and beware not to approach the cleft, lest you come all the way to the little eye, that you may not hurt it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	 And if the skin does not open at the beginning of the cleft, then gently widen the cleft slightly until it opens; then pull as we have said, then moisten cloths in vinegar and water, and place on the spot, and bind with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	 And there are such men who grind salt and put it on to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then cure him until he is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if there comes a hot abscess in the place, then cure it with soothing poultices until he is healed.
des poilz des papieres	 of the hairs of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	 When in the eyes hairs grow that are different from the natural ones, and they are irritated, they harm the eyes and cause various diseases such as tearing and softening of the eyes and cataracts, to the point of causing blindness; and the cure is done in four ways: either by cautery with fire, or by medical treatment according to what was said before in the chapter on cautery, and this can be done either by incision and suturing or by caustics, as I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	 It is necessary that you place the patient's head in your hands, then turn the paper of the eye to your left hand; if it is converted, that is good; if not, then push a needle with all its thread on top; and let this be at the margin of the paper where the hairs are born near these hairs, and draw the thread above all the paper, and turn it to the razor; then make an incision in the part below the paper, below the close-set hairs, cutting all the way from the great tear duct to the small one; then pull out the thread, and place a small tent of cotton and linen under the paper; then sign above the paper a figure like a myrtle leaf, and yet it is necessary that the figure be according to the amount that you wish to raise the paper which is devised for all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	 And if one has need to cut a large quantity of the paper according to how the paper is softened; then make all the spatula on the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the great larmier until small; and let one of the clefts be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the ointment into one of the two angles of the heart, then peel it all; then gather the two lips with a stitch of a needle with all one thread of fine wool, and wipe away the blood, and make the superfluity of the threads stick on the two sorcerers with any gluey thing if you want to do this; and if not, then have no concern about it, then leave the stitch and the threads for three days or four; then heal the wound without stitching with dry and constricting things, because the paper heals by the closing of the wound and its gathering, but the stitch is harmful (as the ancients say), and this is work without fear; and there is another way: and it is that you cut the paper in a shape that is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have said, with three unwrapped ointments according to the form which is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	 Then cut that which surmounts the small forces equally according to the form that is here.
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	 And if you do not have the power to hold the tongs, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle with one thread, and push it into the figure; and push another thread next to the large lip, and the second thread next to the small one, and assemble the threads equally between your fingers; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin on which you have sewn, as we have said, then assemble the two lips of the wound by stitching, and heal it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with wax and similar soothing ointments; and sometimes it happens that the hair on the skin is turned: then you must use what we have said about the incision; but stitching in one place and another is more skillful.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	 The cure of the hairs is as follows: you must turn the paper and the opening inside as I have said, then make two hairs by art, and two fine threads as long as the paper and the width of the spatula; and cut both ends of both parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other finely on what exceeds from the paper of the eye, and strongly tighten the two hairs in the two parts; and leave it this way for some days, and the skin that is tightly pulled will die and rot until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	 If it is delayed, then cut with a strong force, then cure it until it heals; and when the wound is healed and the paper is removed, the hairs will no longer grow. And this is the form of the two hairs that you will make according to this figure and in this quantity of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	 The work is such that you should take a fine needle, and insert a soft and fine silk thread into it; then bring the heads together and knot them both finely, and let the length of the threads be one palm long; then arrange in the shaft another fine silk thread briefly, and knot the ends of the thread; then have the patient put his head in your hand; and let it be near the sun so that the work is illuminated, for this is a subtle and small work, then insert the needle into the entire shaft at the root of the hair close to it, and make it pierce the skin quickly until you draw it above the natural hair; then pull the hair up to the top of the shaft, and insert that hair into the shaft, if there is one or two or three or more; then pull your hand so that the hairs come out completely from the shaft in the skin with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	 And if the arrow is removed and the hair does not come out with it, then you will draw the arrow from below along all the thread that you have ordered there, until the arrow comes out through the hole above and you see it with your eye; then you will remove the arrow and the thread, and close the eye and let it remain closed for 2 or 3 days, until the hair grows in its place and the flesh heals; and if the hair is small, then accompany it with one long natural hair, and lift it with that which you leave, until it becomes elongated and then you remove it.
de la porriture de l’oil	 of the infection of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	 When this disease called "aleacrati" or infection comes to the eye, there are two types of it: one is natural and the other is unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	 And it happens suddenly by a wound, or by cutting, or by cautery, and by similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	 And the manner of working on it is that you split open this suture, and separate its lips, and put inside linen tents, and tie it until it is healed; and it is not necessary to use in its cure things that dry out and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	 For if you do this, the disease returns worse than before; but work with softening things, such as fenugreek; and moisten it with water or honey and flax seeds boiled, and fat of the hyena melted in some of the oils, and wrap it in a tent, and cure it thus.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	 And the treasure of your care is that you take care lest it heals not according to the form that it was before; and this work that we have said is not outside of addressing this illness, lest it return according to the form that it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	 of the flesh that comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	 This illness, which is truly called "axacrati," is both natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	 The accident comes from a wound and a tear and a cautery and similar things; and the way of working in it is that you take a needle, on which there are two threads, and the tip in the flesh, and make it pierce from the left corner to the right, so that the thread comes into two corners of the flesh; then stretch the flesh above all the needle, and cut with one wide spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the figure of the stone returns as it should be, it is good; if not, then take a rasp and place it in the groove, and turn the stone, and make two grooves on either side inside the stone; and let the heads of the two grooves be at the two corners of the incision that you have cut, and make an angle such that when they are assembled, the figure is like the figure of a letter which is called "I griesche"; then remove that flesh, according to the sharpness of its sides below, from what follows the stone, then bring together the two divided parts, and sew them with a woolen thread; then follow the cure as we have said of softening medicines, and compresses, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	 And if the illness comes from a cut or stitch or cautery, you must make a clean cut under the hairs of the skin, according to what was said before; then remove between the two lips of a tent as I have said; and one should perform the work according to the form of the illness, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise master prepares an engine with all his power to bring back the figure to its natural shape; and the patient himself, according to what he needs in terms of work and instruments in various dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	 then sew the skin
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When this sewing happens to many people in such a way that the skin on top is sewn with the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, it is necessary then that you put the point of a razor under the skin, and lift it up; and stretch with tweezers until you cut what is close to the subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp or cutting, so that the patient cannot tolerate being cut by the too sharp spatula in the eye; and your incision, from which you remove that gathering, should be light, so that the skin returns according to its natural form; and all that gathering is healed, and sometimes there is salt water in the eye, and a lift of fresh water and coloring; then put between the skin and the eye a linen tent, and place on the eye wet wool in abundance of egg; and after three days use coloring and healing things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	 of the fingernail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	 You should know that the nail is in two ways: one is like a hard nerve, and another which is not like a nerve, but is like frozen white moisture; when you touch it with iron and try to grasp it with pincers, no one can. And both resemble each other starting from the large tear duct, and grow little by little until they cover the entire eye and all its light and movement.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	 And the manner of the incision is such that the patient places his head in your lap, then opens his eyes. And raise the eyelid with your hand, then curl the nail with pincers of small double-pointed needles, and place them on top; then take a needle, and insert one horsehair, or cow hair, or ox hair, and a strong thread. And slightly bend the point of the needle and insert it into the nail, and pierce all the way with the needle, and tie the nail with a thread and place it on top, and scrape all the way along the side of the nail that follows the small vein and the silk to the hair, up to the head, then cut off the remaining part at the root of the tear duct with all the subtle spatula and fine forceps, and leave the natural flesh in the tear duct, so that the body does not produce tears through the incision; and sometimes the nails are placed only on the eyelid and the thread, as we have said; then scrape all the soft tissue of which there is the form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And ensure that the spittle does not touch the flesh and tear it, and that the anus is not pierced; and after the incision cast into the eye a little of burnt silk, and made from lead, and leave it until the next day; then treat it as needed until it heals.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	 And if the nail is not fleshy, and you cannot insert the needle, and the pincers cannot enter, this appearance of a nail is often treated with medicines; and it emerges as I have told in the division, and if you see it covered, work the eye of the patient, and take a little spittle in a light way according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	 And cut the nail above subtly, and if you see that it does not diminish and the reason approaches, then drip from your mouth into the eye a collyrium made of lead and red collyrium powdered and mixed, and plug the eye until the next day; then begin the other work according to this same work, until it is all removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If nothing is against you in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then leave it, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then begin the work again as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	 And if the appearance of the flesh of the lacrimal sac comes into the eye by great harm, then suspend it to the eyelid, and cut off a part of it but not all, so that no watery body comes into it; then drip into the eye red collyrium which is made from lead.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	 of the flesh that grows upon the eyelid
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	 of some men’s eyes grows sometimes red flesh, which covers the eyelid and extends onto the whites of the eye, turning them outward, resembling a rose on a baluster; and the procedure is such that the patient places his head in your lap, then you open the eyes, and cut all that flesh with scissors suitable for this purpose, and hold it firmly; then cut the first flesh, and continue cutting to the root until the end, taking care not to injure the eye during the operation; and let the incision of the spatula be as we have said in the incision of the nail and in small forces from which one removes the scab, as the figure following this chapter demonstrates; and when the incision is completed and all the flesh removed, fill the eye with warm egg white mixed with vinegar, so that it forms a hot poultice on the eye; and if anything remains and the pus overcomes you, and you doubt a hot abscess, then leave the eye and treat the abscess with substances that soothe a hot abscess; then return to your operation until it is healed, and do this whenever flesh grows in the eye in this manner.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	 But nevertheless, you must choose the cure for each weak eye in accordance with nature; and by accident, in ironwork; and do not venture your hand into any of these works until you see that this member is capable of enduring such work.
des voines des eulz	 from the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	 They are red veins that cover the eye and obstruct vision and weaken the eye every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	 Therefore, the first thing to consider is whether the eye, in which this vein is found, is sound and free from any other illness except for the vein; then deal with the eye in this manner: instruct the patient to place his head on your lap, then lift those veins with a fine thread according to his skill, and let the thread be double and subtle according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	 And there are two bones by degrees in the body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	 and when the forces of those veins are subtly cooled, and wipe away the blood hour by hour until you see those strong veins recede from the eye; and be careful not to injure the eye with the points of the spatulas, and do this work at midday before the sun, and be very ardent in your work so that you only cut those veins; and when you have done this, distill into the eye green and red choler to corrupt what remains from the black.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	 And if you do not have the power to cool all of it in that hour, then make a plaster on the eye with things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is soothed and the hot abscess is assured, then begin again according to this manner which is before until it is healed; and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	 of the eye's fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	 The doctor calls it an "ardent" fistula: when you treat it with cautery and burning medicine as I have said before, and it is not healed, there is a tumor in it that you should cut over the abscess, where it must die, and draw out all the moisture that is there, until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	 And when the bone is exposed and you see the corruption and blackness, take out all the instrument that is in this form; and it is called an "aspre" head, and let it be made of iron with a sharp point, and let it be shaped like a file as shown in the present figure:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	 And place it on the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand until you know that the corruption is removed; and do this several times, then apply drying medicines to the place.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	 If the wound is closed, and flesh grows over it, and the body of the bowel is sealed, and it remains thus for forty days, and it does not reopen and is not abscessed, and no evil incident occurs, know that it is healed; if not, then there is no other device than to redirect the fistula towards the neck according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered, take a foret according to this form, and let the head of the iron be at three angles, and let the shaft be tapered up to the tip as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	 then place it on the bone near the edge, and remove your hand from the eye by a fistful, then turn the entire foret until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it because the wind comes out if he holds his hand to his neck; and then restore the place with dry medicines, as I have shown you, and when the flesh grows and the wound hardens, the matter goes to the neck; thus it is a lighter burden for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	 of the exit of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the eye is completely open and there is no hindrance to vision or reduction in sight, then you must bind the patient; then heal it, then apply cupping without piercing to draw out, then place on the eye a plaster made of alum and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and then hold the eye, and bandage over with cloths and linen; and the manner of the linen is such that you take linen soft enough, and fold each in four, and then place one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eye needs; then bind tightly with a strong bandage, and reapply the cupping without piercing; then remove the cupping and leave the eye bound day and night, and if the plaster softens, then you must bind it very tightly; then remove the plaster after the day and night, and if you see the eye heal, that is good; if not, then recommence the plaster and the linen and the plaster and the cupping until it heals.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	 Dou du rompement of toile ou veue
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 When disruption occurs in the uvea, it opens, and exudes from the tissues like a grain of resin, which is frightening to see; then if you wish to close it, the work is such that you insert a needle into the root of the affected part up to its top, then insert another needle where there is a double filament in the tear duct; and make it pierce through, leaving the first needle according to its position; then cut off the place of the double filament and tie around one part of the uvea, securing it well, then withdraw the needle and apply a moist linen cloth abundantly with egg yolk on the eye; leave it until the threads join with the uvea, then treat the eye with soothing things until the wound is healed; sometimes the wound is restrained by the uvea from all around in a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the eye has great swelling, perforate it with a fine spatula that reaches to the bottom of the eye, and let the purulent moisture flow out and descend from the eye, and enter in quickly; then extract until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	 of the white of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	 This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing but the white of the eye which is collected in the eye, resembling descending water, and it is not water; and the manner of the appearance of the work is that you make the patient sit on a well-prepared and straight seat, then take the head between your hands on both sides, and move it until you see the white come above your eyes; then let it be inserted, and do not let it descend and be obscured the light, and let the patient see things as he used to; and if it does not descend below, know that it is water, and if the descent of the white is not prepared as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 If the patient sits between your hands, then take the thin spatula and make an incision on the corneal cloth in the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal cloth and the cornea, until the bubble comes out; and when it has come out, drip hot water mixed with honey into the eye, or hot fenugreek water boiled with honey, then let it be treated with another treatment until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	 From the waters of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	 We have here similarities to the waters in the division, and what is necessary for piercing; thus we proceed according to healthiness.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	 It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, out of the light of the sun; and he ties the sound eye and squeezes it very hard; then put the paper of the eye to your left hand if the eye is left, or to your right hand if the eye is right; then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument which is called "almagda", or in your left hand if the eye is right; then put the point of the instrument next to the cornea by the thickness of a ray on that whiteness of the eye at the minor lacrimal part, then push the instrument which is called "almagda" vigorously, and turn your hand until it pierces into the whiteness of the eye, and feel that almagda reaches the void place; and it is necessary that the measure of the way of almagda be to the depth of the measure of the space that is from the prunelle up to the end of the pupil; and this is the cornea of the eye; then you will see the bone in that paper through the clarity of the corneal cloth, and then put the instrument until it reaches the place where the water is, then press under one way after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	 If water comes now, let the patient see it before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	 After resting for a little while, and if the water rises again by the second path, place the fire with the instrument, and when it is inserted and does not rise, gently draw the almagda while turning your hand little by little; then put in some clean water, and lift out of that eye.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	 Then place on the eye cotton or wool soaked in rose oil and plenty of egg yolk, and bind it with a healthy eye.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	 Yes, and we who are of our time, place it on top like breadcrumbs with plenty of egg yolk.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	 And if almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are such men who have very hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called "alberit," which has this form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	 And so pierce then the conjunctiva only, and do not go too deep, but make the place subtle; then put almagda, as we have said; and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient a suitable bed, on which he sleeps on his back in a dark place; and let him be free from all movements, and take light food, and do not move his head to the right or to the left, and let him be bound according to his condition until the third day; then unbind him in that same dark room, and test his vision, and show him some things, and then put the bandage back on until the seventh day; and it is not necessary that you do this at the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you lift him up, because the water rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	 se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	 Et puis isse de la maison poc a poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	 Et puis isse de la maison poc a poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	 Et puis isse de la maison poc a poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	 And let the head of them be of this same subtlety, and the last in three acute angles.
de la char sor le neis	 on the flesh above the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	 Sometimes hairs grow on the nose, which are different and some resemble many-legged scorpions; and there are such that have hair of fiery red color, and some have soft hair of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	 Therefore, in that hair which is soft and not hooked, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; open his nostrils, and throw the onion to those hairs, and pull them out; then cut off what you can hold with a subtle pointed spatula from one side, until you know that all the hair has been removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	 And if there remains any matter that cannot be covered, then open it all up with subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and if it surmounts you or if an abscess forms, then aid it as is necessary; and if it is malignant apostemes, then hasten and cauterize until the flesh is charred and all the pus is removed, then cast into fresh water or vinegar.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	 And if the nose works and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is healthy; and if the moisture does not break through as it should, know that there is a bone spur in the upper bone, which prevents the instrument from cutting: then you must insert a thread of linen about a hand’s width thick, and have it tied by my hands, and let there be between each knot a distance of one finger or less; and let the patient place the end of the thread in his nose as strongly as he can, and pull until it comes through the nose into the mouth; and often children do this at school, and it is an easy thing for those who want to do it; then hold the end that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other end that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and know each in turn as I do with the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	 Do this so that you know that the knots have corrupted that flesh, then remove the thread, wipe off the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nose as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointment has corroded all that remains of the flesh; and then put a lead plug in the nose for some days until it is healed, and if dry medicines are needed, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, into which one distills the oils and medicines into the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	 And let it be of silver or copper, resembling an open lamp, like a plug, and the tube likewise; and if you wish, make a closed plug, and let the instrument be full for purging the head; and have one handle on the head to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	 Of the flesh on the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	 Frequently a disease called "telul" appears on the tip of the nose and grows large so that it is a visible thing to look at; and for this reason you should cut it off at the beginning, and remove all force, then apply the cautery or burning medicine in place; and if one delays cutting until it is large, beware if it is hard, with a purple color, with poor sense: do not touch it with iron because it is an ulcer, because when one cuts it sometimes, great harm comes to the patient; and if the ulcer is of soft texture, not of purple color, and you see that one can completely cut it off, let the patient fast and cut without fear, and treat the place with drying and constricting things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	 when the nose is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	 Know that when healing continues to come into one of these cartilage works, it benefits little, except in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If this happens to anyone, first consider if the wound is fresh and full of blood; then join the two lips with one stitch, and treat it until it is healed; and if the lips are already separated from both sides, then you must cauterize all the parts of their heart until they are healed, then join the two lips with one stitch, and hold it, and put on powder of dragon's blood and ground incense; and place a piece of strong plaster or another adhesive plaster over the powders, and leave it until it falls off by itself, then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	 The manner of sewing is such that you bring together the edges: either with needles, as we have said in the sewing of the belly; or with thread, as I have taught you.
des apostemes des levres	 of the abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	 In many people there occurs within the lips a hard abscess, resembling grains of millet, smaller and larger; then you must turn back the lips and cut above each knot, and take it with pincers and chop it in every part; then fill the place after the incision with vitriol powdered until the wound is cauterized; and then apply alum and treat the place with dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	 From the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	 Often there appears on the gums a piece of flesh that the ancients call "albulus"; then you must grasp it with tongs and cut it at its root, allowing the abscess or blood to drain; then apply powdered vitriol or other restraining and drying powders to the spot; and if this flesh returns after cutting, as often happens, cut it a second time, and cauterize it: then it will not return after cautery; and these are the forms of instruments for cutting.
des sordens	 from sores
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	 Sometimes there are scabs gathered at the roots of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, which are ugly and rough; sometimes the teeth become black and yellow and green, to the point where corruption reaches the gum, and the teeth become putrid; then you must make the patient sit in your lap, with their head resting on your chest, and remove the teeth or scabs until nothing remains; and do the same for blackness, greenness, yellowness, and other stains, until they are cleaned away; and know that teeth require different forms of instruments for removal, according to what the work demands, because the files used for removing from outside the teeth have different shapes than those used for removing between the teeth; and these shapes and others should be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	 It is necessary that when you cure the tooth of its pain, you delay pulling it as long as possible, for this should not be done; for it is a very high substance until such time as one has no excuse to remove it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	 Therefore, when the patient is forced to pull out [the tooth], it is necessary that you be certain about the tooth hurting.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	 Often the pain deceives the patient and he thinks it is in a healthy tooth and pulls out the good tooth; however, the pain does not depart because of this, until the evil string is removed. For we have already seen this happen to these lords; and when you are well certain about the hurting tooth, it is necessary that you cauterize around the tooth on all sides with a very hot spatula to protect the gum from every side; then move [the tooth] with your fingers or subtle tongs little by little at first and bit by bit until it is well loosened. Then firmly grasp the tongs, and let the patient's knee be between your knees, and hold it so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	 After extracting the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, then take one of these instruments and gently push it from each side, and remove it as you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	 And if the tooth is perforated and decayed, then you must fill it with cloth where the holes are; and delicately grip it with pliers so that it does not break when gripping; and it is necessary to work very skillfully around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	 And be well aware that you do not break it, and a part remains, and the patient returns with greater pain than before due to the root's evil.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	 And beware that you do not act as the ignorant doctors do, who sometimes break the jaw due to their haste and boldness, and do not bring what we have mentioned; but they sometimes cause a great disease due to the roots that remain or the broken jaw, as we have often seen. And when the tooth is pulled out, wash the area with wine, vinegar, or salt; and if blood flows there, which often happens, then fill the area with burnt vitriol; and if that does not help, then cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	 The forms of the instruments, with which one removes teeth first, should be long and thick, so that they do not bend when you pull out the tooth; and these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	 And let them be of thick material so that they do not bend when pulling, and let them be well-made iron, and let them be toothed to hold well.
de la racine des dens	 from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	 When the root remains after pulling, then you must place on the spot cotton soaked in butter for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	 until the place is softened, then put in the pincers which are called "algefri", with which the tooth seems like a bird's beak; and let them be made inside like a file, and this is the shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	 And if the roots do not want to come out with all these pincers, then you must uncover the flesh completely around the root, and put there the instrument called "althali," which is to say tweezers, of which here is the form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	 And it should be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out this way, it is good; if not, then help yourself with all the instruments, of which the forms come hereafter:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	 And one helps oneself with this instrument that has two pincers, of which here is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	 and other tools that are before in the manner of teeth, and of this tool that resembles large pincers, of which here is the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	 And this instrument should be such that it cannot break; and know that there are many instruments for teeth; and similarly for other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise master subtly finds his own instrument according to what his work and the illness shows him, for there are such illnesses where the ancients did not teach any instrument due to their diversity of forms. And if one does not break the cartilage or other bones, where it could, then he seeks the instruments that are needed, as I have told you, and helps with gestures, of which this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	 And let them be large and well-holding to hold the bone so that it does not escape but can be held and removed; and then restore the place with suitable medicines. And if there is rot in the bone and it is small, then use this instrument for all of it:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	 When the teeth appear not according to nature's body, and the shape is ugly, especially in maidens, it is necessary that you know if the tooth is growing after the other teeth, and it is not in its right place, and cannot be pulled or filed: then extract it; and if it is crooked with the tooth, take this instrument whose form is here, and it is similar to a small beak, and let it be of sharp iron at the end.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	 And the clamp little by little each day because of the tooth's hardness, and so that you do not move the others, and if it is prominent enough to be filed, file it with a file like this shape.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	 And it is also like the file used to make needles; and file the tooth little by little each day lightly, so that it does not move until it falls out; then level it at the end with any rasp, and if the tooth is too sharp and cuts the tongue, you must file the roughness until it is equal, so that it no longer cuts the tongue or corrupts speech.
quant li dent lochent	 When the tooth loosens
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	 When the front tooth loosens, either by impact or by falling, and the patient cannot eat what they want without it falling out, and you have treated it with restricting medicines, but to no avail; then you must restrain it with a gold thread, for the silver thread turns green and rots, but the gold never moves; and let the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the size of the space between the teeth; and if you wish to straighten the teeth, take the thread and double it between the two healthy teeth, then place the knot between the loose teeth, whether there is one or more, until you wisely reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then restart the wrapping from the beginning, and subtly and wisely tighten your hand so that it does not move; and let the tie be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	 Then cut the heads of the wire with pliers, and assemble them, and place them between the healthy teeth, and position it so that it does not hurt the tongue; then let it stay like this for as long as possible, and if it becomes loose or the wire breaks, then hold it in place with another wire; thus it will remain and serve its purpose for all time, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the alignment of two healthy teeth, and two canines, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	 And when the tooth falls out, one puts it back in its place, bit by bit, as we have said; and no one should interfere who is not wise and patient, and sometimes one makes a form of a cow’s bone tooth, and places it where the defect is, and holds it as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	 of copper to fasten the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	 Another time this ligament comes from under the tongue by nature, as one is born thus; or by accident of a healed wound; and the work is such that you open the patient's mouth and have their head in your hand, and lift the tongue; then cut the nervous ligament wide, so that the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is hardness or knot, and this is from a sudden wound, then insert the hook and cut widely that ligament; and beware that the incision is not too deep, for the artery that is below; and when you have done it, lift the place with rose water and alum, or cold water, then put under the tongue a linen cloth; and let the patient lick every night, so that the place cannot heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	 And if blood continues to flow, place a vitriol plaster on the spot; and if it overcomes the flesh, cauterize with a slow cautery, which is good for this; then treat with another treatment until healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if you see that the flesh is of a dark or black color and hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is cancer; and if it tends towards a pustule, and there is moisture, apply onion, and make an incision with a fine spatula, and deliver from one side and the other; and if the flesh overcomes your work, place a vitriol plaster until it is cauterized, then return to your work until you extract everything; then lift the spot with oil and vinegar, and treat with other treatments until healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	 of the throat abscesses
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	 Sometimes there are abscesses in the throat called «godath», and they are properly called the two amygdales. And when you cure them, as we have said in the division, and if they are not healed, take care: if it is hard abscess of small sense and of gray color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	 And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron for the flow of blood; but leave it until it becomes ripe, and then you will divide it, or it would burst on its own; and if it turns white again, and the root is subtle, prepare the instrument to cut, but first look to see if the abscess is hot and soothed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	 Then make the patient sit before the sun, and his eyes be in your shadow, and he works his mouth and takes the instrument between his hands, and presses the tongue beneath it all the way to the end; and let it be of silver or fine brass, like a knife.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	 When you have pressed the tongue to the end of this instrument and you see the abscess, take the needle and insert it into the almond, and draw it strongly above as much as you can; and draw some cloths with it, then cut off with the instrument, which has the form of a forceps; however, the ends are curved, one against the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of Indian iron or steel.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	 Et si tu n'as pas cet instrument sous la main, alors coupe avec des tenailles, voici comment il faut faire :
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	 Et si tu n'as pas cet instrument sous la main, alors coupe avec des tenailles, voici comment il faut faire : soit tranchant d’une part, et de l’autre part non ; et quand tu as coupé l’une des amygdales, alors coupe l’autre de la même manière. Ensuite, fais une incision et rince la bouche du patient avec de l'eau chaude et de l'eau de vie, et si du sang coule, alors rince la bouche du patient avec de l'eau dans laquelle ont été cuites des écorces de grenades ou des feuilles de myrte, jusqu’à ce que le sang soit coagulé ; puis soigne la blessure jusqu’à ce qu’elle guérisse. Parfois, d'autres abcès apparaissent dans la gorge à côté des deux amygdales, alors coupe-les de la même manière que les deux amygdales également.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	 Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	 And the abscess was so high that it had forced out two eyes through the two openings of the nose.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	 I hastened immediately and placed one needle into one opening, then drew it out, and from it issued a great portion of pus; then I did the same in the other opening of the nose, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; after which I placed the needle into these abscesses and drained some of it, but only a little blood came out; and thus the passage of the throat was cleared for the woman, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop trimming that abscess for a long time; the abscess grew back immediately and filled the place I had emptied, until it became very large; then I cauterized it inside the throat: so it remained without growing; and I left those parts, and only God knows what became of her after me.
de l’uve	 of the grape
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	 When pus descends into the eye, and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is below and thick and round, it is called "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	 When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit, and you see that this abscess is quieted, and it is subtle, then you must cauterize it; and that which is round and not long; and it is red or purple or black, then you should avoid cutting it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	 Because there is great danger for the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	 Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its whiteness and length, you should make the patient sit before the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument which we have mentioned earlier; then insert the onion into the eye, and draw it down, and cauterize it with the two instruments that I have said in the incision of the two almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And you must not cut more than the superfluity that is beyond the natural limit; for if you cut more, it will harm the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said about the incision of the II almonds, and cure until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	 And if the patient is afraid of the cutting, then you must use ingenuity in order to calm their fear before cauterizing.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	 And the method of cautery is sharp and acute.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	 And it is that the patient puts their head in your hand, and then presses their tongue against the instrument that we have mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and pierce with a sharp, lively awl, so that it is not too thick nor too thin; and use the end of this instrument, which looks like this:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And have in the head a little hair where one puts the medicine, like the hairs of a spoon, and put the instrument with all the medicine on the eye; and let the patient lie on their side, so that the saliva and mucus run from his mouth into the medicine, so that it does not descend to the throat, and wound; then hold your hand over all the medicine and press on the eye, for a quantity of half an hour, until you see it darkened and the irritations of the medicine are soothed; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument with all the cotton into the canal above, until the cotton hardens on the eye; and do this often, until the cautery is complete, then let it dry, and it will fall off after four days or five. And if you need to restart the cautery of the medicine, then restart it, and after the cautery wipe around the eye with cotton dipped in butter, and cleanse that which is around the medicine; and let it be rinsed with cold water, and be treated with gargles until healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	 This remedy is more effective than cutting or cauterizing; if it is treated with fumigation in this manner, take calamint and hyssop and origanum and rue and camomile and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble all of them or some of them in a pot, and put ash in it, and make it boil; and the pot should be well glued with strong clay, and within the pot there should be an instrument shaped in this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	 And let it be of silver or copper, and let one of the heads be placed in the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to the eye through the nose, as long as the eye is affected; after that, repeat it often until the eye dries up, and take care not to do this at the beginning of the appearance of a hot abscess, for many things can happen; and do not do it except at the decline of a hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	 And if this instrument is not present, take a kettle and put inside it the shell of an egg, so that the patient's mouth does not get too hot; for the eggshell does not allow the vapor to harm the mouth, and this is a good cure together with salt.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	 Many times there is a bone or a fish spine stuck in the throat, or something else; therefore, you must extract what you can see, and press the tongue to the instrument, so that you see the object move; and what does not open and remains in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach; perhaps the hard object will come out with the vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of wool, or a lettuce root, or a crumb of dry bread. And tie a thread to the sponge, then swallow it; and when it reaches the place, it will hook onto it, and then you will pull it out. And if it does not come out with what we have said, then take an instrument made of lead according to this shape:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	 And let the instrument be bent at the tip so that it may enter more easily into the throat, and have the tip raised high; and take care not to touch the epiglottis, lest the tongue or the vein come; do not push in the bone; and it is better that the patient pushes the instrument, because he knows where the thing is hard; so they push downward, where they draw strongly all the instrument equally, until it is drawn out.
de la sansue de la gorge	 of the blood from the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	 Sometimes blood is treated with medicine, as I have said in the division, by medicinal treatment; and when this does not help, then look into the patient's throat towards the sun, after you have pressed the tongue against the instrument that I have told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	 And if you see blood, then draw it out with the smallest hook, or with subtle tweezers that are suited for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	 And if that does not work, take a hollow reed and insert it into the patient's throat, then insert a hot iron into the reed's opening, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	 And if the patient is thirsty all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	 Then take a full glass of cold water, open the patient's mouth, and pour it in without choking, and move it with his hand often; and as soon as the blood feels the water, it will fall.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	 And if it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafoetida, using the instrument that I have mentioned for eye fumigation; do this many times, for it will fall without delay.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	 And the method of fumigation is such that you take a pot with clear-sighted charcoal, and the lid be covered with a perforated cloth in the middle, and through that hole place the head of the instrument; then pour your fumigation, and have the patient put the end of the cane in their mouth, and close their mouth so that no smoke escapes, but goes to the phlegm; and the phlegm will now fall out, and if it does not fall, then repeat the fumigation many times; and the patient should bear thirst, and eat salty things and such, and drink no water; and then it will be necessary for her to come out through this procedure.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	 And the shape of the instrument with which one draws blood, it is, when it can be seen, similar to curved pincers for entering the throat; and let it resemble the beak of a bird of prey, and it should have the roughness of a file, so that what it takes, it cannot release; and see here the shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	 the chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	 There are many types of abscesses, as remembered hereafter in this book, and they differ in perforation and cutting; and it is in two ways, one is similar to its own appearance, and the other because it retains moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	 And the second manner is according to the places where they are on the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	 car the abscess of the head is different from that at the base, and the abscess in the fleshy part is different from that which comes to the joints, and each must be judged in its work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	 And so there are abscesses that should not be pierced until the boil is ripe according to its development; and there are those which must be pierced when they become hardened, and do not ripen according to their development, such as abscesses near the joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	 Because when abscesses come near the joints, and one lets it be until it is rotten around, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint may become corrupted, which causes constriction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	 When the abscess is near the principal member, and if you delay perforation until it is ripe, it will harm the principal member; when it is near the anus, it should be perforated as soon as it is ripe; and one should not perforate a newly formed abscess before digestion is complete, except for that which is near the anus, lest it becomes worse and deeper, and causes a fistula; and it cannot heal quickly.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	 And you should know the time for perforating an abscess that is ripe according to its completion, and this is when the pain is relieved, and the fever subsides, and the redness and swelling decrease, and there is a change in the appearance of the abscess head, and other signs; and you should make the incision where the abscess is most dependent, and where it has opened up; and let the incision be long along the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all places where there is no folding.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	 In those that bend, according to that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	 And when the abscess is in fleshy tissue, it is better that you leave the perforation until it is healed with complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	 For if you open it before that, the body will be longer filled with its poison, and it is full of much filth; and perhaps the edges and depths of it will harden.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	 And if there is any abscess that needs to be opened according to the width of the body, according to what the limb requires.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	 And it is necessary that you bring in small abscesses, small holes; and in large abscesses, large holes, and many incisions according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where you need to remove the core, and cover; when it is fully developed like linen, and it is dead, it is necessary to do as with buboes: and if there are those that are divided into three angles, and if there are those from which one cuts like a myrtle leaf, as abscesses of the anus; and if there are those where one makes a round cut, and other cuts and similar incisions.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	 That which has no head, such as a superficial abscess, it must be pierced completely. And when the abscess is large and has gathered much pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all of the pus in that hour, but only some; then pack the abscess with wool until the next day, then draw out something again; do this many times from great to small, until all the pus is released. Similarly if the patient is weak, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old decrepit man.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	 For the spirit jumps sometimes with the exit of the pus, which may cause the patient to die, and you will not notice it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, and when you have perceived your abscess, then wash the wound, and look if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a plain cut, then apply linen or old cotton bandages; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, then you must insert a bandage into each one so that they come against each other; and if you have cut into the abscess and removed a piece of skin, then you must fill it with old cotton or lint without moisture, and bind it until the third day; then remove it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	 And if bleeding occurs in your work, then bring cold and easy water, and moisten the cloth, and place it on the bleeding area many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the bleeding persists, then bring governance and care, and the powders that I have said in less quantity in this book, and if it is in winter and the place of the abscess is very nervous, then you must place on tents and cloths moistened with wine and hot oil; and if it is in summer and the place is fleshy, then you must place on cloths moistened with water and oil, or wine and cold oil, up to the third day, as we have said; and then uncover the abscess and dry and treat it, as it should be, until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	 And it is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses: now I have told you how one should proceed in the treatment of abscesses, and see here the chapter.
des soros	 of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	 Where the head has small abscesses, and they are similar to us in that they are in clusters, like the bristles of a hedgehog, and there are many similar ones.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	 There are fatty ones and such that have moisture like pustules; and there are such that are hard and stony to the touch, and there is no doubt if the surgeon does not make a mistake.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	 And the work of the cutting is such that you should try every instrument that is called an "incision tool," from which the form comes hereafter, whatever it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	 If it contains moisture, then open it from above the long [bone].
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	 And when the moisture is emptied, then scrape off without leaving any skin that contains this moisture, for it returns immediately if anything is left there; then soak cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is available; if not, in water and salt, and fill the wound with it, and leave it until the next day; and this will cure those who have been affected by the night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then renew the cotton, as before, on the second day and the third, until you know well that nothing remains of the night; then treat the wound with ointment suitable for this purpose, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	 And if the abscess holds the eye (or vision), then cut according to this form, along the length; and throw in your onions, and skin it from all sides, and put all your care into drawing out the force from beneath where it lies; and if the surgeon does something contrary, then do as I have told you afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	 And do likewise for the abscess if it is pious (or purulent), and in cutting and caring as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	 And cut over the purulent and moist abscess, for it is lighter, because they contain little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	 And if there are any of these abscesses that have no moisture at the top, like those abscesses that I cut at the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess as hard as a stone, rough and white, and it could not be broken; and if one were to strike against it, one would cause as much injury as with a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	 In other abscesses coming to the head, except those that come to the heads of children and the roots of the ears, the opening should always be in the most dependent place, so that the pus may exit; and treat it as needed.
des scrophules	 of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	 Often this abscess occurs on the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes it comes to other parts of the body, and they are very numerous, and they are interconnected with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	 And each scrofula is specifically inside its own shell, like the nut and the head abscess, as we have said; and there are many similarities to these scrofulas.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	 There are some that contain moisture, and there are also malignant ones that do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	 en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, and it is similar in color to the body, and soft from all sides and not harsh on the nerves of the neck or the artery or the duct, and not deep; then you must cut it from above, and scrape from each side, and extend the two lips of the heart to the corners, if you need it, as we have said in abscesses of the head; and draw little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or vein, and let the scalpel be neither too sharp nor cutting, so that the hand does not slip, and do not move too far forward, lest you cut something you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	 And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not stop bleeding, then put in the wound vitriol powder, or some powders that staunch blood, and bind the wound; and leave it until the abscess is soothed, and the wound is softened, and begins to putrefy.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	 And when the blood is staunched, return to your work until you complete it; then check with your finger if there remain any small scrofula, and cut and clean them away.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	 And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, it is not necessary to cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it fall by itself, without harm; then fill the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then cure.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	 And if you cut all the scrofula, then it is necessary that you join the two lips of the wound, and sew them together now, since there is no longer any excess due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	 it is necessary that you attend to cutting the root of it, and pull strongly, and sew as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Those scrofulae that have superfluity, pierce there where it appears dark; and pierce in the same way as the one previously mentioned, hanging down, then introduce bandages with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, cure it with enchanting flesh ointment until it is healed.
de squinance	 of scurvy
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	 The ancients spoke and discussed the cutting of the throat; but I have never seen anyone in our land who did it, and this is written according to their word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	 For those who have scurvy, it is necessary to remove the cleft of the throat called "epiglottis"; and do not use this method because all the veins and the mouth of the patient are hot due to abscesses in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both tonsils.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	 When the disease is in the channel of the throat, it is necessary to cut off the epiglottis to avoid death from suffocation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	 Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, we must make the incision below three or four small rings, between two rings or by the size of the tracheal incision, not in the cartilage; and those places are suitable for the section of the epiglottis because there is no bone, and the vessels are long. )))
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	 And if the master is afraid, it is necessary that he extend the skin of the throat to all the neck, then split the heart until it reaches the throat; and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see anything, then cut the sinew, as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the vein of the throat which jumps forth through the place that is broken, and by the loss of voice; and leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when the time has passed in which strangulation is feared, join the two lips of the heart's wound, and sew it all alone without a bandage; then administer medicines that produce flesh until it heals.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	 Albucasis said that one should not do this until the throat is completely filled, and the patient is judged to be dead, and there is a lack of breath.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	 Then the epiglottis is cut so that the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus he is saved from death; and therefore the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the harm of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and cure it, until it was cured; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	 I saw that a young lady took a knife and thrust it into her throat, and cut part of the hollows of the larynx; and I was called to cure her, and found her as if she were dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	 I discovered the wound, and found that blood had come out of it, although it had not struck a vein or artery other than the throat, and the wind was coming out strongly through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	 I hurried and sewed the wound, and treated it until it healed; and no harm came to the damsel except that she was hoarse of voice, and afterwards returned to her normal state; therefore I say that in the cutting of the epiglottis there should be no fear.
de la grosse gorge	 of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	 This abscess is called "hernia of the throat," and it is a great abscess in the color of jet, and it is very common in women; and there are two kinds: natural, and accidental; in the natural kind there is no fever.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 And the accident is according to two manners, of which one resembles grass on us, and the other manner resembles an abscess that comes from our artery; and there is fear, and it is not right to work with fire except in the small one, and prove and search throughout the intromission: if you find it as we do with grass, and it does not hurt any vein, then cut it off, as we cut the nose, and draw all its cover, if there is any; and seek well early, and cure it as it should be, until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	 of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	 Many manners are of us, of which I will say all the resemblances; and now it is necessary that I say all the difference that is between grass and discharge.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	 I say that the issue occurs along with fever and heat until the swelling passes and the suppuration is complete; then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	 With the knot there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains the pus, which is its own sac and matches the color of the body, and begins like a blister, and grows large; and they are of two kinds, either thick or thin, and many colors as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	 It is necessary, when you come to the cure of the knot, that you try and probe first with all the instruments which are called "introducers," according to what their shape will be in the chapter which follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	 And the manner of the examination of abscesses is that you take the moistest place you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little, until you know that the instrument has reached the heart, according to the size of the abscess; then remove the probe, and be careful not to let it jump out.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	 If the flowing moisture stops, and if it has color, then puncture it as I have said for other abscesses; and if after the probe no more moisture comes out, know that it is fatty, so then puncture it crosswise, and take it with tweezers, and lightly scrape it from each side, and watch the cloth where it lies to draw it out cleanly with the thread; and if you cannot draw it out cleanly, then remove it in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	 Car if anything remains there, the nose will return many times; and if a little remains and the flesh is inflamed, then fill the wound with some corrosive powders, and bind the wound, and apply soothing things to the hot abscess, and perform other treatments until it heals; and if the nose is large, then sew the two lips of the wound, and treat it as one would with gangrenous flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	 and if the vein is pulsating against you or otherwise, then hurry and fill the place with broiled vitriol, and leave it for two days or three, until the wound putrefies, and the blood boil ceases; then return to the copper that remains of the nose.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	 Here are the forms of the instruments used for insertion, and there are three types: large, medium, and small; and there are three squares called "albaret", and one called "breb", and there are also three types: large, medium, and small, to surround the fistula abscesses; and they are like the needles used to sew sorceries, and they are made of yellow brass, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow in color are worth more, and they are more proven for dipping in black lead to surround the fistula abscesses; and there are three types: large, medium, and small, according to the width of the holes.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	 The shapes of onions are very diverse, as you can see here: large, medium, and small; there are also onions that have two curves in three different ways; and there are onions that have three curves, also in three different ways; and there are onions that have two curves, and single-curved onions, all in three different ways; and all these are necessary for their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	 The heads of these instruments are sharpened, and among them are those that cut only from one side, with which we peel the noses, lest we cut the vein or nerve; and these instruments include the retractors called handles, so that the patient does not perceive them when opening abscesses. They come in three sizes: large, small, and medium, as you see; and they are used only on fleshy parts, such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar places. Sometimes a smaller instrument is made, resembling the sheaths of arrows, like this, with which we staunch blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	 and it is sometimes placed at the site that heals quickly of veins, and of arteries, and sometimes they return according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	 Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, so much that they seem like women's breasts; and they remain unsightly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them must follow this form according to these lines from .b. to .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	 then scrape off the fat, and fill the wound with medicine containing meat, then join the two lips of the wound with stitches, and care for it until it is healed; and if the breast hangs down and is softened by its size as happens to women, then make two cuts above on either side, through two similar slits; so that one may adhere to the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. to this line .g.; then scrape off the skin between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powder, and whatever is necessary for the care, until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision is not completely done, because the patient does not want to rest, or for the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in caustic ointment; and leave it until it has consumed the remainder and the fat, then care for it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	 from the abscesses of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	 This abscess that comes from under the armpits is like hard scrofula with ribs, and some contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	 Therefore, those that contain moisture should be cut according to this shape, from line .b. to line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when all the pus that is in the abscess has been emptied, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day; then remove all the cotton, and treat with appropriate ointment until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	 And if the abscess is like scrofula, cut it as we have said in the treatment of scrofula, and if the wound releases pus, apply cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	 of the cutting/tearing of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	 When the artery is cut and the skin above it is stitched, often abscesses form. This also happens with an inflamed vein and abscess; and you can tell if it's due to the artery, because the abscess is long and deep. And when you touch it with your fingers, you feel constriction. And when it's due to the vein, the reason becomes apparent; and it's foolish to cut this abscess, especially when it's under the soles of the feet, in the groins, in the neck, and in many other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 It is therefore necessary to avoid the treatment with iron, and whoever has it in their head should also avoid it, and for one suffering from swelling of an artery, make a long incision in the skin; then work on the incision at the corners, and separate the artery from the skin, until it is exposed; then insert below it a needle and make it go through to the other side, and tighten the artery with two threads in two places, as I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries which are in the temples; then stitch up the place between the two threads with an intromitter until the pus comes out that is there, and the abscess will be relieved; then administer treatment like a boil, until the thread falls off; then treat it with ointments appropriate to this, until it heals; and if the abscess is due to the cutting of the vein, you must take in your hand what you can of the abscess to all the skin, then insert the needle below the place you hold in your hand, and make it go through, and let there be a double thread, so that you draw it out on the other side; then tie up the abscess, as I have said, with the end of one of the two threads to the two ends of the filaments; and if you doubt that the thread will come out too much, insert another needle all along one thread below all the abscess at the first incision, and tighten the threads in four places; then cut the abscess until the excess comes out, then cut the excess skin and leave what is tied up; then put on a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil, then apply treatments of bandages and ointments until it heals.
des apostemes des ners	 of abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	 Just like abscesses come in the artery and in the vein, abscesses come in the nerves when they are cut, or due to too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	 And this happens more often in the shoulders and in the arms, and in all places where there are joints, and these are very severe abscesses, and their color resembles the color of the body, and it is in many dispositions without pain; and when it is pressed firmly, then the patient feels pain, and it is not at all in the depth of the flesh, but below the skin; and it moves well from all sides, and does not go forward or backward, nor down or up, and those which are in joints should not be cut with iron: lest a contraction may occur; and those which are on the head or forehead, make an opening for the spatula.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the abscess is small, hold it with tongs and cut it at its root; and if it is large, suspend it on an awl, scrape it, then remove and close the wound with stitches, and cure it until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	 of hanging large abscesses
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	 Sometimes it happens in the belly and nowhere else, and it is a disease called "fungus" because of its resemblance to them, and it has subtle roots, and a large head; and there are small ones and very large ones; and I saw a man who had two in his belly that were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had thin roots, and were always oozing moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	 I cut them and found one weighing eighteen ounces, and the other six, and the work in the incision is such that you should observe if the patient is moist, and the color of the joint is pale and moist and of subtle root; thus, cut with a broad spatula, and let the cautery be near the fire.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	 For often in cutting there is too much bleeding and if the wound bleeds too much then hasten to cauterize; and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the iron incision, take a well-made linen thread and bind the joint as we have said, and leave it for two days; and then restrain [the patient], and do not stop pulling the linen thread until you cut the joint, and it will come out without difficulty; and if the roots are large, there is fear in cutting itself for the belly, but you can well cut half of it, then cauterize so that it does not return; then treat the wound, and be careful not to cut the ligament which is of dark color and poor sensation and milky appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	 Because it is an encrusted abscess, I will come to the treatment of the chancre hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	 when the swelling is strong
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	 If the appearance of the swelling comes from a burn or a cut on the body, and it is on the belly and in some of the scrotum, as happens with other rotations, either from blood coming out of veins or arteries according to what was said before, or from windiness; and if it is due to the rotation of the intestine and the exit of the bladder, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a minor thing without pain, and it opens in different ways.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	 And if it is due to the exit of the intestine, then it is even more diverse; and when one presses it with his fingers, it swells up, and then returns, and perhaps becomes hard, and greatly increases at the entrance of the bath and from great labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	 Et si c'est par moisteur, c'est chose legiere, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne l'en contrains mie; et si c'est par sanc, si apert par ces signes que l'aposteme est gros et dur, et il est fichie selon une certaine quantite; et si c'est par ventositeit, il est doux au toucher, et l'ouvrage est tel que tu regardes si les apparences sont dues au sang de l'artère, ou de la veine, ou de la ventositeit.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	 Et li sancs delivre et le mal en va.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	 Qui veut estraindre les oelz quant il fait son caueterie de feu.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	 And if the appearance is due to intestines or bladder, then you must instruct the patient to hold his thigh, and lie straight; then sign all around the abscess; then command him to rest calmly between your hands, then go around the place that you have signed with all the pus; then extend half of the abscess above onto the large hook; then tie it around with a strong thread, or a strong silk cord firmly, and let the knot of the thread be secure; then work the half of the abscess extended on the thread, and put your index finger in, and seek the intestine; if you find it caught by the thread, then untie it, and push the intestine out from the belly; and if you find the bladder, then take it with the hook, and cut off the excess; and if the instrument or the vein does something against you, then go well around, then return to your work and take two needles, and put two strong threads through them, and push the two needles through what you have done in a cross that you have punctured; then press the abscess in four places on the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the place until it rots, and let the dead flesh fall by itself; or you cut it when it is subtilized and rotten, then cure it as needed, and heal the abscess as we have said; and draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the place as needed, and close the place.
dou chancre	 of cancer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	 We have said in the division the similarities of cancer, and how one should work with medicines therein, and how one should avoid the cure of iron; and we say that cancer develops in the flesh, and great care is needed in the cure, and the ancients said that when the cancer is in a place where it can be scraped off, such as cancer in the breasts, and in the thigh, and similar places, one should remove it all when it is in its beginning; and when it is large and old, then you should not approach it, for I have never seen anyone cured of it; nor has anyone ever been cured before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the work, when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you first purge the patient of black bile; then make him fast if he has obvious fullness, then put the patient in a good place to perform the work; then cast your nails on the cancer, and scrape from all sides, and remove from all sides without leaving anything; and let the blood run freely, and press well the place with your hand or any object, and if the flow of blood hinders you from incising the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the blood is stopped; then cure by another method until he is healed.
de ydropisie	 Of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	 We have already said in the division the resemblances of dropsy, and in what manner the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each resemblance, and the cure which is made by medicines, and that which is cured by iron: this is only in the case of "eclites"; and one should not touch with iron in these two resemblances: namely, tympanites and hydrops, for it is a deadly thing; therefore, when you treat this resemblance of dropsy which is called "eclites" by medicines, and the cure does not help, then look if the patient is weak, or if he has another disease besides dropsy, such as diarrhea and similar things; then do not touch with iron, for there is danger; and if you see the patient of strong constitution, and he has no other disease but dropsy alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you should act thus: lift the patient upright in your hands, and the assistant presses the stomach by pushing the water to the lowest part of the foot, then take the pointed lancet according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	 Et soit tranchant de deux parties.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	 a point, and yet it should not be so sharp that when inserted, it can reach the intestines and injure them; then observe if the dropsy is towards the intestines: in this case, you must make an incision above the navel three fingers' width to the right of the pubic bone; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, your incision should be on the left side; and if it is due to spleen enlargement, it should be on the right; and it is not necessary for the patient to lie on the incision so that the superfluidities do not run to this weak place; then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and push it in, and lift your hand along with the entire layer between the skin and the membrane as if peeling, to the quantity of a nail or around it; then pierce the membrane until the layer comes to the expected place, which is the watery place; then draw out the instrument strongly, and insert this instrument whose form I have described:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	 And it is similar to a silver needle of fine quality, and it is made of lightweight brass or copper; and on the lower part there is one small hole; and on one side, three holes; and two on the other side, and one on another side; and the head is cut like a quill, and this is the shape of the incision which the scribes use to cut the quill:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	 on the top is the air hole, so that when the instrument comes to the water, it rises immediately onto the instrument; empty then half or one-third of it, because if you empty more than necessary in that hour, perhaps the patient will die from the resolution of his spirit due to the weapon, or he falls into a coma, or approaches death; but empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the patient's virtue signify, and his pulse; then draw the instrument and retain the water, and it is retained now by the cork that stops the hole which is on the syphon, about which I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then renew the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering from this, and draw a small amount of water; do this every day, and be careful not to overdo it so that only a little water remains.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	 And if you doubt the patient, and you leave much water in him, then cure him with hot sand or charcoal, and by sweating profusely in a bath and in the sun, and let him drink wine; and cure him with desiccative medicines until he is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach, on the liver, and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	 of the impediment of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	 Sometimes children are born without a hole in the penis, or with a small hole, or one that is not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	 Then it must be pierced immediately so that he does not have to wait until puberty; the tool must be very fine, like this:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	 Then place in the hole a subtle plug of linden wood, and bind it and hold it thus for III days or IV, and when one wishes to make urine, let the plug be removed, and make urine, and then put it back; and perhaps it is not necessary, for the urine that comes out freely does not leave a plug.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	 Those whose hole is small should be treated with the linden wood plug, as we have said, and it will widen.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	 Those whose hole is not in its place are injured, for some are born with the hole at the tip of the penis, preventing them from urinating forward unless they lift their penis up; and they cannot copulate because the matter cannot reach the womb, and this is a serious illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the manner of the work is such that the patient lies face up on his back, then extend the head of the penis and the foreskin as much as the length of a feather, so that the opening is centered in the middle, as it should be; and beware of bleeding that occurs frequently, and if it happens, stanch it like one who staunches blood, and heal the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	 Of the pimples on the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Often these pimples appear on the penis, and it is an ugly appearance of flesh; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; therefore you must take them with a fine needle, and cut and clean all of them, then put on moistened cotton in Egyptian ointment; then cure it with ointment of laudanum until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	 And if the bath is malignant, with foul color and stench, then you must bring cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	 When you have struck it, and if the bath is in part on the stick, and has part within the skin and part outside, then you must first remove the bath that is within; and when it is healed, then treat the one outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 For when you treat them together, it is not certain that the head of the stick will not be pierced, and there will be blackening and corruption in the stick and in the joint; therefore one must cut away all that is blackened and corrupted, then apply a plaster of honey and flour made from the bark of pomegranates and beans, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	 And if the flow of blood continues, bring the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	 The cautery helps in two conditions together: that is to say, for the flow of blood and for corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary that you insert into the channel of the penis a lead tube, and the patient urinates through it; and when the hair at the head of the penis, which happens in those who have not been circumcised, happens due to wound or abscess, it is then necessary that you scrape it with one curved instrument until the connection is released and the head of the penis is freed on all sides; and if it is a serious matter to discuss this, it is necessary that you scrape with one small spatula some part of the head of the penis and the skin; then gently separate between two, and place one fine linen cloth moistened in cold water there, so that it does not swell again.
de la circoncision	 of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	 Circumcision is not the separation of continuity like other wounds; however, when we perform this work voluntarily, especially on children, it is necessary to do the best and lightest work for healing.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	 I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcising their children, for they do not practice it in their law, and we only know what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	 For I have seen the majority of masters and surgeons performing circumcision in Al-Dal, and with force, and all at once on a newborn; thus the heart flees because there are two layers, and by chance if one cuts the upper layer, the lower one remains.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	 Or the healing is delayed, and the pain is doubled, and at the amputation from the shoulder it is not certain whether the tip of the member will be preserved; and at the amputation of the nail by chance the iron may slip away, and the work will run, and many times they are born in such a way that there is no need for amputation.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	 From the amputation done at the fleshy part of the thigh, I have found the benefit of the experiment, for the flesh cuts just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 For when you press your hand and cut equally throughout the entire duration; but let the flesh be well tightened around the skin; and let the manner of the first operation be such that you make the child think, if it understands, that you are only doing to tie the thread around the penis; then comfort him in all ways you can; then hold him straight between your hands, and return the foreskin between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see it, nor any of the instruments; then place your hand on the penis and blow into the foreskin, and pull it up until the head of the penis is in; then clean it well of the accumulated filth, then bind the place tightly with a double thread, then tie it under one finger to another thread; and hold it between the two threads by the second knot at the little finger and ring finger, and cut between the two threads, then lift the foreskin quickly and pull the head of the penis out; then let the blood flow drop by drop, for this is the cure; and apply powder on top and top with a cloth stuck with an egg yolk cooked in rose water, mixed with good and fresh rose oil, and leave it until the next day, and treat with other treatments until healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	 The shapes of the forces for the anointing are like this: the two heads should be thin and sharp, and the heads should also be as large as the hands equally.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	 The error in the anointing is when the heart inside flees from the incision; then you must extend it to your fingernail, lest the place make an abscess; and cut equally, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then hold it with tongs, and then cut.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	 And if they pass three days, and what is under the foreskin is swollen, then leave it until that abscess is calmed down, and lightly scrape off the scab; cut as you can move, and beware of the part of the foreskin, for it will not harm him at all.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Cure therefore the place of sudden wounds with powder, as we have said in the treatment of powders, and if you cut into the heart more than necessary, and it goes further, it will not harm; cure it then, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	 about retaining urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	 The retention of urine is due to a stone in the bladder, or frozen blood, or bone, or dead flesh, or similar things, as we have said in the division; and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to the stone being in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over his knees; and let his feet be placed on his back, and extend his belly from the part above the back, and let the patient hold his breath as long as he can; and then the neck of the bladder is constrained to expel the stone upward, which releases the urine; and if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction with all the instrument that is called a "syringe," the shape of which is thus: and let it be of fine silver, lightly drawn, like the feather of a bird; and let the tube be one and a half palms long, and let it be fine at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	 And the manner of the urine exiting is such that you take a double thread, and tie it to the head of a wool or cotton bag, and insert the head of the thread into the syringe; and cut off the excess of the cloth and push it to the tip of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg white, and make the patient sit on a seat, and wash the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and warm water; then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then fold the penis back towards the scrotum; then push the syringe forward into the bladder, and the patient feels it approaching the empty space, which is not done unless the channel through which it passes is crooked; then draw out the thread with all the wool bag by bag, and the urine follows the wool, then remove the syringe, and let the urine flow; and repeat with the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	 Of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	 When there are scratches or blood in the bladder, and there is pus collected, and you want to apply distilled water and medicines, do so with all the instrument called a “clepsydra,” and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	 It is closed and has three holes: two on one side and one on the other, as you can see. The place through which the medicine passes should be such that it well stops up the tube without addition, so that no moisture can come out, and push when necessary; and when you want to put your medicines into the bladder, put the end of the enema in the water, and draw with the enema inside. This way, you will draw the moisture into the enema bag, and then push it back strongly inside. The moisture will enter, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it; and this is the form of the subtle enema used for enema on the bladder: here it is:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	 And it is of silver or horn, and the head is higher; and under the breast where the band falls; then take a sheep's bladder and put in the moisture with which you wish to enema the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts strongly with a double thread, and heat the pouch with that moisture on the fire; then insert the head of the enema into the pipe, then press your hand on the bladder so that all the moisture flows evenly, until the patient feels that the moisture has come to the bladder; and if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make a circle from it, and pierce it neatly around; then insert a strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle like an ale cup, and put inside what you wish of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you have done with the bladder, to press with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	 of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	 We have already said in the division the manners of stone, and extraction together with medicines; and I said the difference between the rainy bladder stones, and all the signs, and which stones one should work on cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	 I say that the stones which are conceived in the bladder happen more often to children, and it is a sign that the water jumps from the bladder similar to fine water; and there is sand in the urine, and it swells the patient's penis, and he urinates frequently, then it stops; and after many of these jumps the foundation is laid; and the healing of children is easy until they are four years old, and it is very grave for the elderly, and it is moderate for those who are between youth and old age; and the treatment is easier for those who have large stones than for those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	 And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient with an enema, in order to draw out all the feces that are in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	 For it sometimes gets in the way of seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	 Then take the patient by the feet and tilt them downwards, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder and sometimes comes out on its own; then have him sit between your hands, and let his hands rest under his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely inclined downwards; then search for it and touch inside; if you feel the stone in the area, hasten now to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	 And if it does not fall out upon being touched, then moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger, if the patient is an adolescent; and insert it into his anus, and search for the stone, and when you feel it at your finger, draw it to the neck of the bladder; then press upon it with your finger, and push it out where you wish to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	 And instruct the servant to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to extend the testicles upwards with his right hand, and with his left hand remove the skin that is below the testicles in the part where the cut is made; then insert the spatula, this is its shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	 And make an incision between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side of the vein; and let it be straight over the stone, and your two fingers should always be at the anus, and the cut should go across so that it is wide outside, and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large; perhaps this will cause the stone to jump out without effort; and know that there are stones with angles and edges: these are eager to come out; and there are those which are below, similar to a hazelnut, and round, whose exit is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	 For those with corners and edges, make the cut larger; and if it does not leap out, then you must use pincers which are like a file at the top to tightly squeeze the stone so that it does not escape; or push underneath it a subtle curved instrument at the top; and if you cannot deceive it thus, then widen the hole through which it passed, and if the flesh tears, constrict it with vitriol; and if there are more than one stones, first push the largest into the bladder's neck, then cut above it, then draw it strongly out, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are many.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	 And if it is very large, you must sew it and make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	 When two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or urine flows constantly where the wound cannot heal; nevertheless, strive to pull it out, or crush it with pincers, until you extract it in pieces; and when you have completed your work, then fill the wound with frankincense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bandage it, and place a damp cloth on top infused with oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then bind the patient on his neck, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when you untie it, wash the place very well with oil and water, then treat it with a fine ointment and a basilica ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	 And if there are abscesses or corrosions and congealing of blood in the bladder, and by this urine is retained which exits with the urine: then thrust your finger into the wound and draw out that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and make it rotten; afterwards lift the wound with water and honey and oil, and assist him in all ways you know until he is healed; and it is necessary that every time you treat him, you bind both thighs, and apply medicines to the place.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	 And if the stone is small and it is in the urethra and lodged therein, and urine cannot pass; then treat it as I have said before: cut open the urethra many times, and you will be excused from further cutting due to this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	 I have already proven this to be so.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	 Take an iron rod according to this shape and let it be fixed at three angles on one coal:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	 Then take a thread and tie it around the rod under the stone so that it cannot go back into the bladder; then push the rod into the urethra lightly, until it reaches the stone; and turn the rod in your hand inside the stone bit by bit, until you can pierce through the other side of the stone; then urine will come out immediately, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the urethra.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 It is then immediately broken and ejected with the urine, and the patient is cured; and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie a thread under the stone and another above it, then make an incision in the urethra between the two threads, then pull strongly, and untie the string, and clean the congealed blood that is in the wound; and heal it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	 of the women's stone
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	 Rarely does the stone become lodged in women, and if it happens, the cure is difficult, and it is prevented by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows herself well enough to reveal to the doctors, especially when she is modest.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	 And the third manner is that perhaps one cannot find a woman well-versed in this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that the stone in a woman is more profound than the stone in a man, for which reason a deeper incision must be made, and there is great fear. And if necessity requires it, you must take a skilled midwife, and such is rarely found, and if you cannot find one, do not seek a subtle male doctor; and present her with a wise old woman in the ways of women, or a woman who knows some part of the art, and instruct her to do what you command regarding the search for the stone; and take great care if the woman is a virgin: then she must insert her finger into the anus and search for the stone; and if she finds it, she must constrain it under her finger, and she should be advised to insert her finger into the vagina of the patient, and seek and press her left hand strongly on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	 If she finds it, she must move it from grain to grain from the entrance of the bladder downwards, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then strike against the stone at the root of the thigh towards the middle of the con, where it is more prepared, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her finger above or below the stone, and let the cut be small at first; then push the reed into the cut, if you feel the stone so tightly that it can come out strongly, and know that there are many types of stones: that is to say, small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and some with furrows.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	 If you know its similarities to understand its outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	 And if the blood overcomes you, put vitriol ointment in its place, and hold it for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your work until the stone is out, and have the instruments I told you about for extracting stones in humans to help you with your work; and if the blood overcomes you, and it is from the cut artery, put the powder on the spot and bind with cloths and bandages, and do not attempt this again, and leave the stone alone, and do not pull it out, lest the patient die; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	 And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the place is darkened, return to your work until the stone is out.
de hernie carnouse	 de hernia carnalis
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	 of hernia aquosa is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or white sap beneath the skin of the testicles, which contains the sperm; and it is called «sap», and sometimes it is properly in the cloth of the sperm, so that one thinks it is another sperm; and this is the skin of the testicle between the white sap that we have said; and these do not happen unless there is a pox.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	 And the origin of this hernia is from weakness in the testicles, and that matter is spread.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	 And sometimes it comes from a blow to the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: either it is yellowish, or redless, or black, or watery white, and this happens most often; and these are the signs to recognize this gathering, for if it is in the white sap that we have said, then the abscess is reasonable, a long pox like the figure of an egg, and the testicle does not open, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	 And if there is moisture in the proper cloth, then the abscess is round with one part of the egg, and for this reason it is thought to be another egg; and if the moisture is between the leather of the kidskin and the white silk, then it is felt well; therefore, when you wish to know the color of the moisture, prove all the introduced instrument, from which the form is made before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	 According to what follows after the introduction, judge that which is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when we cure it with iron, the patient must be bled according to his power and the fullness of his body; then place him on his back, on something not too high, and put many cloths under him; then sit on his left side, and command the assistant to sit on the right, and extend the rod along one of the two ribs near the kidneys; then take the small spatula, and cut through the leather of the kidney lengthwise down to the groin, and let your incision be perfectly straight in dividing the leather of the kidney up to the white silk, and peel it carefully as best you can; then pierce the silk with water through a wide hole, and drain all the water, and then put your fingers, and lift the silk upward; but do not touch the kidney itself, only the silk; cut off or in pieces equally the rib on him carefully, for if you do not cut it skillfully, the water will return; and if the egg jumps forcefully at your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the silk; then sew together the two lips of the kidney with a stitch, then cure it as other wounds, until he is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	 Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie,
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	 Et si copes la premiere partie com tu as dit; et puis met sur la plaie un pan de laine mouillé en vin, et puis un pan de laine sec, et l'asserres sus au plus près que tu pourras.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	 Et se tu ne veus mie faire la taille de leu, si met le cautere par dehors sus les coions, et soit eschaufez tout ainsi com nos avons dit.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	 And strike in every way that you can, until you reach everything; and take care that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more healthy; and beware of incisions bleeding and wounds caused by cutting; and if anything goes against you, whether it be an abscess or bleeding or something else, then cure what goes against you, according to what was said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	 And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this work because of its horribleness, then introduce perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are certain through the indications we have said that aquous pus is there, make the patient sit on a raised seat; pierce the abscess in the lower part with all the wide spatula, and place the perforation along the length of the body; and let the holes be wide, so that all the water flows out; then put cotton on the spot, and bind it, and leave to drain the remaining water, then treat until the wound is healed; and if the white cloth does not allow the water to exit at the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a feather or the instrument used to draw water from hydrophobics, whose form we mentioned before; and enlarge the opening of the wound, and know that the water will return, and it will be collected after six months or around that time, and when it is collected as before, and thus the patient will pass his days.
de l’aposteme des coions	 of the pustules of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	 Know that in the cutting of this vein there is fear in many situations, which is why it seems better to leave it alone; and I will tell you about the work and the characteristics of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	 Therefore, I say that many abscesses come in the body, and especially in the testicles; and this is very common.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	 This is to say, by an acute and feverish superfluity that is spread to the testicles, or from blows; and the color of the abscess varies according to the color of the body; and it does not feel pain, and the abscess is serious; and sometimes there are serious abscesses that are pus-filled and yellowish in color, and sometimes they come from a knot in an artery, or from swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	 When it is by swelling of the artery, it is known by the hot abscess, when you press it against your fingers; and you should not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	 He who is made of swelling of the vein is known by its disposition at the touch of the fingers, and one can well make an incision on this appearance, and on other signs; and it is that you cut the heart of the abscess, then lift the egg up, and draw out the white pus, and deliver the pouch from all around the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	 If the egg is already solidified with these signs, then it is necessary that you draw out the egg and cut; and if there is air in the pus, or in those who are inside the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver all of this air, and cut roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	 And if the base of the flesh is at the back, then you must cut it all, and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when your work is done, fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	 of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	 This is an abscess wrapped in a covering similar to a bud, accompanied by the softening of the testicles, and the patient feels very ill when he goes; and the cure for this disease is almost as dangerous as the one mentioned above, nevertheless we will tell you its work according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	 It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a high seat, then wrap the suspenders of the testicles down to your toes, over all the vessels near the penis, and hold them firmly, stretching them out; then cut with a sharp spatula wide across the vessels, until they are exposed, then scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples; then insert a needle where there is double thread, and tie it to the first place where the vein came, and tie again to the other end; then cut straight through the middle according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupt fluids; then treat the wound like others where one does not lose any vessels; because by this there is no harm, and if the veins come in all the vessels, it is necessary to draw out the testicles for all the vessels; so that the birds do not lose their nutrition due to the incision of the vessels, dry up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	 of the rupture of the sinus
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	 The cause of this rupture is due to the cutting or stretching in the abdomen, specifically in the area of the flanks, which causes the intestines to descend from that rupture into one of the testicles; and this rupture occurs either in the sinus or in the stretching of it, and these two types occur for many reasons: from a blow, from a jump, from a fall, from lifting a heavy weight, and similar things; and the sign when it is due to the stretching of the sinus is that it happens gradually, over a long time, and does not come suddenly; and the abscess is even up to its deepest part, because the sinus presses against the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	 And the sign is when it is from the section of the abdomen, it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscess appears diverse, beneath the skin, and this is due to the exit of the intestine and the body from the abdomen.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	 And sometimes the coils go with the intestine, and are retained therein, causing great pain for the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	 And in these cures of iron, there is fear, therefore one must avoid it.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	 And the manner of working is such that you instruct the patient to move the intestine into his hand within the wound, if he can reach it; then let him lie down on his back between your hands, and raise his thighs; then press the heart above, and cut all the skin of the testicles lengthwise; then insert the hooks of the waist inwards according to what you need to open the wound, and let it be such that the feces can exit; then peel off the abdomen that is beneath the skin of the testicles, so that the white abdomen becomes hard and is exposed on all sides; then insert your finger into that which follows the testicle, in that which is between the white abdomen that is beneath the skin of the egg, and between the second abdomen, and separate what is behind the egg, and between the second abdomen; and then move to the right hand within the heart of the testicles, and raise the white abdomen up to your left hand, and lift the egg with all the abdomen towards the waist; and instruct the assistant to extend the egg upwards, and loosen what is tied behind the binding; and check with your fingers if there is any part of the intestine wrapped around the hard white abdomen, and if you find anything, push it down into the belly beneath; then take a needle with a thread made of 10 filaments, each consisting of 10 threads, and insert it into the rear part of the abdomen, which is after the skin of the testicles; after the waist, then cut the heads that appear from the threads, so that there are four threads; then assemble them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and bind the abdomen, which we have said is beneath the skin of the testicles, with a strong thread of two parts; then wrap the heads of the threads, and bind them firmly with two parts, so that no servant who tends to it can enter into the holes, where an abscess may come; and put the thread again according to the first long thread, and after these two threads leave the abdomen that is beneath the heart of the testicles the width of a finger; and after everything else according to the roundness that the egg carries; then cut in the part that is beneath the skin of the testicles, so that the urine flows and the feces, as we have said before; then bring moistened wool in oil, and place it in the wounds, and put the thread that we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	 And sometimes the white flesh that we have mentioned is cauterized after the incision, due to fear of bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 For this often happens, and let the ligature remain until it falls off by itself; and if it delays in falling off, then be rinsed with hot water, and place what we have said on top of it, until it falls off; then heal the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	 of fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	 In this case, I have never seen anyone who dared to perform the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the ancients said that it is done like the vein which is near the bladder, in such a way that you tie off the vessels after cutting above lightly below; then cut in half and heal the abscess with what works, until the vessel falls out; and heal it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	 When there is a rupture in the intestines, as we have said, the place opens up; and let no one from the intestines fall into the belly, and if any do fall, it is little, and it returns every hour; yet if it stays too long in this state, the wound or fistula grows until the intestines fall out; and this happens by the extension of the fistula which is in the intestines, as we have said, for it is extended, then the place becomes softened and swollen, and open; and the cure is by cautery, as we have said before; sometimes it is cured with iron in this manner: and let the patient lie on his back between your hands, then cut the place of the rupture swollen wide according to the width of three fingers; and then draw out the fistula which is under the skin like the custom, then take the ribbon and put it over the apparent place of the fistula; and press it firmly into the belly, then sew the two apparent places of the fistula on the head of the ribbon, and sew both; then remove the head of the ribbon, and do not cut or extend anything from the fistula or other things, as I have shown you in the cure of the fistula of the intestines; then cure it by the cure of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when you cut the thread, clean it and treat the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	 The syphilis (syfac) is confined and has no appearance in the scar, and the cautery is applied here, being closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	 of the softening of the skin of the testicles
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	 Many times the skin of the testicles is softened in some men, because the flesh within is softened, and it can be seen; and it is necessary, when one wants to cure it, that one makes the patient lie on his back, and cuts the softened skin on top of the natural skin; then join the two lips together with a single stitch, and if you wish, first sew the excess softened skin firmly with three or four stitches; then cut between the stitches, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed, and let the thread fall.  />
dou chastrement	 of chastisement
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	 Know that chastisement is forbidden in our law, and therefore it would please me if I did not speak of it in this book; and there are only two necessary ways: one is that the physician knows how to respond when asked about it and knows the cure; and the other, because we often need the chastisement of certain animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and dogs and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	 I say then that chastisement is done in two ways: either by attraction or by incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	 In that which we do by attraction, we make the beast sit in hot water until the ligaments are softened and drawn out; then take them with your hand until they are returned and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste,
des hermofrodites	 of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	 Of hermaphrodites is according to two types in humans: one is that between the two testicles appears as the nature of a woman, with hair, and sometimes it secretes urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	 And the other type is in women, who have on the mons pubis like a penis and two testicles.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	 And the treatment for the male and female is that you cut off all the flesh, and treat it as other wounds; in the second type, of those whose urine passes through the skin of the testicles, there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	 Of leprosy
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	 Leprosy is a fleshy growth on the natural part of the body, so ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and this is its treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	 Il is necessary that you color the superfluity of the tentigene in your hand or in onions, and cut it lightly; and do not go too deep, so that blood does not come out, then heal another wound until it is healed; and on a different flesh that arises at the mouth of the marris, and fill it, and perhaps jump far, and it is like a cow, and therefore the ancients called it «maladie kowee».
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 If it is necessary that you cut it, as we have said about the tentigene, and heal it until it is healed.
de erratique	 Of herring
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	 It is called herring when the woman's nature is not perceived, or the opening is small; and it is natural from birth, or accidental due to illness that has come upon it; or it is due to adjacent flesh, or the subtle or thick humors, and it is made deep in the marris, or on the side, or below, wherever it may be; and it prevents conception, and childbirth, and perhaps also menstruation; and the recognition of this is by the appearance of the hair.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	 If the swelling is clearly visible, it will seek your fingers or toes.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	 If it is a subtle swelling and it is close to the liver, hurry; do this: place your two index fingers together, and let the woman be on her back, with her legs spread apart; then stretch the two livers very well, so that the subtle swelling is round, and the swelling is above; then take wool, moisten it in oil, and place it on the spot, and let the woman lie down on her side every day, so that she cannot heal.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	 And if the swelling is hard and thick, you must cut it with a spatula shaped like a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the swelling is from flesh, hang it on a hook and cut it off; and have the blood-stopping medicines ready, like acacia, dragon's blood, incense, with plenty of egg yolk; then apply a wide bandage of lead, so that the wound cannot heal quickly; and thus let it be for a long time, and apply a tent of dry linen; then treat it with other treatments until he is cured.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	 And when flesh grows in the wound, it must be cut according to this manner, unless it is an encysted abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	 For the encysted abscess that is in the wound, one should not do anything to it.
des emorroides	 Of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	 Hemorrhoids are openings of veins which without treatment usually remain so, and when hemorrhoids are old they become thelul; and we have already said in the division their similarities and signs, and I will say here those that receive treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	 I say that hemorrhoids and thelul, when they are deeply embedded in the anus and are not felt, should not be treated with a cautery iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	 Those that are at the mouth of the anus, which can be felt, are those that can be treated.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	 Then you must place the woman in a cold room, then grasp the hemorrhoid with pincers, cut its roots, then sprinkle on medicines that restrict blood flow, such as acacia and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then put her feet against the wall for an hour, then place her in cold water; and if bleeding continues, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peel and galls and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	 And if it bleeds, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	 If not, let him breathe through cupping glasses on the back and breasts without cutting; then take cloth and moisten it in juice of plantain or in juice of hawthorn with old wine, and let him breathe that place.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when the abscess rests, then treat the place with oil until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and is like a sharp head, so you must cover it as I have said before; and then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	 of the abscesses of the anus
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	 Many kinds of abscess come to the anus, such as chancre and pious abscess and herpes and sty-like sores and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, and many other illnesses that I have spoken of in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	 It is therefore necessary that I say in this treatise about the hot abscess that comes to the breast, which is not one of the abscesses that swell up; and if you wish to know the work of iron, look if the abscess is sharp at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and if it turns red when you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	 Then do not hasten to perforate, but let the matter ripen until the pain is relieved; and then have the patient sit on a chair, and have two small chairs where he leans back, and support his back and gather his feet towards the side of the leg; and let his thighs be spread, and place his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good ligature; then give him to drink towards the right rib, and bring the instrument that is used to open the breast, from which afterwards comes the form; and it is necessary that when you wish to use this instrument, that you first insert the point in order to know the depth of the breast, so that what enters into the instrument does not go too deep, and does not hurt the patient; and if the instrument is larger, then it is necessary to cover the depth of the breast with cloths, so that the instrument does not harm it; and it is necessary that he place the cone of the instrument above, and that he dip the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	 And when the abscess opens, and one makes an incision with a soft hand, it must be covered at the top with spongy linen cloth; and when the bag is emptied, it should be placed in the wound with moist tents soaked in rose oil or in dry green oil; and place the tent outside the wound at the bottom of the bandage, and place above the bandage and on the wrist a clean cloth moistened in water where the malves have been cooked; then cure it after two days of dressing, until it is healed; and sometimes lift the bandage and the wound with an enema of water and honey, and then of water with lily roots and long Aristolochia, cooked well; then return to the dressing.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	 And if the wound is in the stomach, then you must beware of using iron, but treat it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	 of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	 It is first necessary for the midwife to recognize the natural shape of childbirth, and its sign is when you see a woman press downward and desire to smell air; then you should hasten to help the child out: know that this birth is according to the natural shape, and the issue is under his head, and the afterbirth with it; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press her belly, so that the child comes out quickly; for when he descends onto his head, the afterbirth comes out with him, and the mother is cleansed of her superfluities by good cleaning; and those which come otherwise do not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	 Because it sometimes comes upon his feet, and strikes the body or the head, and the hands, or comes upon his stomach, or perhaps his back, and is converted by chance onto his neck, and other evil shapes; thus, it is necessary for the nurse that she be wise and subtle in these things, and guard against error and deception, and I will show you all the figures of how to help him.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	 If the child comes upon his head by natural birth, and the woman gives birth painfully, and the virtue of the child is weak, then have her sit on a saddle, where women hold her; and anoint her nature with oil or cooked fenugreek, and then the nurse places between her teeth the small spatula whose form is here:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	 And split the afterbirth, and cut it to its fingernail until the moisture that is within flows out; and hold the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to enema the woman with a fennel mixture with sesame oil; then make her drink and sneeze with cumin, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: thus the child will now come out.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	 And if the two hands come out strong, then you must gently push them back in little by little; and if they cannot go in, then put the woman on a stool and raise her feet high; then tilt the stool to the ground, and hold the woman so she does not fall when tilting; and if the hands cannot go in, and the child dies, then cut off the hands with the knife mentioned earlier, and extract the child, and push equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	 of the childbirth onto its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	 When the child comes onto its feet, you must push it upwards; and then turn it little by little until it is even; then take hold of one foot and extend it little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	 When it jumps up to the hips, instruct her to take hold and make it sneeze with cunnilings; if it jumps further, so be it with God’s will.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	 And if it does not jump further as we have said, then turn it little by little until it is according to the natural form.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	 For then it goes easily.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	 And if it does not come further as we have said, then take mugwort, oil of cumin, and melted gum; grind all together in a mortar. Then apply this ointment over the woman’s genitals both inside and out. Then make her sit in hot water up to her ribs; and when she is well soaked below, give her a drink of honey wine, and let it sit for an hour. Then seat her on a chair, and make her sneeze by holding her mouth and nose shut, and gently massage her belly, for the child jumps now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	 The issue of the child on its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	 When the child comes in this manner, let the midwife put her hands little by little; then let it be turned on its back, and let the feet hang down, and let it lie on the bed; and fold its hands little by little, and then take the hands on top of the belly, and remove the cushions from below, until she is prepared. And if the child does not jump, take its feet and move them strongly, then move the belly upwards, then put your hands there; and draw the child little by little; and instruct the woman to grasp herself until the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	 The issue of the child that comes sideways, one hand dangling
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	 It is necessary to invent a way to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, make the woman stand up and walk; if she cannot walk, make her lie down on the bed and spread her legs widely; then apply the treatment I have described; and if she does not give birth, make her sit on the chair, then study bringing back the hand; and look at the child according to its natural shape, and make it sneeze, and command that she take as much as the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	 from the exit of the child on its neck, and with its hands spread, and its face turned towards the back of its mother
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	 It is necessary that the nurse takes his hand, then turns it little by little, and looks at it lightly; and when it is equalized, put on the natural treatment of oil and oil, as we have said, then command her to move little by little; and when you have done this, make her sit on the chair, and command that she take; and make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	 In this same manner, do so with all the secondary parts
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	 When the force comes this way to all the secondary parts, then cut the secondary part with your nail until the moisture is emptied; and if the child clings to its face and neck, then cut it from the base so that it may not be retained, and let the child die; then put the child back in until you have placed it as it should be, and instruct the woman to take some time: then it will easily come out.
de l’issue des gemelz	 of the birth of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	 Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not an extraordinary thing, but rare.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	 Two are an extraordinary thing, and do not live, if at all; I know that they can be many, and are separated by the sinew which divides them, which is attached to the base; and sometimes they come out as naturally as one alone, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	 And if they come out sharply, then treat them as we have said, and let the bandage be fine, and do it quickly and lightly as she does; and do so that he moves towards safety.
de plusors enfans	 of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	 Sometimes they are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, or even more up to fifteen, and all are perfectly formed like a child by the measurement of the wise glorious one, and it is necessary that the bandage know all these things; for by chance similar things may happen, so do according to what is required.
de l’enfant mort	 of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	 When you treat the woman for the dead child or in her womb, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are forced to work by hand; then it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound constitution, and has no accident or fear of death. It is necessary that the woman be placed on her back, and her head bent downwards, and her legs raised; and let the midwife hold two parts, where she lies in bed so that she does not pull during the descent of the child; then rub the mouth of the womb with moist oils with a mixture of althea and fenugreek and flax seed, then anoint the hands of the midwife with these oils and these mixtures; then insert them lightly into the womb, and seek one place where she inserts the hooks that are suitable for this, and take care if the child is ready to descend onto its head; then insert the hooks into his eyes or his neck or his mouth or on some palate or under the beard or in the vagina or near the sides, and if the descent is on the feet, then insert them into the palm and between the ribs; and it is necessary that she hold the hook with her right hand, and put the curve between her thumb and index finger of the left hand, and let her insert all her hand lightly, and insert the hook in any of these places we have said, until it comes to the empty place; and this is the form of the hook:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	 then insert one against the other, or a third if you need it, so that the extraction is equal; and then move them equally from side to side, in order to move out, and let the thorns be pointed to hold on, as shown here:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	 And if a part remains, then grease the ball of your thumb with oil and push it into that part, and draw out the other part; and if nothing remains, place this thorn in a higher spot, and do this until all comes out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	 And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be brought back due to constriction, then you must wrap it in a cloth until all comes out; then cut off at the joint of the foot or the knee, and thus you should do with the other hand and both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	 And if the child's head is large and it is stuck in the birth canal, or if there is sharp water collected at the top, then you must insert a spatula between your fingers, split the skull, and extract the water; or rotate the instrument called "almidach," from which the form comes with the instruments in the following chapter; and do the same thing if the child has an unusually large head naturally. Then draw out the bones with the tongs, and if the head protrudes and is tight around the pelvic brim, it should be split until the water that is in the lower part of the birth canal comes out; and if it cannot come out, strike it in pieces as much as you can; and if it is swollen in the abdomen or under the ribs, then you must puncture until the water flows out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	 And if the child is on his feet, then the traction is gentle, and the reduction at the mouth of the womb is gentle.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	 And if it is stuck in the belly or the breast, you must pull it out with a cloth wrapped around your hand; and make an incision in the belly or the breast, until the moisture that is there drains out; and if the other members are removed, and only the head remains, then press your hand deeply into the womb, and pull it up to the mouth of the womb; then insert one or two fingers, and pull strongly; and if the mouth of the womb is narrow due to a hot abscess that has formed there, you should not struggle, but rather apply moist and greasy things; and administer poultices, and use softening and moistening liquids.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	 And if the child is on its side, and you can put it straight, then do as we have said with the living child; and if one cannot, then draw out the fetus piece by piece, and leave nothing of the secondine.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	 And when you have done this, treat it as we have said for abscesses that come in the womb; and if blood comes out, put her in cold water restraining, and give other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	 And I saw a woman in whose womb an infant had died, then another grew on top of that one, and the other also died.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	 After a long time, she got an abscess in the womb, which swelled so much that it burst open, and began to be very putrid.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	 I was called to treat it, and I thought for a long time, but the wound could not be healed.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	 I applied a strong attracting plaster, and from it came out a bone, and after some days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	 I was very amazed by this, because the belly does not have any bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	 I thought that these were the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	 I examined the wound and drew out many bones until the woman was in better condition; and the woman lived for a long time like this, and there always came out a little pus from that place; and I have noted down this chapter only because when the master finds something strange, he should know how to help it.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	 To bring the bone back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	 Here comes the form of the press, with which one moves the weights; and at two turns, the two keys of the two levers.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	 However, the horns should be more subtle of the restricter, and made of ivory or boxwood; and the mouth of the stick should be two thumbs wide, and the margin of the trees one thumb, and in length one palm and a half; and between the two levers there should be two adjustments of this same stick, which are fixed at one end and the other, of half a palm long or a little more; and these two adjustments are pushed into the mouth of the bone to open when one turns the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	 A different form, more subtle and lighter, should be made from the wood of an ebony or box tree, resembling pliers; and it should have at its two heads two adjustments, as you see, one palm long and two fingers wide; and when you wish to open the vulva with the entire instrument, make the woman sit on a bed, her feet dangling and legs spread, then insert the two adjustments close together into the vulva, and hold the head of the instrument under between her thighs; then work your hand over the entire instrument, just as you have done with the pliers, according to the quantity by which you wish to open the mouth of the vulva, until the vagina does what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	 This instrument is all surmounted, and their resemblances are multiplied; and when the master has prepared them, so much the more urgent is the work, and higher for men because of their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	 Do not disregard the instrument until you have prepared it, for its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	 When the afterbirth is retained at childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath, then make her sneeze strongly, and press your hands to her mouth and nose; and if she expels it by this means, all is well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	 If not, take a pot and make a hole in the lid, and put in herbs that can open the womb of the woman, such as calamint, rue, anise, camomile, cassia, and centaury; all these herbs or some of them should be cooked in water on the fire. Then place a reed in the hole of the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the woman, and hold it until the vapor enters into the womb; then make her sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	 If the ligament tears quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	 And if it remains after this treatment, and is not weakened, then instruct the nurse to moisten her left hand in oil of cicely or muslin cloth with vinegar, and then place it on the wound, and seek the ligament; and when she finds it, take hold of it and gently stretch it little by little until the wound does not swell at the stretching; but you must move it lightly to the right and to the left, and then pull; then it will come out and relax.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	 And if the mouth of the wound is tightly constricted, we have said the treatment of sneezing and herbal fumigation; and if it does not come out from all that we have said, then take care not to be hasty in pulling; but it is necessary for whoever is at the mouth of the wound, that you tie him to the thigh of the woman, then administer an enema with four-component oil mixture; then she will fart and restore, and come out stronger; but nevertheless, when she farts, bad odor comes to the stomach and the head, and hurts the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	 If it is therefore necessary, fumigations are appropriate for this: some of the ancients have proven fumigations of watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	 The form of the instrument with which one fumigates a woman for the retention of flowers and the second stage is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	 And it is made of glass similar to a tube, and one places the subtle end in the nature, and the wide ends over the fire; and let the fumigation be over the coals, and continue until it is consumed, and then begin another.
de percier lou fondement	 to pierce the anus
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Many children are born with the anus not pierced, but rather blocked by a subtle membrane: it is therefore necessary for the midwife to pierce this membrane with her finger, and do not pierce it with a sharp instrument, and be careful that she does not touch the linen; then place a cloth moistened in wine and oil on top, then continue the treatment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	 And if you doubt that it will not pop out, then put in the opening a piece of lead, and leave it there for fewer days, and remove it when the child wants to go into rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	 And sometimes this blockage comes from a sudden vein or abscess; then it is necessary to cover that sudden [bleeding]: if it is treated, as we have said about the piece of lead.
de la fistule dou fondement	 Of the fistula of the anus
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	 Fistulas that come from below the anus are nodules, and growths that come beside the anus towards the outside, or in the space of the two parts, if there is one fistula or more; and when this nodule is old, it works, and attracts abundant white or subtle pus, and sometimes these fistulas are painful; and they are known by this: that during defecation or flatulence, some come out, and occasionally one comes out in a rush.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	 And if there are fistulas that reach to the bladder, and to the midpoint of the penis; they extend to the junction of the thigh, and to the navel of the vulva.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	 And thus one knows the fistula penetrating to the anus, and not penetrating: and it is that you insert your index finger into the anus, and thrust a subtle needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no convolution.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	 And if there is convolution, then thrust a subtle tent of lead or a horsehair, as much as you feel the tent or hair at your finger; and if you do not feel it, nor does egestion, ventosity, or vermiform appendix come out, as we have said: know that it does not penetrate; then hasten to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	 And when the fistula extends to the bladder or to the passage of the urine, then the urine escapes from it, and cannot be healed by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	 If it is perforated up to the joint of the thigh, then the tent comes to its place; if there is no tortuosity and the location of the pain around it, then it constantly flows out, and neither medicines nor healing by ointment are effective; and in these perforating fistulas, there is no cure except labor, and foolish physicians waste their efforts on them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	 In those that are not perforating and not old, there is hope of health by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and he raises his legs up to his thighs, and has his thighs inclined towards his belly; then insert a tent of iron, or of lead if there is tortuosity, until you know where the tent comes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	 If the patient feels it around the anus, then you must insert your finger inside, and if you sense that the tent has been pierced; and if it is uncovered where you feel between your finger the syphilis or the flesh, then know that it is perforated; so do not try to heal it, for it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	 Nevertheless, one can heal some [cases] well, but this happens rarely; and the aid that one provides is to heat the cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before; and insert it all hot into the fistula, until it reaches near the anus; and do this two or three times, so that you know these fleshy parts have burned, which resemble a bird's feather; and then cure the wet tents with butter, until those fleshy parts come out, then cure the ointment, joining flesh and suturing.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If he is healed in this way, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	 If this is not another way to be healed; and if the tent enters but does not perforate until the finger that is in the fundament, and between your finger and the tent there is a thick covering of flesh or tissue, and you see the fistula at the end of the covering of the heart; then cut from the beginning of the fistula, and always push the tent forward, and afterwards apply cautery until it reaches the tip of the tent; and the tent will be released and fall out; then remove those fleshy threads that resemble a bird's feather, and nothing should remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	 And if the pus overcomes you, and it passes between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or astringent medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	 Because the fire cautery combines two good things: namely, the burning of these hairs nearby, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture; then the treatment of wet tents with butter or crushed substances, until the place swells up, and the burned hairs come out in the swelling; then treat the wound with hardening ointments, and the medicines are dry.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	 Because when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	 And if the fistula reaches all the way to the bottom of the anus and is separated from the body, then place your finger in the anus and seek it out.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	 If you feel the tent, and there is the tissue or silk or hair in it, which is close to perforating, do not proceed further unless there is hope and expectation through the use of one of the three methods: either cauterize it as we have said, or cut it to the bottom, or if possible place a tent and treat it as before; but do not go too deep, lest you cut the support that holds the anus, and cause involuntary defecation; then treat it as we have said; perhaps it will be healed, or remove that covering and clean it after it has been cut near the anus, either by tent or by another suitable instrument; then cleanse the faulty hair that is in the wound, as much as you can; then endeavor to restore the wound, and make the fistula remain on the outer part of the anus: this will be less difficult for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	 And sometimes fissures occur in this manner: and it is when you push the tent into the fissure, and it is on the side of the anus near the skin above, then take a punctured tent at the top in this form.
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	 And you push a twisted thread into it, and push the tent with all the thread into the fissure until it reaches the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	 If it is protruding within the margin of the anus, then extract the thread from that hole, just as you push your finger into the anus; and pull out the end of the thread, and bring together the two ends, and press them against each other, and leave it for one day or two; and constrict it occasionally, until the thread cuts through those tissues that are between them, and they fall off; then treat the wound until it is healed and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	 If the fistula does not open, then make it open in all the ways you can, unless it is too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 For it is not right to cover for the healing so deeply, and then heal, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	 The form of the pointed spatula with which one makes the fistula is very sharp on one side and cutting; and on the other side not, so that one does not cut what should not be cut, as you see here.
des emorroydes	 hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	 Hemorrhoids are in two ways: either they are inside the rectum like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and blood always comes out of them, and there is one or more, and they are outside the rectum and at the edge of the rectum; but those that are outside have little moisture, and sometimes a little yellow water or a little blood, and have the color of the flesh. And the cure for those who have them inside the rectum is that you instruct the patient to sit on the toilet until the rectum comes out, and the threads appear; then hurry, and clamp it with pincers, or hold it with your nail, then cut off its roots; and if the nails cannot hold them because of the moisture, then take them with a piece of cloth, or cotton, or a piece of flannel; and pull with your fingers, then cut, and sprinkle some warm powders that are suitable for cauterization on top; or you cauterize as it is said in the chapter on cautery, then cure with other cures until it is healed; and if the rectum cannot come out, then enema the patient with a bitter and sharp enema to clean what is in the rectum so that it can come out openly. When the patient sits and the threads are out of the rectum, the cure is light; and it is that you take them with your nail or pincers, and cut, then cure as we have said, until it is healed, and that it fears incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it is necessary for you to perform the stitching in this manner: take a twisted thread, insert it into a needle, then pull the thread through and make the needle pierce from the other side; turn the two ends of the thread underneath the needle, making sure it is wide enough; then tighten the thread firmly, knot the thread, remove the needle, and do this with all the others, leaving one for draining excess blood; then place a damp cloth soaked in rose oil or wax over the wound, and instruct the patient to rest; and leave it until they heal, and once healed, treat them with ointment and other treatments until they are cured.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	 of dryness from the intestines or the fundament
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	 Many times dryness occurs in the intestines, due to natural constraints, and when the illness is old and medicine is of no use.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then you must scrape off the skin above with a spatula or your nail, not allowing it to moisten; then treat it until it is dry as it should be; and if it cannot dry, repeat the scraping more strongly than before, until it bleeds profusely and is raw; then treat it until it heals.
dou fremit	 from trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	 Formication is a small, hairy creature that enters the body and goes very deep; sometimes the cold finds it, and one feels it like death from trembling, and it spreads throughout the whole body, more in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	 And the cure is such that you take a quill of a goose feather, or a strong quill of an ox, and place that quill on the trembling part, until the circle surrounds the entire trembling part; then turn your hand around the entire quill so that it covers the entire trembling part, and insert it deeply, and eradicate the trembling from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	 And if you see this, do it with a quill of brass or iron according to this form, and let it be subtle below and drawn above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	 nor should it be perceived, to better hold the two together, and better press them And if you see this, then cauterize the trembling part, as is written in the chapter on cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	 of the form of the enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	 Sometimes one makes an enema with silver or gold, or melted iron or copper; and sometimes it is made from these instruments, both small and large, according to those for whom they are prepared.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	 Therefore, those who prepare for the treatment of children who are weak and suffering should be small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	 The form of the small and large enema is such that it is wide at the top where the intestines are tied in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	 and there should be an opening where the intestines are tied as you see, and the tip should be perforated; and on one side there should be two holes, and on the other one; and the bag where one puts the medicines should be made from a beast's bladder or parchment, and should be pierced all around with small holes, and between each hole there should be one finger's width of space, then insert into these holes a strong thread of twisted silk in the shape of an X or O, and assemble the bag like this, and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument in front with a strong thread, then administer the enema; and that is the form of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	 And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the enema with oil or egg white, or a similar substance, then insert it lightly; then the minister should press with his two hands together until it is all empty, then remove the enema, and lift the patient's legs to the wall, and if the medicine wants to come out, then hold it as long as he can; and if he sleeps through the night, then there is greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if you give an enema for a disease of the intestines, and the medicine hastens to come out, then repeat it until it is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	 And if the hemorrhoids are in the rectum or abscess, then let the enema be as thin as for a child; and this is the form of the thin enema on which the skin is stretched:
des plaies	 of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	 We have already spoken in the division about the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you about the treatments for hands and medicines according to the method.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	 I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and by what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	 The things by which wounds are made are by falling of a stone, and cutting with a sword or knife, or by a lance, or a club, or an arrow, or similar things; or they are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound on the neck, or on the head, or the buttocks, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with the simple wounds of the head, because their treatment will be in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	 I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, then beware if it is from the fall of a stone or similar things, and the skin is still torn and the wound is large, and you suspect a hot abscess: then have it cauterized immediately with cephalic caustic even if there is little blood from the wound, and let the cautery be on the opposite side of the injured part; and let the patient avoid overindulgence in wine and heavy foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if he does not want to be cauterized, let him eat less food, and drink no wine, nor eat any meat; and put on the wound, if hot abscesses come there, cotton soaked only in rose oil or stiptic wine; and if there is no hot abscess, then put on the fresh wound, as long as it bleeds all its blood, and is not moved by the air, a powder that I will tell you a little later; and if the fire has moved it, then apply some ointments until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	 And if the wound is large, such as from a sword cut or similar, and the lips of the wound cannot be brought together by stitches, then bring them together by sewing, as I will say for wounds in the belly, with the stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	 If the wound is exposed bone and gaping, and holds together only by a thread, then cut it off; then treat the wound with medicine, and replace hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse food, such as heads and cooked wheat, also like beans, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	 And if you find rottenness in the skin that reaches to the bone, then cut away all the rot and throw it away, then treat (the wound); and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which does not stop bleeding with medicine, then seek the artery, and if you find it dislocated, bind it with a thread; and if this does no good, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	 And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and it is that you put in this powder which binds before the heat has moved it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 And the manner of the powder is thus: take one part of frankincense; dragon's blood two parts; quicklime three parts, and grind it finely, and fill the wound, and bind it firmly, until it dries well and joins with all its blood; and then bind it well, and leave it unbound, if it does not swell; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	 And sometimes one does this with quicklime alone, when one has neither frankincense nor dragon's blood, but that the heat has moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the fire has moved the wound, especially in summer, do not put this powder on it at all; but apply some digestive ointments, or poultices made of barley flour mixed with water and honey, until it weeps; then proceed to other treatments until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	 And if the fracture of the bone comes with the wound, and it is small, draw it out with fine tweezers; and I will tell you about the fractures of the head afterward.
de la plaie dou col	 of a neck wound
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	 If the wound is in the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and one in the head, unless a nerve of the neck or an artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	 If it is the nerve, there is no other device than to leave the treatment alone and put nothing constricting on it, because it harms the nerves and makes them retract; and do not put anything cold on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member; but let the medicine be below, as hot water in soft water, and mixed with rose oil, and also washed in soft water, and other stones of the same kind according to this manner, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the wound is large, stitch it up and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	 And if the wound is deep and it is swollen and full of pus, then open it in a lower place; and if an artery is cut, and blood flows out, then dry it off, bind it, and cauterize it if necessary; and if the windpipe or the throat is cut, and the passage is preserved, through which food goes, then sew up the throat on the neck of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back in its natural shape; and then bind it properly, and leave it for some days, then treat it with drying ointments until it is healed; and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then open it; and if there are pieces of bone, then draw them out completely if you can, and those that you cannot have, leave them until the wound suppurates, and let the opening be drained and cleansed; and if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle the powder on the powder that I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	 And if there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	 of the spear or knife wound
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	 If it is a spear or knife wound, and the wound is deep, observe if there is swelling in the wound as the patient lies down: know then that the wound is mortal; and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not apply powder at the first hour, nor bind it so that blood does not seep deeply, return to the heart, and kill the patient; but apply drawing ointment, and bandage it twice a day; and if you have no ointment, place old cotton in the wound to absorb moisture, and let the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more; so there will be no spasm, nor heart tremor or strangulation of breath; and when you see good signs, know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	 Treat it with tents and other treatments until it is healed; if it cannot be healed, and works, know that there is a fistula; treat it as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	 And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut and it is simple, whether worse or on the back, treat it like those in front; if it is large, with stitching; if it is small, with powder; and if it is close to the bone and has chipped pieces, cleanse the wound, and draw out the splinters if they are loose; if they are not loose, let the wound fester, which will ease the extraction; and for other wounds in other limbs, the judgment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	 From the rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	 The rupture of the belly is great and medium and small; from the large wound sometimes the intestine or the nerves of the intestines come out, causing their exit; and the sewing up is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the large one, because it is harder to put the intestines back in if they are not replaced hot on hot; because the intestine swells as soon as it feels the cold, so they go back in less easily. And for this reason, the medium wound is worse, because it is more difficult to return the intestine to its place than in others. And know that the treatment of the belly is according to four methods: two common sewings occur in the sewing of the belly, and the sewing of other wounds of the body, and two other specific sewings are common with other wounds; nevertheless, they are more specific with the sewing of the belly, and I will say each one and explain.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	 I say that when the wound is small and something of the intestines has come out, it is a very difficult thing to put back, which can be done in two ways: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen from the cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	 And when it is cold, warm the intestines in this manner: moisten one sponge or piece of linen in hot water only, and cook in boiling water cinnamon and pepper and cloves; and rinse the intestine until the swelling has subsided; sometimes this wine restricts, and it is better alone for deflating.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	 And when you see the swelling subside, moisten the intestine with water where althea and mallows have been cooked, for by this the opening is made easier; and if it cannot enter, make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used to cut hemorrhoids; and the first care is better than cutting, no one should cut without great necessity; and this is the instrument to split it: cut inside the curve and not outside, and see here the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	 And when the wound is widened and the intestines jump out, then put them back inside according to their natural form in their proper place, if you can, for this is better.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	 And when the wound is large, and it is in the part below the belly, then you must make the patient lie on their back, and put their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the part below the belly, put the head and the chest higher than the parts below, and likewise if the break of the belly is in one of the two parts, put your attention to this so that the injured part is higher than the other; and thus you must treat as I say both large and medium-sized wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	 For small wounds, use what you have prepared, then take between your hands the pious minister who holds all the instruments in his hand, and gather the lips; and this is the common manner of suturing, and it is that you take a needle or more, according to the width of the wound, then leave two fingers' width from the head of the wound, and insert a needle where there is good strong thread; and pierce the two heads of the skin with the two heads of the siphac, which is underneath the skin inside, until you make it pierce from that part, and gather the two heads of the siphac together in four; then tighten a double thread around the needle on two sides, then gather the two lips of the wound together in the same way, and then leave two fingers' width, and insert another needle; then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this with the needles until the entire wound is restrained; and let the needles be medium-sized, between subtle and thick, for subtle needles cut all the flesh, and too thick ones cannot enter well: therefore they must be medium-sized; it is also not necessary to push the needles too far into the flesh and skin, lest they cut and work the wound before the suturing; and then cut the heads of the needles, so that they do not hurt the patient when sleeping, and put tenths or cloths on the heads of the needles to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed; and this manner of suturing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, for one can use a needle or two in the second suturing, which is common, and it is that you gather the two heads of the skin and the two heads of the siphac together in one needle where there is good medium-strength thread; and when you have pierced these four heads together, then remove the needle to the part where you began, in the manner that one sews clothes; and put space between each suturing the thickness of a small finger; this suturing is known by men, and I sewed a wound that a man had in his belly, which was cut by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm in size, and the intestines protruded well two palms in size, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	 I brought him back the intestine after it had been outside for twenty-four hours, and the wound was closed for fifteen days, and I treated it, and he was cured.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	 And the doctors had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle; and I did not cure him with ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicines; and I put on the wound old cotton twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he was cured.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	 Now I will tell you the two proper ways of sewing: take the needle and insert it from outside to inside; when it has pierced the skin straight on, leave the head of the thread where you inserted the needle, and make it come out the other side from inside to outside; and the meaning of this sewing is that you sew just like furriers sew furs, and that you leave the thread once on one side and take it back on the other, until the entire stitching is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	 The second method of stitching, which Galen describes specifically, is done as some do: they naturally bring together the two parts and apply one head of the needle to the other head in this manner: insert a needle into the head of the mirror nearby, and make it pierce only that place, leaving the two heads of the needle; then turn the needle and make it pierce from the outside part until inside, to the two heads of the needle; then make it pierce one and the other from the outside part until inside, in two other holes of the mirror which are on the opposite side; and this is the most common method of stitching.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	 Galiens says these words, and some testify to it: that one should stitch the belly with two needles, with a thread in each; and one should insert one needle from one side, and the other from the opposite side, in the manner of those who sew straps; and know that when the wound is in the middle of the belly, the stitching must be larger than in other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	 The judgment of the wound is such as that of other wounds: and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, before the fire has moved it, then you should resume the burning inside and on the skin; then apply the powder healing flesh, and if the fire has moved it, then apply some ointment that is available, until the wound closes; and stitch the threads, and let the seams and the mirach heal; then treat the wound as the others, until it is healed; and if you do not have medicines, then apply, as soon as it begins to cast pus, old cotton, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	 Car you do not need any other medicine in many cases when the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound may affect the principal members, then you must wet a light linen cloth in warm oil or rose oil, and wrap it around the corners and under the armpits; and if he feels pain or infection in his bowels, and this often happens, then give him an enema of black wine tede, and likewise if the infection reaches the intestines; perforate it from within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	 The intestine that is called "young" cannot heal when it is wounded, and this is due to the thinness of the veins there, and due to the subtlety of the whole body, and its proximity to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	 And if the gut spills from the wound, replace it like the intestine while it is fresh; and if it is old and has become green or black, then you must tie the place that is black to prevent blood from flowing therein, for there are veins and arteries; then cut that which is between the ligature, and hang the two ends depending from the lower part of the wound until it falls, and the wound closes.
de la routure dou boueil	 from the wound's edge
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	 When the intestine is cut and the wound is small, it can be healed in some men, because I saw that a man was wounded in the belly by a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became infected and turned into a fistula, and from it came excrement and windiness; I treated it as best I could, and did not cease to care for him until he was healed, and the place healed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	 And when I saw it sewn, I feared that the patient might have pain in his stomach; but there was no pain, and he remained in better condition, eating and drinking; and some experts said that when there is a small wound in the intestines, it should be tied in this manner: take large-headed pins, then gather the lips of the wound, and when the pin has opened its mouth, place it on top of the two lips so that it pulls its mouth up; and then cut off the head, and this is done so that it cannot come loose, then place another pin afterwards in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely enclosed; and sew the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	 Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, and the head becomes attached in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient, and it can be tied off with a fine thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal, in this manner: take the end of this intestinal thread which should be very thin, and then tie to the end of this thread a fine twisted linen thread, then insert the thread into the needle, and sew up the intestine, and draw it together; and this method of sewing is not outside the path of faith and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the internal parts, there is no cleverness or skillfulness, except for subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	 From a fistula wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	 Know that every wound or abscess, when it bursts open, is universally called a "fistula," and likewise when it opens and pours out pus.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	 And a fistula is by definition a hard and white nodule without pain, and it opens like the feather of a bird; sometimes it discharges clear pus, other times thick; sometimes little, other times enough; and I have spoken about this in the section on wounds, that any wound that does not heal, and there is no flesh, it is only healed through one of the nine causes: that is to say, due to the scarcity of blood or body; or because of its corruption; or because there is hard flesh within, and on the edges, which prevents new flesh from growing; or there is too much pus; or the place is rotten, and the matter is of poor quality; or the medicine is not good for healing; or because the corruption is in the form of plague; or due to the nature of the region where digestion is slow, and healing is delayed, and it swells naturally; or there are veins or bones. And I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the section on wounds.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	 Or I must inform you of the treatment for a fistula caused by manual labor.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	 Know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come from the large veins, and the arteries, and the nerves, or the sinuses, or the intestines, or the bladder, or in some of the ribs, or the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet; and there are those that come to the property of the principal member, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	 And all fistulas of this kind are of serious condition, and there is only labor and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come to the place I have mentioned, and you have confidence in the cure, and you wish to know it, then take a probe of bronze or iron, if the fistula is straight, then seek it; and if the fistula is crooked, then seek it with a subtle probe of boxwood, for boxwood bends more easily around the crookedness; and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot probe it well with probes, then irrigate it through one of the openings, for the moisture goes from one opening to another, and cleanses it; then seek it wisely as you can, that you may know if there is bone or nerve, and it is deeply rooted, and inquire carefully of the patient about the pain he feels at the pressure of your hand, and the place where he feels it; and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the places I have mentioned to you, then cut according to what I have told you, and remove firmly the foul matter and corrupt flesh that are inside; and then cure until it is healed, and if the fistula is very deep from a right place, then it is necessary that you cut deeply, as much as you can, then put moistened tents in aquatic medicine, and pour them up to the head of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the superfluous material that remains at the bottom; and then put on healing ointments, until it is healed; and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupt from the fistula, then cut it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If a vein or nerve strikes a main joint, as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, so boil it until all the corruption is removed, then treat with things that enclose flesh until it is healed; and if it is not healed, and it opens again as before, know that you have not reached the source: uncover and seek until you reach the source, remove all the corruption, then restore the place; and if it heals thus, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	 If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach; then there is no other strategy than to leave it to nature; and if there is a small corrupted bone, and you can pull it with tongs, pull it out with an appropriate instrument, and if there are many bones, pull them all out, leaving not one; and if moisture hinders you, and there is no error or fear, cut off flesh and moisture and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	 And if you cannot remove them within an hour, place something causing putrefaction on the wound, and let it be until the place is rotten around the bones, and then the bones will break more easily; and if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, raise only the corruption until all the blackness is removed, then suture the wound; and if there is a great part of the putrefaction and it reaches to the marrow of the bone; then you must saw and cut all the way to the putrefaction, and then cure it until it is healed; and I will tell you about a fistula that happened in a man's leg, so that you can take an example and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	 It was a young man about thirty years old who had pain in his leg from an internal cause until the matter reached the leg and it swelled with a large abscess, and there was no outward sign for opening; but the physicians, through their folly, worked on it so much that the abscess opened, and many matters came out of it, and it became a fistula, and there were many openings from which all threw pus and moisture from the body; and many physicians attended to him for about two years, and there was no wise man in the art of medicine, until I was called there, and saw his leg and the medicines with which he was treated, and what came out through the openings at a great rate; and the youth's flesh became red, and had a citrine color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	 I set up a tent in one of these holes, and then searched all the holes, and found that some went against each other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	 I hurried then, and cut into one of the holes until I exposed part of the bone, and found it corrupted and perforated, and the corruption went as far as the inside of the bone; I removed what appeared to be the corrupted bone, and thought there was no other corruption except what I removed; and I began to treat the wound with healing medicines for a long time, but it could not heal; then I tried again, and exposed the bone as before, and found the corruption continued in the bone, and removed it, and then worked on healing the place; but I could not do so until I cut around a palm’s width of the bone, and drew it out completely, then treated it with medicines; and it was healed and healed quickly, and there was no need to repeat the work except for the weakness of the patient, who could not bear it, and for the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	 For the evacuation of blood he often bled, but was healed entirely, and in place of the bone grew hard flesh, and it was of good disposition and had no harm or contrariety at all, neither coming nor going.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	 And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be sutured in this manner: take a linen thread and bind it to the end of the bone that is open; and command someone to extend it upwards; and put another thicker linen thread over the first thread, and tie it on the flesh above the bone, and stretch the head, so that you draw the corrupt flesh downwards, and uncover the flesh above the place where you want to suture, so that the stitch does not hurt the flesh; and place a hot ember or a board under the bone to melt the corrupt flesh; and it must be sutured as long as one can see and feel the corruption, and also sutured again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	 Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, and put a coal underneath, puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, then saw from one part of the corruption to the other; et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, and let the length of the saw be a thumb's width longer than the corruption, as we have said; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, if the corruption is in the joint, si cope la jointure corrumpue, then cut away the corrupt joint, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part, and saw through the bone where it contains the other part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper, there is no alternative but to cut; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, if the corruption is in the wrist of the hand, ou ou poignil dou piet, or in the ankle, si est mout fort celle chose, this procedure is very challenging, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; and you must investigate that corruption to see how it opens up; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, but cleanse it in all the ways you can, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire, except that the vein or nerve does not interfere; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, and know that there are many instruments for cutting these bones, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, and their thickness and fineness, et lor grandor et lor petitece, and their size and smallness, et lor duresce; and their hardness; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument, therefore it is necessary to prepare an instrument for each type of work; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, and know that the work will show you the instrument that you need, selonc la conissance de cest art, according to the knowledge of this art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies, and the testimony of the ways of illnesses; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.
dou feu	 of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	 The head rots from within or without; and when you have treated this corruption with the cure of medicines, and they do not help, then it is necessary to amputate that member up to the place where the corruption comes, so that the patient escapes death, or the greater evil, which is the lack of the member; and the sign is that the member turns black, as if it were burned by fire, and rots after the blackness, then this corruption of the member goes from member to member, and takes over the whole body; so hasten with the amputation, and if it is due to the bite of some venomous animal, such as a sea scorpion or viper and the like, if the corruption is at the base of the arm, then cut it off, and do not give it space to reach the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	 And if it reaches the hand, cut at the joint, so that the corruption does not reach the arm; and if it reaches the arm, cut with a knife; and if it passes the knife, it is death, and no treatment will help except the quantity of its virtue; and do the same when the corruption reaches the foot: if it reaches the first joint, cut after the next joint; and if it reaches the foot, cut off the whole foot; and if it climbs up the leg, cut at the knee joint; and if it reaches above the knee, there is no other remedy than to leave the patient to die; and the manner of cutting or tying the member is such that you tie it above and below, and one assistant extends one of the ties downwards, and another assistant the other tie upwards, and you cut the flesh between the two ties to a width of one finger, so that the bone is exposed; then cut or tie, and place on each side a piece of linen, so that the ligature does not touch the healthy area, and thus the patient may receive another wound and abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	 And if bleeding occurs while you work, cauterize the area immediately, or apply some restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is complete, then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed; and I will tell you what happened to a man in one of his feet: he had a blackness that resembled a burn from fire, and that corruption first came into his foot's toe, so much so that it spread throughout the entire foot; and when the man saw the corruption, he hastened to cover his foot, and was healed; and a long time later the corruption returned to the toe of his hand, and he came to me, and I applied repressive things after cleansing the body, but could not stop the corrosion; and he wanted me to cut off his hand, but I did not want to, because I hoped to repel the matter; and I also feared that if I cut off his hand, he would die, for the man's strength was weak; and he became completely desperate, and returned to his land, and hastened to cover his hand, and was healed; and I have not told this story except so that others may learn from it, if they need to.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	 A certain time comes an abscess in a fleshy place, and it stays so long that it forms a large swelling of the boil; and then it thunders and bursts, and the pus jumps out, and the place remains empty, just like a vessel; and the skin that is above is as thin as a delicately woven cloth, and it does not reach to the bone, nor to the nerve; and such an illness is called «sinus», and it is not called «fistula»; but if it extends so far that it reaches to the bone in depth, then it is called «fistula»; and the skin is such that you can cut all around that skin, even when it is thin, just like a cloth; and it does not heal due to its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	 And if you think that the skin is swollen, and corruption is not deep, and the skin is thick with flesh, treat it thus: observe whether the breast is large, and the opening from which it issues is of foul odor; then catheterize with Egyptian medicine made like this: take equal amounts of asphaltum, oil, and lead oxide, and cook in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey; then take some of this according to your need, and mix it with water and honey, and catheterize the breast, and constrict the opening; and let the medicine remain inside for two hours, then remove by pressing out; do this many times until the breast is cleansed, and the corruption is removed; sometimes catheterize with ashes water, when this medicine is not present, and it is that you take vine wood ashes, and pour water over them, then strain it, and catheterize until you know that the breast is well cleansed; and if the patient cannot tolerate it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the ashes water, then catheterize with water and honey in which there is a little lead oxide mixed; or you can catheterize with honey and mead, where the honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and the mead makes the flesh dry; and when you have done this, and you are certain that the breast is well cleansed, then catheterize with what causes flesh to grow in it, and it is that you take a definitive plaster, and mix it with rose oil and wine; or you can catheterize with some medicines and onions, whose properties I have spoken of in the treatise on onions; and if the opening of the breast is small, and the tube of the catheter cannot enter, then widen it slightly with an iron, and insert a tent of Egyptian ointment, or basilicon ointment until it is widened; and if the wound is too large, then sew it up except for one place where the catheter can enter, and if the opening from which the matter issues is at the top, then cut lower than that place.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	 When the abscess is ripe, do not allow any flesh to enter; and if you cannot cut the skin underneath as you wish, prepare it in such a way that the abscess runs to the lowest place there is, for when the abscess is ripe, no flesh should enter. And if you cannot cut the skin underneath as you wish, prepare it so that the abscess runs lightly downwards and leaves nothing of the abscess; and take consolidative medicines to put on the wound, and extend over a linen cloth that covers all the wound; then cut strongly towards the hole in the skin, wider than before, then extend a soft ointment on another cloth according to the size of the hole, and put it on the hole of the wound to lighten the abscess, and do not remove the large cloth until after many days once. And the one that is on the hole of the skin, take off often to remove the abscess, and know what comes out of the abscess, whether it is venom or pus or enough, or digested, or undigested; and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not. And when your medicine has thus spread and you see the nature that leaps up on the hole of the wound, know that the skin is already healed, and health approaches; and then unbind in the morning, or on the third day, and when you unbind the wound, change another cloth, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	 And if the chest throws out undigested matter after many days, know that the chest does not heal.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	 And if subtle poison follows after a long time, do not despair of your health, for health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	 And there are men whose flesh grows slowly in their wounds, and others do the opposite; and if undigested matter comes out of the chest after many days, know that the chest does not heal; and if the chest is slow to heal and distant, then use dry medicines which are moist in substance but dry in virtue, such as ointment defined, for there is a great deal of vitriol in it, and this is the last medicine; take ointment defined, and make it with rose oil, and sprinkle it with equal parts old wine; then cook it and use it; and this same thing does better when cooked and thickened, if ointment defined is not present, or you take myrrh and aloe and frankincense, and grind them, and powder them over the honey when it is on the fire; and then glue a cloth onto it, and place it on the chest; and sometimes add long aristolochia, and celestial lily roots, which are like vetch flour and centaury; and use both simple and compound ones: grind them, and make them into powder, and put them over the honey I mentioned earlier, and use it; and if the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this cure, then know that the corruption is deep, and makes an impression on the bone or hard parts or limbs; then treat it as a cure for fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	 Of the abscess of the fingernail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	 Paronychia is an abscess that occurs beneath the fingernail of the hand or foot, or perhaps in other places; and when it becomes old and is not treated, a foul abscess forms there, spreading and throwing pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and perhaps all the way through it; and there is decay reaching the bone, causing fetid pain, and the head of the finger is swollen, and the color is red.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	 When you treat it as we have said in the section, and the treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you cut away with an iron all the remaining excess of the nail, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The cautery is a great help if the bone is healthy and the nail is intact. And if the nail presses into the flesh, begins to prick, and wounds it, then you must place the blade under the nail that points at the flesh, and push it up, and delicately and lightly cut off that flesh; then apply burning and corrosive medicines on the rest of the flesh to remove all; then cure with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	 And if the corruption is in the bone, cut it out and draw strongly, for as long as the corrupt bone is there, it cannot heal. And if you see the finger begin to rot, cut it off at one of the joints as said before, then cure until healed; and if it is struck and swells and feels great pain, it is necessary that you cauterize it first; then cut the nail with a sharp spatula by slicing across the top, and be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh under the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain. And if it happens, apply something soothing.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	 The pain of the shoulder of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	 The two thumbs that are born in the hands of some men by chance are all fleshy, and sometimes there is one with bones, and sometimes there is one with a nail, and sometimes they grow at the root of the joint, and their birth is in the noses of some people.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	 The one that is born in any knuckle of the thumb does not move, and the one that is born at the joint of the thumb may possibly move; the shape of the fleshy one is light, like this: cut it off at its root with a wide spoon-like tool.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	 The one that grows in the root of the joint is difficult to cure; therefore, be cautious.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 In one who is born or should at the anus, it is necessary that you first cut the flesh roundly to the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable saw, then cure it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	 The union that comes to the two together comes by birth, or by the healing of a wound, or by burning with fire, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	 Then you must cut that union, so that the parts return to their natural forms; then place between two tents or cloths moistened with rose oil, so that they do not join together; or you place between two thin lead plates, until the place is healed, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	 If union occurs to one of his fingers with the palm, cut that union as necessary.
des vils	 of the wounds
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	 Wounds are large swellings full of melancholic superfluities that come in many members of the body; and they occur more frequently in the legs of those who walk and work and carry things than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	 Therefore, you should administer purging with cinnamon, and then heal it with balm.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	 The treatment of iron is done in two ways: one is to cut the wounds and draw out the black blood; and the other way is to lift the wound and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	 The cutting is done in this manner: first, raise the leg with very hot water until the large vein is thinned out; then hold the patient's leg from above the hip down to the part below the knee; then cut the wound in one place, or two, or three, making a wide cut; then lift it and draw out the black blood forcefully by hand, from one end to the other, as much as the patient can bear; and then bandage it, and instruct him to eat foods that generate black bile; and repeat the evacuation and healing when the wounds are full, and this benefits the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The raising of it is according to this manner: raise the patient's leg, if there is a lot of hair, then put it in a bath, and pour hot water on the leg until it becomes red, and swell the veins; and if you do not have a bath, heat it over the fire, then cut along the length from the knee to the ankle; then lift the skin with tweezers, and scrape the vein from each side, until it appears when touched; and one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems like a white cord; then push the vein down, so that it is raised from the skin, and then slightly pinch with tweezers, then cut in another place higher by three fingers; then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears, then lift to the tweezers, as you have done before, and pinch in another place higher by two fingers; then make another cut, or several if you need them, then lift and pinch at the toe of the foot, then pull and lift up to the second cut; then draw from cut to cut, until it comes out completely, then cut; and if you cannot pull and lift it, then insert a needle with a very strong double thread, and tie and pull, and insert below the vein, and turn your hand from side to side, until it comes out; and take care that it does not cut, because if it cuts, then one cannot pull or lift it, and it causes harm to the patient; and when you have pulled it all out, then put moistened wool in wine and rose oil on the place of the wound; and cure it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	 And if the face is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it crookedly, but do not cut it; and pull it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	 The shape of the iron used to cut the face is curved and does not slice, so that it cuts the vein; and it is thickly curved, for if it were fine, it would cut the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and here is the shape:
de la voinne civile	 of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	 This vein is injected in the legs, in hot places where no herbs or trees grow, and in land without moisture; and perhaps it appears elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens from the corruption that comes under the skin, as it comes inside the body, snakes and worms, injected between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	 And if the sign of the beginning of this vein is such that there comes in the leg a very great inflammation, then the place changes, and the vein begins to emerge, just like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	 When the vein opens, it is necessary that you wrap around it a piece of linen from one and a half to two cubits, and the knot, and let the linen hang at the leg. And every time that some blood exudes from lack of strength, then wrap around it the linen and the knot; and if it is too long, then cut part of it, and wrap the remainder, and do not cut it at its root until all of it has come out. For if you cut it, then it enters into the flesh and brings an abscess and rottenness to that place, and a bad illness; because of which thing it is necessary that it be treated little by little up to the head, and that nothing remain in the body; and sometimes this vein when it is treated from five palms long, or ten, and one man came to me whose (vein) issued ten palms long. And when you cut it, then it releases a finger's worth of pus, and pierce it until the bottom, so that all comes out; and let the matter that is inside be emptied, and apply to the place medications preventing rottenness each day, then heal it as (you would) an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	 And sometimes at this vein there are few grains, and especially when it opens in the joint of the foot, or in the foot, and many grains come out from there; heal it then as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	 Worms that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	 This disease is called in our land "cattle disease," because it often happens to cattle, and it is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and it goes through the whole body up and down, and one feels it well when moving from member to member, until it pierces the skin where it goes, and jumps out; and it comes from the putrefaction of certain humors, just like worms, serpents, leeches, and ascarids in the stomach; and one fears its malice, because when it goes through the body, if it goes to the head and comes to the eye, by chance it enters and destroys the eye; and this happens often.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	 When you see it being healed and pulled, one cannot do so unless it is going: therefore, it is necessary that you bind the place above and below with a strong, tight ligature, then cut above and pull strongly; and if the pus has entered deep into the flesh, and you do not find it, cauterize it with fire above until it dies. And the greatest harm it does is that it runs to the eye, as we have said; and if you see it coming near the head of the eye, hold firmly under it the sorcil, then cut above and pull strongly. And the patient should use body cleansing with dissolving medicines for bad humors causing putrefaction, and avoid foods that cause putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	 of the pain which comes from flatulence
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	 This disease is called in our country "vakirir," and it is a pain that comes in some members, and then moves from one member to another; and I saw what I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	 I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and shortly after, I saw it rise up to the shoulder as quickly as anything, like living silver when it runs from one place to another; the pain left that place and fixed itself in the shoulder, and then a short while later it ran through the entire body, until it came into the other arm; then she told me that it was always turning around the body, just as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	 Je m'étonnais beaucoup comment elle passait ainsi d'un membre à l'autre, car je n'avais jamais vu cette maladie de cette façon.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	 Cependant, j'avais vu beaucoup de personnes ressentir des douleurs d'une partie du corps à une autre, mais je ne l'avais jamais vue de cette manière, comme je l'ai vu chez la femme; et je me suis dit que c'était parce que les femmes ont un corps sec, et les veines découvertes, et pour cette raison apparaissent ces ventosités contraintes; mais on ne les voit pas de cette manière chez ceux qui sont délicats, et qui ont des corps humides et des veines remplies.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	 And when you see to heal this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said, then quickly stitch it above and below, and then cut into it so that that windiness is constrained in its place; and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your own eyes, then heal it with those who expel windiness, such as fetid pills, and pilules of serapin, and similar others.
des saiettes	 arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	 The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and the places in the body where they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	 The diversity of their types is such that there are those which have large points and small ones, barbed and solid; and some with two prongs, and others with tongues, and some with parts; and the one which strikes in any member does so in two manners: striking a principal member, such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	 When it falls into any of these limbs, and the signs of death that I will tell you later appear to you: then you must beware of extracting this arrow, for death follows in many forms; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not embedded deeply, draw it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	 And the signs of the brain when the arrow falls into it and pierces the bone are: a swelling on top of the brain, accompanied by blindness, deafness, dizziness, redness in the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms and confusion of the mind, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps there is a discharge from the nostrils or ears; and perhaps he loses his speech and voice; and from the wound there comes white, viscous pus like brain matter. And if these signs appear to you, abstain from treatment, and draw out the arrow if it is not embedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	 The signs of the fainting spell when it falls upon the heart are that it is near the left nipple, and it feels as if it were stuck in a hard thing, not empty; and by chance the faint may move like the finger, and black blood flows out, and coldness and cold sweat come on, and syncope: know then without doubt that death follows.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	 And the signs of an arrow that strikes a lung are that it is without foamy spittle from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and breathes heavily and seeks cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	 And if the arrow strikes the covering of the breast, it is near the small ribs; and there is great pain and great breathing difficulty; and all the limbs from the shoulders are moved.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	 Et s’il la saiette chiet en l’estomac
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	 And if the arrow falls into the stomach, and some fecal matter comes out of the intestines, then there is no hope for a cure, or for the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	 And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and blood comes out with the urine, and the patient feels great pain, know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	 The other members, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulders, upper arm, spine of the back, chest, hips, legs, and similar members, are safe according to many conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	 Quant la saiette est dans le nerf ou l'artère, et elle n'est pas venimeuse, comme je vais vous dire ce qui m'est arrivé, afin que vous fassiez de même.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	 It happened to a man that an arrow struck him in the eye socket at the root of the nose: I tried to remove it, and pulled it out from another side under the fat of the ear, and he was cured without any harm.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	 And he pulled out an arrow that struck him in the fat of the eye under the eyelid, and the arrow was bent, and he could only reach the tip towards the shaft, and the arrow was large like a Turkish bow, completely light without feathers; the youth was cured, and no evil happened to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	 And he drew an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabian with feathers; I shaved off his beard, and managed it so that I drew it out, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	 And he drew an arrow from a man who had it in the stomach, and I thought he would die; but after thirty days, his condition did not change; I cut around the arrow, and secured it, and pulled it out forcefully, and there was no bad outcome.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	 And I saw a man into whom an arrow fell in the back, and the wound healed over; and the arrow remained inside him, and did not change any of his natural habits, nor did it find any harm in any of his natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	 And I saw another man, to whom an arrow fell into his face, and the wound was closed; and he remained thus without suffering great pain; and very many similar [cases].
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	 And an arrow was shot at one of the king's princes, which had fallen into his nose, and it was leaning a little to the right side; and the arrow was completely lodged in [him]. I was called to the cure after it had been [in him] for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	 Thus I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	 I examined it with all my skillful hands, and did not feel it at all; and he felt a stinging pain under his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	 I thought it was from the point of the arrow. I placed on that spot a digestive poultice to prevent swelling; and the site of the arrow became apparent to me.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	 Je mis l'emplâtre maints jours, et résouda la plaie derechef, et demeura ainsi le malade longtemps, tant qu'il sentit la saiette un jour dedans son nez; et il le me dit.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	 And I put on the wound a corrosive medicine for many days, until it was open, and then I probed it, and felt the tip of the arrow that was lodged there; then I applied to the opening of the wound this corrosive medicine, until the tip of the arrow appeared visibly; and it passed well over four months, and then the wound healed so much that I put in tweezers, and pulled from one side and the other, and it could not come out; then I did not cease to invent and devise means with instruments, until I got it one day in good tweezers, as will be shown at the end of this chapter, so that I drew it out, and healed the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	 And the doctors judge that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored; I restored it then, and the wound was healed, and the patient was completely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	 But I have told you the nature of the extraction of some arrows, so that you may apply your treatment to those which I do not mention, for a book cannot encompass everything; but a wise master understands well even small things, and concerning what is present and failing, finds new work, and new instruments, in the practice of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	 I say that arrows do not exit from the members into which they are shot except in two ways: either through the place where they enter, or by another route; and those that go out by the same way they entered are arrows entering fatty places, and this sometimes happens now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	 And if it does not come out now, leave it until the flesh is rotten around it, and the opening is cleared; and likewise if it is stuck in the bone, and cannot come out, leave it thus for some days, moving it each day; and then it will come out, and if it does not, pierce all around with a fine needle, until the place around is enlarged, and then draw it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	 And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head, and goes into one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of the accidents that I have mentioned happen to the patient: do not draw it out, but leave it until it is equal after some days, for if the arrow comes as far as the brain, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	 And if the arrow is lodged only in the bone, and does not reach the marrow, and the patient remains for some days without bad symptoms, then extract it with skillful pulling.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if it is deeply lodged and cannot be pulled out, then apply cauterizing agents around it, as I have told you; then treat the area until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	 And if the arrow is embedded in such a way that it cannot be seen, then search for it throughout the body; and if you can feel it, then extract it with an appropriate instrument; and if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound or the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then widen the wound until it is large enough; and extract the arrow if you can, and if there are barbs on the arrow that keep it in place, then remove as much flesh from both sides of the barb as you can, and then break or bend the barbs until you can pull out the arrow; and be skillful so that you do not break the arrow, which would make the extraction more difficult.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	 And if you cannot do it at once, leave it until the place around is rotten, then pull it out, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	 And if the flow of blood seems unfavorable to you, then do as we have said about the cure in its chapter; and beware of incising the nerve or vein, and devise a way how you can best draw out the arrow without danger, either early or late, strongly or gently; and place the patient in the same position he was in when the arrow struck him, for that is the greatest help there is, and if you cannot do this, then place him according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	 The arrow that comes out of another part, or if there is an opening on it, or the skin is swollen in such a way that one can see or feel it clearly: cut open then until the tweezers can grab hold of it, and then pull it out; so it will come out now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	 And if it is stuck in the bone, then turn your hand roundly until it enters the bone and widen the bone, then draw it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	 And if it cannot come out, leave it and then begin the extraction again until it comes out with force; and if there is any part of the arrow inside, push all of the shaft; and if the shaft has broken off and you see that a pressing instrument should be used, insert an instrument with a notch, so that the point of the arrow enters the notch of the instrument; then press strongly, and if the arrowhead has come out, insert the instrument with a pointed tip inside to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	 And if the arrow is poisoned, it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can, then treat the wound as needed.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 Et si la flèche tombe dans le pied ou dans le ventre ou dans la vessie ou dans le côté, et qu'elle soit proche de la surface, tu peux frapper par-dessus; mais fais attention à ne pas frapper une veine ou un nerf. Puis extrais-la, puis couds la plaie si nécessaire; et continue le traitement jusqu'à ce qu'elle soit guérie.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	 Les pincettes utilisées pour retirer les flèches ressemblent au bec d'un oiseau, et voici leur forme :
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	 Elles existent en plusieurs tailles : grandes, moyennes et petites, selon la taille de la flèche.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	 La forme du poussoir est comme les plumes d'un oiseau, pour pousser la flèche par son extrémité, ainsi que montré sur cette figure :
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	 The form of the tongs for pushing and pulling is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	 common body veins
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	 The veins from which one bleeds are XXXI, of which there are XVI at the head: that is to say, two veins after the ears called "herbic"; and two arteries in each temple; and two veins on the upper eyelids of both eyes, called "aspirates"; and the vein in the middle of the forehead; and the vein at the tip of the nose; and two windpipes in the neck; and two veins on the lips above the mouth, which are the veins called "auguric"; and two veins under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	 The veins that are commonly used for bleeding are V in each arm: one is the cephalic, and it is located on the left side, and the common people call it "the head vein"; and the middle one is called "fast", and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilic, and the common people call it "heart vein"; and the basilic is on the right side, and the common people call it "belly vein", and it is above the ulnar, and it is the one that is used for bleeding, which appears clearly on the wrist.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	 And the small vein is the one between the little finger and the ring finger, which has two branches; and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is below the curve of the left wrist, and the second saphenous vein is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein called "nose", which is on the other side of the ankle; and in the other leg there are three veins under those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	 The bleeding of wounds that are behind the ears aids in ancient catarrhs and headaches; and the qualities of the bleeder, as I tell you, is that you take the patient's head, and rub the place where the wounds are with a rough cloth; then the patient strains his neck with a screw, until the two wounds appear behind the ears in two dependent places of the head: seek them then with your finger, and where you feel the pulse under your finger, press firmly; then take the lancet, and insert it under the wound up to the bone, then lift your hand all along the wound upwards, and cut through the skin and the wound well two fingers wide across, and make the blood come out as much as you wish; then compress and bind, until it is healed; and I have already spoken of the incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	 The bleeding of the two veins that are in the two temples is good for an old migraine and a headache, and a customary cataract, and for the body's acute tears in the eyes; and the qualities of the bleeder are as I say: and it is that the patient should strain his neck so that the two veins appear clearly; and he feels the pulse beneath your finger, then sign with your thumb; then lift the heart above the vein high to your finger's indication, and insert the lancet below, and lift the vein high, and cut it as you have done in the two other veins, and let the blood run according to your need; then release the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on top; and then bind it well, and leave it until it heals; and we have already spoken about their cutting and extraction at the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	 The bleeding of the frontal vein is as valuable as the bleeding of the cephalic in old face diseases, and for migraines, and for flushing; and its quality is such that the patient should twist their neck until the vein appears; then take the instrument called "fosseur", whose form is thus:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	 Place the point on the vein, and strike with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow according to the amount you wish; then release the patient's neck, and bind the vein until it is healed, and sometimes use a wide cloth.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	 However, it is not appropriate for the cloth to be too sharp; and bleed diagonally, because the bone is nearby, and perhaps the cloth will break when it is thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	 The bleeding of the two veins that are in the two temples helps with the eyes, and with baldness, and with redness, and with the cataract in the eye, and with the diseases of the face; and the quality of their bloodletting is such that the patient should strain his neck by twisting some cord, as before; then bleed, and let the bleeding be transverse, a little long from the flame, a little wide, for there is no flesh there.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	 And if the flame is fine, it may break; then let the blood run, as much as you need, and then bind with cotton, and tie well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	 The bleeding of the vein of the nose is good for ague, and for sudden madness, and for diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes in the face, and especially when it is old; and the quality of the bloodletting is such that the patient strains his neck, then holds his nose with your left hand, and takes a fine long flame, and sticks it in the middle of the lip in the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well there, and the blood will now begin to run; and do not go too deep, and let the blood run according to your need, then bind it for one night, for it is very quickly healed; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	 The bleeding of the two jugulars helps with the constriction of the blood vessel, at the beginning of mixing, and for many diseases, and for itching, and for ulcers, and for shingles; and the quality of the bleeding is such that the patient should stretch his neck under one and the other, as we have said; and let the master be standing on the head of the patient, and the patient sit on a chair, then open the vein widely from the front to the back, then draw blood quickly, or as much as needed; then do the same on the other side, then release the band, and gently constrict both veins, so that the patient does not strangle; and leave it until morning, so that the wound may be healed.
de la sainie des leivres	 Of the bleeding of the liver
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	 The bleeding of the veins of the lips above helps to cool in the mouth, and to corrupt the gums, and to split the lips, and from the nose and around.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	 And the quality of the bleeding is to have the patient sit before you, and grasp his neck as I said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left, and they are known by the fact that they are black, and because around them there are small black veins: therefore, cut off both, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, then cut off the largest of each side, and likewise for the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	 Of the flow under the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	 The bleeding from the veins that are under the tongue helps after the bleeding of the cephalic, and this is for constriction of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth; and the quality of the bleeder is such that the patient sits between your hands before the sun, and he lifts the tongue, and looks under each side a black vein: then bleed one and the other, and do not go too deep, because below are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	 The veins of the knife with which one commonly bleeds are bled in two ways: either by pricking with a wide and large Martian flame, or a subtle olive-shaped knife like cutting knives, and it is called "anesil"; and they are wide and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	 The shape of the flame mirror is very renowned, and it is wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	 And it is necessary for opening the full veins that contain large and visible blood, and that hold large and turbid blood; this is the shape of the olive-flame.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	 And it is more pointed and subtle, and is for healing the subtle veins, where there is subtle yellowish blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	 The healing of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases under the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the belly; and it is necessary for the healer to heal wisely, and to beware of the artery that is below. ︎
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	 And if it cuts the artery and bleeding occurs, then it must be cauterized, as I have said; and the flame should not be pricking, but cutting like a knife.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	 And if the basilic does not open clearly, then you must strain it and change another one; or you seek some part of it, or you heal in its place the vein in the arm: it opens clearly; and cut with a knife flame, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	 And if you want to know the place of the vein, then first you must strain the arm so that you touch the place until you recognize the pulse; then sign the place from below, and then bind the arm, and cut the vein with a knife flame; and beware that you do not hit the artery when you see the place swollen, for it is of the artery: avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Et si tu vois saillir en haut ainsi comme l'urine d'un enfant,
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	 Et si tu vois saillir en haut ainsi comme l'urine d'un enfant,
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	 Et se tu vois saillir en haut ainsi comme l'urine d'un enfant, ›
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	 The bleeding of the vein in the middle is such that it draws blood from above and below the head, because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic, as we have said; and it behooves the bloodletter to beware of the nerve that is below, and if he strikes too deep, and finds the nerve, and it swells and the health of the patient is endangered, and perhaps cannot heal; and this nerve often opens, and if it does not open in some people due to its subtlety, then you must bleed with the instrument anesil; and avoid the nerve as best you can.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	 And if he has a vein between the two nerves, then open it lengthwise.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	 The sanguine of the head also helps, as it draws blood from the head and aids the eyes; and one must bleed at the point of the olive-flame or the myrtle-flame, for that is the safest of all veins, for there is neither nerve nor artery beneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	 However, one must seek the lightest place, and it is not serious if one misses the first time, and one can try again; and perhaps the place swells in some men when one misses the first time, but it is not serious.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	 The quality of the bleeding depends on your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	 The first thing you must know about bleeding is that bleeding is only done in order to maintain health and to prevent future illnesses; and the bleeding should be done in one of the three veins, which are: namely, cephalic, fasting, or basilic; and one should bleed at the beginning of spring towards summer, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of repletion appear; and one should bleed on the first or third day, after two or three hours of the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	 Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIV ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	 Ne ne se doivent mie saigner les vieux qui ont passé soixante ans.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	 Car cil qui sont fors de lor raisun par maladie ou par force de vin, si est moult de paour que le malade ait d’eus, si que il ne puet bonement saignier; car li sainiers, quant il voit le palsier crier ou esmaier, si se desconforte, et laisse la voinne, ou il ne i pueet faire aucun bien.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	 Car il y a des veines qui fuient comme des cordes au saigneur, et il y en a de telles qui sont pleines de ventosité, ainsi quand on met le feu dessus, il retire le feu, et ne peut ouvrir la veine, et ainsi se fait-il avec ces veines; et s’il ouvre la veine, alors la plaie est trop étroite, c’est pourquoi il faut que le saigneur soit avisé de ces choses.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	 And if the vein opens on the first attempt, that is good; if not, then try again a little below or above that place quickly, if the area is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	 And if the area is swollen and the patient is frightened, leave it for a day or two without tying off the arm; perhaps an abscess will form; do not enter into a bath, then begin the bloodletting again if desired; and if the opening is small, or the flow is too subtle and you doubt that enough blood will come out as needed, then push all of the fire straight into that same opening; work quickly for a short time before the area swells; because this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	 If you see the place swollen, do not restart the bleeding, and put a little oil on it, for it lightens the body of blood, and it is better in this place the oil than the ointment; and thus administer the oil of olives in each wound that you bleed the veins, to stop the flow of blood; and this same triple and bowel makes when one puts it on the place; so subtilizes the blood and separates when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	 And if there comes a large abscess, which happens often, especially when it is not bled strongly except at that time where the opening of the vein is small, then hurry and put on the place a moistened sponge in water and salt a little hot, and hold it for an hour; and it is necessary that you do this after the issuing of blood from the vein, and if there remains on the place after some days any blackness or greenness, it does not harm him; and if you see, put on some aloes or myrrh dissolved in juice of calamus, mustard, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	 And many times there occurs an abscess and swelling at the incision of the basilica: place your hand on it, and if you find the area soft to the touch of the hand, then this appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Therefore, do not apply any of the things we have mentioned, because it may cause bleeding from an artery; but make a dry poultice to harden the area, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	 And draw from each according to the amount of its power and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	 For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	 And for the one who is full and strong, and needs bloodletting, a wider wound should be made, and the flame should be wide; and for the weak one, do the opposite, and it should be bled little and often, and it should be bled by cutting across, not by pricking; and this method of bleeding is safe from excessive bleeding and nerve damage, and is worth more than the long or wide bleeding.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	 And for the one whose body lacks blood, it is necessary to give him moist bread in apple juice; if he is hot, draw III or IV times of blood. And if he is of cold temperament, let him eat before bleeding moist bread in musk syrup, or aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and a well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	 And if it happens at the syncope, after much blood has been let out, he must drink meat broth and subtle scented syrup, and use other things that we have mentioned in the section on syncope, for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	 And if he wants to bleed an arm and let blood another time, it is necessary, when he has been weakened by a great bleeding, that he bleeds little by little, according to the quantity of his strength continually.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	 And whoever wants to bleed an arm after the first bleeding and has a strong body, should bleed seven hours after the first bleeding or in the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	 And whoever wants to let blood from another place, should do so on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	 Because there is much blood within the body that is already heated, and it causes fever; therefore, one must draw out a large quantity of it, and widen the opening until it drips in streams; then, once you have verified all the conditions of bloodletting, place your hand upon the pulse when it bleeds, so that death does not come in place of bloodletting, which happens often when the bloodletter is negligent. And it is not necessary, when you see the arm being released, and allowing blood to flow a second time, and the opening is closed, to press strongly; nor if it is crooked, should it extend the arm hastily, for that would be bad; but let it be until it bleeds a second time. Or you prick with the point of the flame, so that the blood which is congealed at the opening of the vein may flow out more freely, and place upon it a little cloth soaked in water, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	 Et s'il est enflé, laisse-le et ne l'étreins pas, jusqu'à ce que l'abcès soit calmé.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	 And if it is necessary to bleed a second time, then heal him in that same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	 The veins inside the arm are healed in place of the vein of the head because they are more composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	 And the manner of healing is such that the patient places his hand in hot water until the vein becomes red; then it is bound moderately so that the vein appears well, and then heal him now across [the vein], not lengthwise or widthwise; and let the opening be wide, and heal close to the joint of the hand. And if blood cannot come out, then place the hand back in hot water and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough; and if it is summer, do not put the hand back in hot water, for one puts it more in winter than in summer; and the healing from this vein is safer than any other veins, for there are neither artery nor nerve [there].
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	 Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	 Et de toz les autres membres, si li fais le mesme que je te di del main, car c'est mout boen a tout maladie dou foie, et de la grant bile.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	 Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	 The sap of the sponge is good for all diseases that are below the body, such as diseases of the uterus, and retention of blood, and disease of the kidneys, and of the hips and ancient legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	 And the quality of its sap is such that the patient should put his foot in hot water and rub on the vein until it bursts, and bind over the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot go many kidneys; heal it then in the widest kidney, or at the ankle, which is better.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	 And if you heal on the foot, beware of the nerves that are beneath, and heal across as when cutting; and let the flame be gentle.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	 And if the blood cannot flow out, then put the foot back in the water, and let the vein bleed well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	 And if the bloodletting fails the first time, then start again a little higher the second time, for the place is salt; do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and do the same with the saphenous vein of the other foot likewise.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	 The place of the sciatic vein is at the ankle on the outer side, and its bleeding is good for hip pain when it is due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	 And the qualities of its bleeding are such that the patient should enter the bath, and wind four fingers above the ankle, for otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, then bleed in all the ways you can, and by crossing over; and it is better that you cover it, for the place is salty, and it is very responsive to many men.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	 And if you do not find it, then cut a vein from him that opens onto the back of the foot, towards the small toe, and beware of the nerves; make the blood flow as much as you see fit, and then unbind the ligature, and place cotton on top and bind it; she is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	 of the bleeding by cupping
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	 Cupping is made from horn, or brass, or glass; and cupping is done in two ways: either by striking and drawing blood, or without striking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	 And this cupping which is without striking is done in two ways: either with fire or without fire; and cupping done by striking and drawing blood is done in fourteen places on the body, of which one is entirely at the top of the head; and another is in the neck; and two others on both sides of the neck; and a cup under the chin; and cups on the shoulders; and cups on the buttocks; and cups in both arms; and cups in both legs; and cups in both ankles; and cupping does not draw blood, except from the small veins that are scattered throughout the flesh, and therefore it does not weaken anyone, as is done with bleeding; and it should not be administered, either by fire or without fire, for any illness that comes from fullness, until the entire body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	 And if by necessity of illnesses it is necessary to bleed, or by custom, then we administer it each hour at the beginning of the month, and at the end, and in between, and at all times; for there are such people who, when they need to bleed, have a heavy head; and there are those who find fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness in the eyes; and there are those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have an inflamed tongue, and spit blood; and there are those who dream, and see nothing but blood and wounded and dead and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	 And when we see these signs, and especially in the middle of the month, we order them to be bled after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	 Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, and it is not necessary that this be after the evacuation of the entire body; and this ventosation is in place of the cephalic bloodletting, and it is not necessary that those of cold temperament use it, or those who have catarrh, for it causes them great harm; and therefore, it is not necessary that old people use it, nor those who have cold diseases of the head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	 And those who often let blood from there become oblivious, and therefore it is necessary to place the cupping glass a little lower out of fear of oblivion.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	 The ventosation in the neck is in place of bloodletting from the head and temple, and therefore it is good for narrowing the foot, and for cleft palate, and for jaundice, and for plethora; and it must be used sparingly, because if it is held too firmly, it can cause oblivion in the stomach and heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	 The ventosations at the two ribs of the neck are good for headaches, migraines, and strangulation, and for toothache at the roots; it is in place of the bloodletting of the basilica; and you should instruct the barber not to cut the artery when performing the procedure, so that there is no bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	 The ventosations under the chin are good for diseases of the mouth and for decaying gums and similar diseases in the mouth; it is in place of the bloodletting of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	 The ventosations of the shoulders are good for diseases caused by heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	 The ventosations of the ribs are as effective as the three veins of the arm, because they draw blood from these large veins; and instruct the barber not to strike too deep, for the place is bare of flesh, and lies under nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	 The cupping glass on the buttocks is good for hemorrhoids of the anus and for diseases below, and it should be large, and made of brass, because it needs to draw well; and perhaps, if it were delicate, it would break, causing great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	 Cupping glasses on the legs are effective because they draw blood from the entire body and are good for old pains in the loins, and in the groin, and in the bladder, and they remove flows; and they are placed on the two shanks and the two ankles, but they weaken the body after long use, causing paralysis in many conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	 The manner of placing the cupping glass is such that you first place it empty, and suck quickly, and place hastily, and move evenly, and do not cease from doing this until you see the place red and swollen, and the reddening of the blood; then strike, and replace the cupping glasses, and take care in the arrangement of the body, for there are those who have dark flesh and clear pores: thus it is necessary to strike only once, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and one deep wound; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	 And if the blood is thick, then it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to refine the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	 And if the blood is very thick, then it is necessary to strike a third time; and when we want to draw out some of the blood little by little, we only allow ourselves one time.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	 Et si nous voulons beaucoup de sang, alors nous recommençons souvent; et si le sang est épais, alors nous frappons en profondeur, et la fin de cela est que le cœur soit percé soudainement, et il faut à celui qui a une peau épaisse et dure, et qui ont des pores étroits, que tu oignes les lieux des ventouses d'huile ouvrante et dissolvante: si c'est en été, d'huile violette, ou d'huile d'amandes douces, ou d'huile de semence de citrouille; et si c'est en hiver, d'huile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblable.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	 And if the swelling is large and cold, take bitter almond oil, or balm oil, or anise oil, and similar ones.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	 And if the person being healed has tender flesh and large pores, then no oil should be applied; rather it should be washed after bloodletting with rose water, or cold water, or black nightshade water, or cucumber water, or apple water, or other similar ones.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	 And those who have much moisture should be treated with asafetida, or myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	 And those with large swellings should be treated with old wine, or barley water, or aniseed or camomile decoction, or other similar things; and they should not be bled by cupping before the bath or in the bath, but rather an hour or two after the bath; and they should not sleep after cupping, and they should wash before being cupped and after being cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	 And take care if the one who is healthy is choleric, and if his blood is too hot and inflamed; then he should take cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuce in vinegar, and similar things; and he should eat raw vegetables, and the meat of capon, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	 And the one who has a cold complexion should take syrup of honey, and moderately scented wine, which is between old and new, and eat raw apples, and raw vegetables and small birds and pigeons; and on the day that he will purge himself, he should drink more than eat; and it is necessary to give some men a triacle or musk before or after the purging, to strengthen the main members; and let his blood be thinned, but those who are hot should not drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	 The ventouses that are applied without cutting are those placed on the liver, and the bladder, and gout, and on the abdomen and the womb and the kidneys and the hip, for these members do not allow cutting near them, and this is only done to draw blood from one member to another, as we place ventouses on the breasts when the nipple bleeds; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we place ventouses on the abdomen and womb to reduce the member; and it relieves pain when there is an ulcer or stone, and perhaps removes the ulcer by its attractive power, or dislodges the stone from its place; and thus it acts when placed on the liver and bladder when there is retained gas, and these ventouses are administered empty to suck only; and sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with hot water, as in pleurisy, and in such a manner that one fills the ventouse with hot water alone, or with water in which healing herbs have been boiled.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	 The form of the cupping glass administered by fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	 And let it be two fingers wide and half a palm deep, and let there be on the side around the middle a small hole, just big enough to insert a needle, and let it be made of brass, soft inside so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb; and let there be in the middle a crossbar of brass or iron, to hold a cloth wick, both large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who use them; for the cupping glasses for children are different from those for the elderly, and for the thin from the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	 And one must place this cupping glass on the limb in this way: take a wick of wax or linen and place it inside the cupping glass across the crossbar that is inside the cupping glass, so that the light is at the bottom of the cupping glass to prevent it from burning the patient; then place it on the limb, and let your two fingers be on the hole that we have mentioned, so that when desired, the vapor can escape, and remove the cupping glass; and take another wick as before, and begin again often, if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	 In the application of the cupping glass in pleurisy, it has no rod nor hole, and is only administered when full of water, and is placed on the member alone; and this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	 Without rods and without holes, they are only administered in members where one cannot place cups due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and in bare places of flesh, such as fingers or noses, and other similar ones; and the use is such that when you find leeches that are in soft clean water without putrefaction, take them; and put one in soft water until they become familiar with it, and have nothing in their bellies; and then let it be bled from a vein and from a cup, then rub the member until it is red, and place the leeches on it; and when they are full and fall off, if it is a place where one can put a cup, then put one on, for that is very effective afterward.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	 If not, then remove the place of the leech with water, very well, and then press it; and if the place bleeds too much after the leeches, moisten a cloth in cold water and place on top until the blood is stanched; and if the blood is abundant, place vitriol or gallnuts and similar things on top until it is stanched; or you can place half of peeled beans on the place and leave them until they dry on the place, which will now staunch it; and if you need more, take other leeches.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	 And if the leeches do not want to be taken, then rub the place with fresh blood or stick a needle into it until the blood comes out and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they dry; and when you see that they are falling off, sprinkle a little alum and powdered glass or ash on top, and they will fall off now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	 Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	 This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine and is for the treatment of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	 Know, dear son, that the foolish doctors cast away this chapter because they never saw any ancient books or read any letters about it; and for this reason, knowledge has become strange in our land, for I have never found anyone good at it; and I know nothing of it except through the science of ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have gained knowledge from them, both by experiment and by the experience of my life; and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained within, and have abbreviated it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments used, as I have done in these two previous chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	 It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the sums of the word and the chapters where the wise man places his understanding, and dwell on the truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	 I say that when fracture or dislocation or twisting or bruising occurs to someone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient on all sides, if nothing prevents you completely, such as physical weakness, infancy, old age; or if the time is not very hot, or too cold; and avoid cold foods, that is, cold baths, and bird and crab meat, and do not drink wine, and do not eat any fatty meats, and do not fill oneself with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have no doubt of hot abscess or spreading of matter to the limb; then the patient should return to his previous way of life.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	 And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that the patient be fed with food that promotes thickening, such as wheat cooked in water, rice, heads (of animals), feet (of animals), cow's udder, eggs, fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	 For with such nourishment the bones mend more quickly and soon heal.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	 And know that broken old and withered bones cannot heal well or mend according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor can those that are too soft, such as the bones of small children; but it does not matter, reset above the broken bone with strong bindings that hold the limb together until it heals as before; and if it is not completely healed, then the patient must be fed with rich food, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	 And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	 For the fracture of the head is different from that of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	 For there are fractures that go to the bone marrow, and others that splinter, like the cut of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	 And there is fracture with wound, and fracture which is just a small crack throughout.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	 And each type has its own device, and its proper instrument for restoration, according to what the bone returns to its place; and the fracture of the bone is known by the fact that the place is twisted, and it opens well from the outside, and sounds when pressed with the hand; and when there is no twisting or pain on touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture; but it can still have twisting, or cracking, or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	 If you do not need to move it by hand, but rather place on top of it the medicines that come hereafter, and then hold it now gently.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	 And know that the fractures that go in width, and are the two parts disjointed, it is now necessary to place them at an equal point before any abscesses come there; and if hot abscesses come there, leave it for some days until the abscess subsides; then put it at a moveable point that you can easily and wisely do so, and know that the restoration of this is lighter than the restoration of that where there are pieces; then hold it as required hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	 And if there are broken pieces in the bone, and it is divided into two parts, whether in hand or foot, or at your hand if it is a small limb, or with two cords, or with one cord and at your hand; and put the member according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the member are separated, reset by all means the additions in their places as you can, and be careful not to cause injury or pain to the patient through your work; and join well the two ends of the bones according to the best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	 And he feels it well in the hand if it seems to you that it is not well: then arrange it beautifully, and do not constrain it too much, nor press as those who bring about by their work hot abscess and contraction of the limb, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	 And when the limb is in place, instruct the patient well not to move it, neither awake nor asleep, nor turning, nor any other way; and ensure that the limb is so secure that he feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	 For when he feels no pain, it is not in place, and one must put it in such a position that he feels no pain; and ensure that it is placed straight, so that crookedness does not come to it when it is set; and the nature of the broken limb is as I tell you. xspace
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	 Saiches que li membres brisiés sont divers en petitesse et en grandeur et en forme.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	 Car il i a petis membres, si com braiz et doiz et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	 And if there is swelling or an abscess, place something that soothes the abscess and removes the swelling, and leave it thus for some days; then bring forth your stiles, and let them be half the width of a reed, wisely made, or of wood used to make clogs, or of palm fronds, and let them be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	 but the stile that is placed on the break should be a little thicker and wider than the others; and it should be as long as is necessary for the member, whether small or large; then bring forth the stiles as you did in the first layer, then bind above with a thread evenly, as was done in the first layer on the break; narrower at the top, gradually thinner; and the threads should be of medium thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, and they should be soft linen; for if the threads are thick, as I have seen the work of fools who make their bindings with twisted linen thread, this is a great mistake, because the binding cannot be even if it is too tight, and there should not be less than two finger widths between each stile.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	 Et si le malade est blessé par les pointes des étoiles après l'extraction en ses veines, alors mets dessous elles des éponges de lin, ou de la laine pilée, afin qu'il ne saigne pas.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	 When the wound is with a bone fracture and the skin is broken, I will describe its treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	 And know that it is not advisable to extract all the broken bones on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	 For when the limb is large, it is not appropriate to insert needles before day five or seven, or more, depending on your certainty of a boil occurring; and see here the manner of ancient emplastrums for restoring fractures, dislocations, and torsions: and it is that you take flour that stays near the walls of the mill, and mix it with plenty of eggs, and put this concoction, not too thin nor too thick, into use, and this is the common manner of the emplastrum restoring fractures in many dispositions, especially for women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	 Autre maniere d'emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	 Another way to make a poultice for torsion: take mugwort and vismalva, ana XII; myrrh and aloes, ana IX; acacia VI; bolus armeniacus XII, grind well, and mix with water or plenty of egg, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	 Another way to make a poultice for joints and bones that have moved from their place, and it relieves the resulting pain, and those who use it cut off parts of the bone, and breakage: take new wool, soak it in vinegar and cooked oil, and apply to the affected area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	 This poultice does not restore [the bone], but it is good for relieving hot abscesses and removes pain properly.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	 Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	 Another method of poultice for restoring the fractured bone and to heal the remaining abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	 Take equal parts of mallow root, camomile, violet flowers, and chickpea flour; grind them together, mix with wine, and if the limb is hot, mix with moist coriander water or plain water, and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	 Another stronger method of poultice than the previous one, when a hard abscess comes to restore the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	 Take roots of mullein, and flax seed, marshmallow, melilot, and burnet, and flowers of violets and camomile, all in equal parts; grind them together with salt water, or sweet water, or wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	 Hippocrates said in his book that nothing should be put on the broken member to restore strength except for a salve made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and that it should be between two, neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	 And it seems that Galen said that dry and slightly warm things should be put on the broken member to restore it, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	 Another way to make a poultice that works for wounds and pain: take mugwort and chopped onions or bird feathers, and vervain, and equally willow leaves, and grind them, and make a poultice and apply it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then you loosen the bandage after a while, and watch if the patient feels no pain, or if the bone has moved from its place; do not loosen it for many days. And if there is pain in the area, or itching, restlessness or swelling, hurry, and loosen it, and remove the poultice now; and take a light cloth, and a moist sea sponge, and dip it in water, and lift the area, until the itching stops, and the pain is soothed; then let the member rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, wet in water or rose oil, and bind it tightly with a nut, until you are sure that there is no hot abscess; and the inflammation of the member rests, and the pain is gone, then start again with a subtle bandage, and a little poultice, and do not tighten it as much as before; and continue until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	 And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen, I have removed everything; and you need plasters and bandages, then begin again as you did first, equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	 And if nothing comes to the member from what we have said, do not unbind it until after three days or four or five or seven; and sometimes leave it for twenty days, according to what is seen, until the breaks become hard, and the flesh approaches; then bind it more tightly than before, and thicken its flesh, as I said earlier. And if you see that the place dries out more than necessary, know that nutrition cannot come there; therefore, wash it with hot water each time you unbind it, every three days, and loosen the bandage a little. By this work, therefore, nourishment comes to the member, and quickly corrects what foolish doctors do, who bind the member crookedly: it is bad, and it is a dangerous practice, and I see nothing other than leaving it and working correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	 of diverse kinds of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	 There are many kinds of fractures and diverse shapes, and the causes are distinct; for there are fractures that are caused by the blow of a sword, and the bone is completely removed up to the marrow which is beneath the bone, just like an axe or wood; and for this reason this kind of fracture is called «haichure».
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	 When the sword strikes the bone from above without penetrating it, this kind of fracture is called «absolue»; and the wound in these two kinds of fractures can be large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	 And if there is a blunt force trauma, or splitting, or striking with a stone, or falling onto stone, or other similar causes.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	 And if there is a penetrating fracture, which reaches as far as the cloth beneath the bone, or on top of the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	 And if there is a wound that penetrates the bone as subtly as a hair, and the fracture is small, it is therefore called a "hairline" fracture; and if the wound is made by striking with a stone, or by falling, or by something similar, and drives a piece of the bone inward, and the place is indented as blacksmiths do when they strike on anvils; then a stone enters.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	 And this happens more often in those who have soft bones in the head, like a child's skull; and it occurs in all these types of fractures that small fragments are detached as if they were stars; and I will speak about this later.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	 And we recognize all types of fractures by drawing them out, and by probing with hooks, and by the corrupt flesh that is on top.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	 The hairline appearance is known by this: when one has exposed the bone and scrapes over it, the black fracture appears.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	 In the treatment of fracture, pay attention to the patient's condition, and if you see any evil signs such as vomiting of bile, loss of consciousness, extension [of the limb], paralysis, shivering fever, eyes exuding pus and redness, or similar symptoms in various forms, it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	 And if you do not see any frightening signs and expect a favorable outcome, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	 Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	 Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	 Et la seconde maniere si est que tu encheves le bout d’un fer, et le mets entor la plaie et le tires a soi, et c’est fait tant que tu pues tirer l’os de la plaie.
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	 And then he makes another cut, larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	 And the second method is that you have various cuts, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and made of Indian iron; and work lightly, so that you do not wound the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	 And if the bone is protruding and hard, then you must drill around it before administering cuts with trepanations, not so deep that they penetrate through the skull bone, and there should be a margin or circle above the point to prevent it from penetrating beyond the bone; and you must have several of them, so that each fits in its place on the thickness of the bone, thus having trepans for all skulls; and this is the form of the three types of trepans:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	 For piercing around the broken bone, you must place a trepan on the bone and turn it with your hands until you know that the bone is perforated; then remove the trepan and replace it elsewhere a short while after, and do this all around, then cut away the space of the bone between the holes with incisors, doing so as subtly and lightly as possible, as we have said, until you draw out the bone to your hand or with some of the instruments you have such as pincers; and be sure not to touch the brain or the membrane.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	 And when you have perforated and drawn out the bone, it is necessary that you scrape off the remnant of the bone with another instrument similar to an incisor, but it must be thinner and more subtle than the other incisors; and if there remains any small bones or scales, remove them lightly with one of the instruments; then treat the wound with tenths and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	 And the other manner of working is that which Galen said, which is safer; and he praised it greatly, and these are his words.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	 It is first necessary that you uncover a part of the bone where the fracture appears to have moved, so that when you have uncovered this part, you will place under the head of this trephine, which has the following form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	 And do not cut from one side only, and the part is sharp on two sides, so that the cutting edge is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer on top, so that you lightly cut all around the bone, and be careful of the cloth that is underneath; if it is too close to the bone, remove it gently, for one can remove it without harm, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	 Et si la fracture de l'os ne traverse pas jusqu'à la peau, et l'os est coupé seulement par le dessus, avec des petits fragments, alors il faut raser ces aspérités, et enlever les écailles avec un rasoir subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantités, pour adapter chaque endroit de la manière la plus appropriée, selon l'ouvrage et la forme de la fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	 If you start with large rasps, and then use finer ones afterwards, do not stop until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	 In each of the other delicate cuts and subtle fractures, you must adapt according to their direction; this is something that cannot be taught to those who have studied this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	 And if the abscess is uncovered, it is necessary that you take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it on the wound; then take another double cloth, two or three times, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth; and do this as lightly as you can, so that you do not burden the abscess, then apply another ligature over it, and do not tighten it too much, only enough to touch the wound; and leave it like this for one or two days, until the swelling is appeased, then unbind it, and administer medicines such as lily roots, vetch flour, incense powder, and aristolochia, and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and place on the wound, and always administer non-irritating medicines; and beware that the wound is always clean, so that you do not leave any oiliness, nor allow pus to gather, for when pus gathers on the linen of the brain, it will run and burst, and great malice will happen to the patient; for when a mordant substance is placed on the abscess, it poisons from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	 Take warning then, if any bad accident befalls the patient, as we have said, there is doubtful sense in it.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if blackness occurs other than due to the medicine applied, which has such virtue, it is necessary that you take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil and make a glue with one linen cloth, and apply it on the wound; then treat in various ways as needed until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	 Know that sometimes the two upper parts of the nose are broken, or one of them alone, for these are two bones; and the lower one is cartilage and does not break, but only causes a swelling or twisting, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	 And if one of the two parts is broken, you must insert your little finger into the nostril's opening, and evenly place that fracture within your index finger, and push out through the thumb, until the nose returns to its natural shape; do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	 And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and your finger cannot reach it, then you must place a small piece of cloth on the tip of a reed.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	 And if the fracture is in two parts, do the same again, and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can; otherwise, after the seventh or tenth day, when the swelling has subsided, then insert at the tip of the nose linen cloths, if the fracture is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	 When you push one against another, if there is a fracture; and let the tents be so large that they fill the holes of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	 And some say that one should wet the tents in butter, and change them every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	 It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be moistened in the making of an egg white and powdered flour; then leave the tent until the bone is healed and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	 And sometimes one puts goose feathers in the nose instead of tents, and with it a soft cloth around, and holds the fracture, and the patient blows through; now do what you want.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	 And if such abscesses come to the nose while you work there, place a poultice of cotton soaked in rose oil or a pouch of dioxolane.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if such abscesses do not come there, apply a plaster from the outside, made of sesame flour and incense powder, mixed with egg white, then place light dressings on top, but do not bind the nose; and if the break in the nose is small, and it has broken into many pieces, straighten it with suitable instruments, then sew up the split, and care for things that are cutting into flesh, and healing, such as suitable plasters and ointments; and if there is no wound inside the nose, cure it with tents, and place lead strips until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	 Of the jaw dislocation
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	 When the jaw is dislocated below and there is no wound except that, and it is only broken outside and not broken in two, other than slightly indented inside, then one recognizes it easily.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	 It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, that you insert your index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is in the left jaw, then insert your right index finger, and gently push the fracture inside, and adjust it with the other hand from outside, and make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	 And if the jaw fracture is divided into two parts, then you must administer traction to both parts until they are equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	 And if there is movement of the teeth, or loosening, tie them with a thread of gold, silver, or silk; then place on the broken jaw fat, and put on it a double cloth; and put on the cloth a large well-made blanket, or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the jaw, and tie it as tightly as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	 And if you see that the figure changes, untie it on the third day, and then reset to its original position what was changed; and place a poultice on top, of mill powder with plenty of egg or sesame flour, after you have removed the fat; and put light linen cloth on the poultice. And if the poultice dries out, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until it is healed; often it is healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	 And if such abscess comes, then bring it about as we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	 And if there is fracture and wound together, check if any piece of bone has been removed; then carefully remove it with suitable instruments for this purpose.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	 And if the wound is narrow, widen it with flame according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when you have removed all these pieces and none remain, then sew the wound if it is wide, and place on it suitable dressings to promote flesh growth until it heals.
de la forcele	 of the hammer
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	 The hammer fractures several times in front, towards the shoulder, and the fracture is in three ways: where it breaks and splinters into two, and there are pieces, and it is easiest to restore; or there is fracture with wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	 And the work is thus when the fracture is without wound, that you have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder that feels the broken force; and the other stretches the neck towards the part; then place the fracture equally between your fingers, so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor deformity.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 And if you need to stretch more, place under the patient's shoulder a round pillow of cloth or wool, and let it be thick according to your need; and extend and lift the broken force; and press the pillow to your hand, so that you equalize the fracture as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	 And if you cannot pull the end of the broken bone outward because it comes from inside, it is necessary that the patient lie on his back, and place under the shoulder a moderate pillow, and let the assistant push the shoulder downwards until the bone of the fracture is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	 And then receive the fracture in your hands, and if you find it splintered, then you must cut above; and draw out the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot come together due to any protrusion, then strike one of its edges with the chisel you have; but place under the forceps this instrument, to prevent slipping:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	 and appears like a spoon, and is not heated, and let it be as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and it has two heads, as you see, and one should be wide, and the other narrow, like the cut of the wound that you made when you pulled out the bones; and when you are sure of hot abscess, then close the wound, and if the cut is small, or you doubt a hot abscess, then fill the wound with cloths and bandages, according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	 And if there are abscesses here, then soak the bandage in rose oil, and in aloes, and in wine, and apply it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	 The setting of the bone, when it is without wounds and without fractures, is to place on the bone a poultice made from flour of the mill and egg white, and put light wool on top, and place a sponge under the splint, if you need it; then take a very large bandage one palm wide, then place a double cloth over the wool, and the poultice; then take a fine cloth three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the ends of the bandage hang down; and place the cloth on the fracture, and turn the bandage over the shoulder, and under the splint, and under the sick arm; and tighten each part, and when you see that the bandage holds the fracture well, and you see clearly that the cloth does not move on the broken bone, then loosen it each day, and when the tie slackens, then retighten it; and make the patient lie on his back, and place a small pillow under the splint, to raise the shoulder up; thus the fracture of the collarbone is eased by raising the shoulder, where you tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless an unfortunate accident occurs, for twenty days; then renew the poultice, if you see that it is needed, and tighten and leave it thus, until it is healed; and it is healed in twenty-eight days or less in some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	 Of the fracture of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	 When the shoulder breaks in a wide place or middle, and it is not known where except by touch; then prepare according to the shape of the fracture, and reset according to its natural form, in all ways that you can; then put on the place powder from the mill with plenty of egg, and light tow, and put on a double cloth; then put on a wide and fine iron plate, a little wider than the shoulder, and if there are cavities in any part of the shoulder, fill those cavities with flax tow, so that the plate sits evenly; and then bind it all tightly with a large bandage, so that the plate does not move from its place, and check the bandage each day; and every time it weakens, tighten it, and adjust the plate if it is out of place, and let the patient lie on his side; and the shoulder is healed in 20 days or 25. And when this number is completed, then unbind it, and be assured, for it is not bone that can easily move.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	 And if a piece of bone protrudes forward and pricks below the heart, it breaks through and removes it, and does what we have said about the fracture to appease the hot abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	 of the fracture of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	 The foot is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks at the extremity.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	 And when it is broken in the middle, it declines downward, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of blood flow, and swelling, and perhaps vomits blood, and opens the gap in the broken bone, which can be felt well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the treatment is that the patient lies on his back, and one puts a pillow between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and brings together the ribs from the second rib with both hands, and tries to make it equal in all ways possible until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then places plasters and bandages on top of a fine cloth, or other light wood, and wraps it in a linen cloth, and binds it tightly around the broken bone so that it does not move; and turns the bandage roundly on the back, and binds it firmly, and checks every hour the binding, and if it loosens, then binds it again; and if it is necessary to unbind, due to swelling or itching that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, then hurry and unbind it, and remove the plaster, and address what has happened in ways of treatment; then reapply the plaster, and bind it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	 Of rib fractures
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	 Know that rib fractures occur only in large bones behind the back and at the top inside, and they break only because they are fragile; and one feels it well upon examination of the two [ribs].
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 And the treatment is that you set the fracture straight, as is necessary.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	 And then apply a poultice, and bind it with a bandage, if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	 And if the rib fracture is directed inward, the patient feels very great pain and stabbing, as if from pleurisy, because the bone points to the lung; and walks with difficulty, and vomits a large amount of blood, which is serious illness, and the ancients have placed great effort into [treating] it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	 And so there are those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that inflate the belly, in order to push out the fracture.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	 We do not do this, for hot abscesses could come from it, if they were not already present.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	 And if they have come, then heal them.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	 And some say that one should place cupping glasses on the spot to draw out strongly, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the cupping glass may attract superfluous humors to the place due to weakness of the constitution.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	 And some say that one should cover the spot with wool soaked in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to equally distribute the heat around it, then treat it according to the treatment for pleurisy, with food and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure due to a bone protruding through the flesh, and there is doubt for the patient, then it is necessary to make an incision over the broken rib, and it is necessary to place an instrument underneath to remove the splinter; and then one should cut the bone, pull it gently, and then suture the two lips of the wound if it is large, and treat with poultices until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if these abscesses come, then place wet cloths in rose oil on them, and put them on the affected area; and treat the area as you would an abscess, and let it lie on the side where it should, until it heals.
de la brisure dou col	 of the breaking/fracture of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	 Sometimes there is a fracture of the bones in the neck, and it often happens that it bends; and so with the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	 And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, take care to see if their hands are softened and swollen and numb, and he cannot move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	 Know that he is mortal in many circumstances, and if he moves them and feels well when they are squeezed or pricked, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if care is taken for him.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	 Et si une chose semblable arrive à la colonne vertébrale du dos, et tu veux savoir s'il est blessé ou non, prends garde si les pieds sont mous, et s'il y a des accidents qui sont dans les mains, et sur le dos il saute une ventosité et une évacuation involontaire; et quand on l'a tourné sur son ventre, il saute une évacuation involontaire.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	 Et quand il est retourné sur son dos et qu'il veut s'asseoir, il ne peut pas.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	 Sache que c'est fatal : n'entreprends donc pas de le soigner.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	 Et si cet accident ne lui arrive pas, alors la situation est moins grave.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	 And the cure is such that you apply if there is hot abscess, place on top of spine oil rose or egg yolk oil, until it is soothed; then place one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and let him not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And if any bone protrudes, it is necessary to cover the head; and remove the bone, then close the two lips of the wound with a stitch if it is large, then treat it with fatty meat until it is healed; and if the bone’s head is broken, which is called the "bone’s head", if you insert your little finger of your left hand, and make it equal to the other hand to your power, then place the plaster and bandage on top, if you need them; then bind it, and if there is a bone protrusion, it breaks through, remove it, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	 Of the fracture of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	 It often happens that the hip bone is fractured, and if it does happen, there is little weakening at the head; and it breaks lengthwise, and slants towards the outer side, and the patient experiences pain and throbbing in the area, and swelling like a break.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	 And the restoration is such that you extend your hand above, so that you are above the break; and know what kind of break it is and its shape; and if the break is only at the head, then set this break equal, until it is in natural form.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	 And if the break is lengthwise, or if it slants inward, then make the patient lie on their stomach, so that the restoration of this break may be prepared for you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	 And when you have set it evenly, then apply the plaster, then place a board of wood or leather on top, and constrain the break, so that it does not move; and fill the place under the ribs, until the legs are even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	 And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	 And if an abscess forms there, do not touch it until the abscess is calmed, and apply what we have said before; then return to the restoration, and constrain it as needed, unless there is any bad incident; and that is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	 of the shoulder dislocation
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	 The shoulder blade is that which is between the rib and the top of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it should be restored according to one of the two methods: the first is that you take a piece of wood of medium thickness, in this manner:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	 And tie to the two heads two ropes, and raise them up, and have the patient sit on a chair; then throw his broken arm over the wood, until it reaches the armpit, and has in the middle a bend of wood, then pull up some heavy thing or the assistant extends downwards; then place the master the break equal to his hands together, so that the break returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	 And the other method is that one places the patient on his back, and ties the hand to his neck, then commands two assistants that one holds what is above the break in his hands, and the other holds below with all his strength, and each extends at his part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	 And if you see that the extraction is too strong, hold the tendon beneath the break and above the break, and extend each of the members to its side.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 And if the break is near the shoulder joint, it is necessary that you place one tendon in the middle under the arm, and another towards the elbow, under the break; and so if the break is towards the elbow, it is necessary to place one tendon lightly, without effort, until the break is level on the bone and on the elbow; then set the break evenly as needed and hold it, lest an abscess form.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	 And if an abscess forms, do not hold it for up to seven days, and place a moist linen cloth on easily and with rose oil until the abscess is appeased; then hold it, and the manner of holding is such that you place the poultice on the break, then assemble the arm on the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the chest; and wrap the bandage, and hold on the shoulder and on the arm, so that the arm is in its proper place, unless something prevents it, or if the bone is not set.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	 And if you doubt that the bone may move, use of splints is needed. Place on the break a splint wider and stronger than the others, with two fingers' width between each splint. Each splint should be large enough to pass over the break by three fingers' width on either side; then apply pressure on the splints as I said at the beginning of the chapter for the break, more strongly and less widely spaced.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	 And if you see the positioning of the splints and the pressure, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, leave it to heal for seven days, as we have said; then every three days examine the bandage to ensure that no itching or swelling occurs in the place, so that care can be given to the limb because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	 If he accepts it, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	 And if no such accidents occur, do not unbind it except after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, with his hands on his stomach; and place a woolen pillow of equal size under the shoulder, and watch every hour of the day or night that the figure of the broken limb does not move, nor is the ligament softened; accept it through the virtue of medicine, and give him the food that we mentioned before, in such a manner that the first food is subtile; and when he begins to improve, let it be thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	 And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be taken in forty days altogether; and then one must unbind it and administer baths and ointments for the place to heal.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	 And if the stricture is ugly and clogged, it takes one or two months to heal.
de la brisure du bras	 of the arm fracture
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	 The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two "fosciles," one of which is small and is below the elbow; and the other is large, and is located towards the little finger; it may happen that only the large foscile breaks, or the small one, and perhaps both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	 When the small foscile is broken, the restoration is easy, and so is the healing; but when the large one is broken, then the healing is bad, and more serious than when both are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	 If it is only the small foscile that is broken, then one must slightly extend it and set it equal.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	 And if it is the great scapula, then he must be held more firmly; and extend him on the pillow, and dip the thumb of the hand higher than the others, and the little finger lower than the other fingers, and let the patient be crossed over himself, and the pillow in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then let the minister extend his arm to the part below his hand, or at the wrist, and another minister to the other above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	 And then let the physician place him equally, according to his best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	 And if in the breaking into pieces, then place each one in its place, and if there is any that pricks the heart, which you cannot restore to its place, then cut it out and remove it, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	 And if with the break there is a wound, I have spoken of it in a singular chapter; thus take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	 And if in the beginning of the restoration there appear such abscesses, then apply a cloth made of rose oil and white wax, which should not be too hard nor too soft; and bind the cloth on top delicately, until such abscesses are appeased.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	 And then remove the wax cloth, and apply a poultice made of flour from the mill with plenty of egg, then place the bandages; and let the bandage on the break always be stronger and a little wider than the others; and know that it must have VI bandages on the arm in several arrangements: whether the break is in one of the bones or in two; and tighten more above the break than elsewhere, and always less when extending, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the cloths that are on the break be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough; and let the thread with which it is bound be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	 And after some days, restore the limb and the ligament.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	 And if some bad thing happens to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, you must rinse the limb with hot water until the itch is calmed; and let the limb rest not tightly wrapped.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	 And then resume the splinting, and if the ligament is weakened and the bone dislocated, and similar things, treat it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	 And take care that the nourishment cannot reach the limb because it is too tight; then you must soften it in a cup, and let it rest like this for some days until the nourishment flows there, and then splint it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	 Et si nul de ces choses que nous avons dites ne vient au malade, si ne le délier pas jusqu'à vingt jours.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	 And when around it, then he can put his hands on his neck, and his necks should be equal, and he should avoid movement and turning, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-five, and perhaps in twenty days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	 Of the break in the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	 Know that at the back of the hand and near the fingertips, there are few breaks, and it only happens as a result of frequent bending.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	 And when the palm of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary that the patient sit cross-legged and sit upright facing him evenly; then place his hand on a flat surface, and let the assistant straighten the broken bones, and let the physician align them well until they are properly joined; and apply the plaster and bandages, if there is no abscess, then place a splint according to the size of the location; and it should be wrapped in one linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	 And if the break is around the abdomen on the side of the plant, make a sphere of cloth, and instruct the patient to bind it to his broken side; and then bind with a long cloth, and let the end be as large as the palm of the hand, and bind it, as necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	 And if the break is in the forearm, you must place a bandage on top and another underneath the limb, so that the hand is open and straight; then bind it all around the arm, and secure the binding between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	 And if the break is in any of the fingers, whether it is a thumb or not, place it straight; and bind it with the hand, and if you see it, place a small straight bandage to lift the break, so that it does not move; and if the break is in other fingers, such as the index or one of the others, place it straight, and bind it with the healthy finger that follows; either bind them all together as best you can, or place a bandage on top, as for the thumb; and take care in the restoration and placement of an abscess, and support whoever comes, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	 From a broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	 The bone of the thigh is often broken, and this can be seen when it turns forward or backward; the restoration consists in tying a ligament above the break and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	 And the patient lies on his back, then each assistant stretches their ligament to an equal extent; this is when the break is in the middle of the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	 And if the break is near the root of the thigh, then one of the ligaments should be towards the knee, and the other ligament below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	 And so if it is near the knee, then let the ligament be next to the knee, and the extension downwards; then let the surgeon place the bone equally in both hands until it follows its natural shape, and then apply the poultice and bandage, unless pus comes out.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	 And if there is a hot abscess, let it subside before returning to your work and treatment; the plaster is made in such a manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	 And it is necessary that you wrap around the break I bandage doubled in II or III, and remove the excess, then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the base of the nail, and insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg, near the knee below, and the ends of the thread come up; then turn on the leg and on the thigh the bandage, then place on the break splints, and put a splint on the bone of the leg; then fill the space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloth to evenly distribute the pressure, then begin to bind strongly III or IV times on the break; and as you go higher on the break, bind less; then tie II ends of the thread that you inserted between the leg and the thigh, and tie III splints that are above, then return below to the end of the thread, so that you come near the foot; and bind it, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, provided that there is no abscess or swelling or other similar thing.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	 And if it happens, then dislocate it, and address what comes there, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that prick, then one should remove them, if possible; and if not possible, then one must split the place, and pull strongly; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	 Sometimes the thigh is broken in such a way that splints are put there, as in the shoulder and arm; however, in this kind of restoration the patient does not become lame.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	 And know that the thigh is restored in about 40 days, or a little less or more, according to the different constitutions of the body.
de la ruelle dou genoil	 Of the ankle of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	 Know that in the ankle of the knee there are few fractures, but it often swells.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	 And if it breaks, then it is only a split or a puncture, and this occurs in all wounds, and in those without wounds, and one feels this well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the treatment is to join together equally that which is broken with its two parts, as much as possible; then apply a poultice, and put on it a round bandage, if you need one, and bind it as needed, then follow all the preparations that we have said for other fractures, such as abscesses or others; so treat each accident with what is necessary until healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	 Of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	 Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is rightly called «mustelz», and the other is called «foscile»; and all kinds of fractures occur as they do in the arm, and for this reason the restoration is the same as that of the arm, and the workings are all alike. And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns in all directions.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	 And if the smaller bone is broken, it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	 And if the larger bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it is clearly visible; and it turns downward.  /> Ensi de coi que il soit de li dui os brisiez.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	 Then apply traction, and set it straight, and bind the splints evenly; however, if the fracture is ugly, and there are many fragments, then the traction should be less and gentler; and set it according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien.
de la brisure des os dou piet	 Et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	 At the ankle, there is no break, but sometimes there is a break in the foot bones and in the two hollows, and it happens more often as a fracture in several places.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	 And if there is a break in the foot bones and you see these bones overlapping each other, then place the sick person's foot on the ground as if he wanted to walk, and now put your foot on his, where the bones are raised, then press until they return to their places; then apply a poultice and bandages on top, and under the sole of the foot put a small board with two full nails, then bind the foot firmly, and after you have wrapped cloths around it and other necessary things.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	 Et quant trois jours ou quatre seront passés, si desserre le lien, car tu trouveras les os égaux, qu'ils soient cassés ou disloqués.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	 Et s'il y a un os brisé parmi eux, alors restaure-le, comme nous l'avons dit pour les doigts de la main; puis mets une épingle sur l'os brisé selon sa longueur, et qu'elle soit un peu plus large. Ensuite, place sous le pied cette planche que j'ai mentionnée, et serre-la fermement; et s'il y en a deux ou trois, ou plus, qui sont brisés, alors mets une épingle sur chaque os selon sa taille, enveloppée dans un morceau de lin, et serre la planche sous le pied. Et qu'elle soit placée au-dessus du chef de la planche, hors du ventre du pied, pour bien le maintenir.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	 And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, as we have said; and treat each incident as it should be.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	 of the break of the wrist bone
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the wrist bone of the woman is broken, have her sit enlarged, then incline it towards the back, and hold it from behind; then fill the gap in the woman's nature with cotton, and put as much as a fistful inside; then make the woman stand up, and lift the back little by little, and then the cotton jumps until it reaches the entrance of the nature, and the bone comes back with the fistful; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and once she has urinated, replace it, and do this for 7 days or so: the fracture will be healed, and if you wish, take a sheep's bladder, and attach a reed to the opening, and fill the entire bladder in the nature; then blow into the reed very strongly, so that the bladder swells inside: the nature will return the fracture; then fill it with cotton, and leave it like this for some days until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	 And when the bones of the wrist of the man or woman are broken, restore them as we have said for the hip bone; and these fractures are not hidden from those who study and practice this, and understand my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	 For a fracture indicates in many cases the right way of restoration; pay attention to it therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	 In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose's windpipe and insert the penis into it; then wrap cloth around it, and leave it there for three days or as long as necessary, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	 of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	 It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the hip bone or shoulder blade or similar, that he be treated now, as the treatments that we have mentioned testify.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 And if the wound is clean, then seal it with vitriol, if you have nothing else, then immediately restart to restore the fracture in that same hour or day, unless there are abscesses like those.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	 And if abscesses like those come, then leave the restoration until the ninth day, as long as the abscess is appeased, and do not touch it on the third day or the fourth, for you would bring about evil accidents.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	 And if the broken bone appears on the surface of the wound exposed, then it is necessary that you place it lightly and carefully with your hands, with slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	 And if the extension is not ready to place it evenly with your hands, then reset it with this iron instrument that has VII or VIII fingers in length, and its width according to the size of the wound; and for this reason, it is necessary for the physician to have III or IIII, according to what he needs for each fracture cure; and let it be round and a little thick, so that it does not bend under compression on the limb during your work, and let it be sharp at the front, and thick from the middle forward, like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	 And it is called "palainche," for which the curved head should be placed on top of the protruding bone; and push once, until it returns, and are equal to each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	 And if the fracture is subtle and the instrument cannot well grasp the bone, then you must cut off the head of the bone, so that the instrument has power over it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	 And if you cannot bring the bone back as we have said, then cut off with an appropriate instrument, either a knife or scissors, according to your ability; then remove that which remains in the bone of sharpness and small splinters.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	 And when the bone is brought back and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	 If it is not in its place, then moisten the bandage in black stiptic wine, and properly if it is summer; and do not put any oily substance on the wound, such as cerate or other things, so that it does not cause rot and corruption; then administer estelles when you have reset the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut the covering all around according to the size of the wound, and be well cautious that the wound is not constricted with the fracture; and many times the foolish physicians have done this, and have brought about death or corruption in the patient; and let the constriction be softer and gentler than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	 And if the wound is bad or large, and you fear that a bad accident may occur, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, then it is not necessary to apply sponges; but wrap around, in place of sponges, hard cloths, and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	 And when you see after one day or two that the wound becomes hotter, then remove everything that you have put on at all times, and apply a healing ointment to the wound, such as tetrapharmakon ointment and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	 And it is necessary that you unbind the limb twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is healed and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	 And it is necessary that the limb be prepared in such a way that the bone slides down lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	 And if many days pass and it cannot heal but the bone slips back again, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which you must search the wound with a probe, and remove all these loose pieces that cause this pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	 And if a fistula occurs in the place, or another form of corruption, then you must cure it according to what is said in this chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	 And when the bone is broken and protrudes from the limb, as the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large bones, do not pull it out, for many times death results, but leave it until it rots; perhaps it will fall out on its own after 20 days or 30, then cure the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	 Of the bruises that come upon the sore
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	 We often see this after the healing of the bruise, especially when it is near the joint, and the appearance of the limb is unsightly; and by chance the member cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 Take heed therefore if the sore is fresh: and administer stiptic medicines, such as aloes, frankincense, myrrh, sarcocolla, acacia, and similar others; and whether you take any of these things or all together, and mix them with stiptic wine or a lot of egg or with honey; and apply to the knot in poultices, and bind it well, and do not unbind for many days; and then unbind, and begin another until the swelling is removed; or you bind upon a well-made piece of lead; for the property of lead is such that it removes all swellings from the limbs; and if the swelling has already hardened like stone, and it must be removed, cut off the top, and bring out the superfluous part; or you can scrape it with some razor until it is removed, and treat until it heals.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	 of the limb which is weak after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	 When the bone fracture is healed, and afterwards the limb remains weak and delicate, this happens for many reasons: one reason is because it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as needed; or because there were too many bindings, and nourishment could not reach the limb; or because of excessive bleeding; or because of too much movement, not at the right time; or because the person has little blood in their body, and thus the limb is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	 And the treatment is to make the patient eat and soften their body until their blood increases; and administer baths and bring joy and cheer; then apply poultices on the limb so that the poultices attract abundant nourishment, and often wash it with warm water so that the nourishment reaches the limb; and it returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	 Of the twisted limb after health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	 When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bones are open, and the form of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the fools who say that one should break the whole limb anew; many foolish physicians have done this in our land. And these works are blamed, and great evils come from them, and perhaps death. However, if the dislocations and tortures are fresh, they must be washed with hot water, or cooking herbs that soften, such as leaves of comfrey, roots, mallow, and similar things; and make a softening plaster, well made with diachylon, and take the juice of comfrey, and cook it with goose fat or sesame oil, and place the plaster on top. Or you take fresh figs, and grind them with marshmallow powder, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	 And sometimes dislocation is removed by continually and extensively rubbing with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	 And let the limb be moved gradually each hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	 And if the distortion is swollen and hardened, like stone, and it needs to be removed with iron, then it should be cut down to the bone, with a subtle and light incision; and apply caution and skill in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	 Here begins the book on dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	 A dislocation is an exit of some joint from its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misshapen, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	 When a dislocation happens to someone, it must be immediately brought back without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	 Car si l’on tarde, le lieu s’enfle, et par aventure on ne peut remettre la partie à sa place; c’est pourquoi il ne faut pas déplacer la partie quand elle est gonflée : souvent cela cause des spasmes et d'autres douleurs ; néanmoins, quand cela arrivera, faites saigner le malade, puis laissez-le jusqu’à ce que l’abcès soit apaisé; ensuite, appliquez sur le membre de l’eau chaude et de l’huile, puis réajustez légèrement, et soignez chaque membre selon comment il reviendra à sa place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	 Et j'ai ordonné les chapitres sur les dislocations de la tête aux pieds.
des mandibules	 Of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	 It often happens that the jaws are dislocated together, and the dislocation of both is according to two manners: either they are slightly removed from their places, and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, and hang towards the chest, and the saliva flows from the mouth so that it cannot be held, nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue is enveloped with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	 When the dislocation is slight, it returns to its place by itself in many ways.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	 And if it is complete and whole, then you must reset it quickly, and do not delay; and in such a manner that the servant holds the patient's head, and the physician places a little cloth of one of his hands at the base of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and let the other two hands be free to make it even; and instruct the patient to soften his jaws, and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	 And the physician sets it straight until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	 And if the setting is difficult, even if it is the two jaws together, then soak them in hot water and oil until they are easily set; do not delay the setting, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	 And when they are set evenly and the patient's mouth closes well without softening, then place wet compresses on cerate made of rose oil and wax, then bind them lightly with soft bandages; and let the patient sleep on their back, with their head between two pillows so that it is not moved to the right or left, nor should they make an effort to speak, but take light food until the pains are removed and the jaws are bound; and then he may chew what he wishes lightly, and should not struggle to open his mouth for eating and drinking until the jaw is well bound and healed.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	 And if the two mandibles cannot be set in place at once within an hour, and are not converted to their proper places, fever and sudden constipation will ensue, and possibly diarrhea, and perhaps pure bile will be vomited.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	 And when you see this, then know that it is fatal; and many times he who experiences it dies within nine days.
de la forcelle	 of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	 The fork cannot dislocate from the inside of the chest or from the pelvis, and it is sometimes dislocated from the finger, which can be felt distinctly.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	 And the restoration is such that the patient lies often on his back, and extends his arms; then press firmly on the place with your palm, and it will return; then apply a poultice and bandage, and bind it tightly; and the joint towards the armpit cannot dislocate; if not, and if it dislocates sometimes, then reset it to its place, as we have said; then apply a poultice and bandage, and bind it, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed; and thus also is restored the shoulder joint when it has been separated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	 Of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	 Know that the shoulder is dislocated only in three ways: one is that it dislocates at the lower part of the armpit; and the second is at the chest part; and sometimes it dislocates at the upper part, which happens rarely; and it does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and it does not dislocate inside for the nerves; and often it dislocates downwards towards the armpit, especially in those who have little flesh, because in them it jumps quickly; in those who have enough flesh, it jumps with difficulty, and returns with difficulty.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	 And it happens to some men to have a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and he thinks that it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	 It is therefore necessary that you test it, until you are certain of it; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	 And the dislocation is known when it is down towards the shoulder blade, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them a clear diversity; and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and under the shoulder blade on the back the top of the shoulder, as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move in any way; and likewise, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you find it clearly on the back; and this manner of dislocation is not difficult to reset when it is new, or if the child is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	 And the manner is that the caregiver lifts the patient's hand up, then places his fingers underneath, and lifts the joint forcefully upwards in place; and the caregiver lifts the hand and stretches it upwards, then places it underneath; thus it will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	 And if it does not come as we have said within many days after, then the patient must be bathed in hot water; and let the caregiver prepare a softening and soothing ointment, such as a decoction of althea and fenugreek and mallow in water, and apply it; then let the patient be laid on their back, and place under the joint an even pad of linen, not too soft nor too hard; then let the healer place his heel on the pad, and lift the head of the shoulder gently, and pull the hand of the patient; and another caregiver holds the head of the patient so that it does not move downward; that shoulder will return immediately now, and if you see this happen then reset according to this manner: and it is that you make a man present who is larger than the patient; and let him stand straight by the side, and place his shoulder under the patient's joint, and lift the joint upward so that the patient hangs in the air; and another caregiver pulls the hand of the patient downward toward the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	 And if the patient is too light, let him carry something heavy with him, and the dislocation will return now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	 And one can also reset it in another way: and it is that you drive a long stick into the ground, such that its tip is as round as a pestle, nor too thick nor too thin; then let it be placed under the patient, but that he has soft cloths above, and the patient should stand along the length of the stick; then his hand should be stretched out on the other side in the same manner, and the joint will return to its place quickly; and if it does not wish to return for all these things that we have said, then perform this cure: take a stick of two arms' length and four fingers' width, which has a rounded head to enter deeply under the armpit, in this manner:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	 Then place the patient under the top of a draped post, so that the post does not hurt the patient. Place it below the patient's seat; extend some of your arms along the length of the post, and tie the shoulder to the post, with the arm at the top of the hand. Then put the arm on the top step of a wide ladder, and let the hands hang down, and leave the body hanging from the other side: now we return to the joint.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	 And when she is inside, in whatever manner it may be, you must place below the seat a round piece of wool, then put the plaster prepared with flour from the mill, along with incense and egg white, all over the shoulder and around, then press it firmly under the seat, and turn the bandage over the plaster, and embrace the hand to its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	 And it is necessary that he takes little food, until the limb is strengthened, for it will heal faster; and then take more after V or VII days, and move it; and if it is stiffened and not softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	 And if the joint is displaced from its place due to moisture that has come upon it, or for any other reason, then you must apply cauteries to three openings, as was said before in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	 And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after VII days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot raise its arm above, then know that the nerves at the top of the shoulder are cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The dislocation that occurs towards the foot and the breasts, or the rear, is caused by pushing and stretching of the hands, and other means are administered; and treat it until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	 And if after the healing there is stiffness in the member, and delay in movement, then the patient should bathe many times until that stiffness is relieved, and it returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	 of the dislocation of the rib
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	 Know that the rib joint is easily dislocated and easily returns; and if it is dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not repaired, for one can see and feel it well; and it dislocates according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	 And when you join the sick cut with the healthy one, then you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	 For the joint is dislocated, and the arm cannot be bent, nor can it reach its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	 And you must reset it before any abscess forms there, for if an abscess were to form, it would be difficult to reset; and perhaps it cannot be fully reset, especially when it is in the back; this is worse than other dislocations and causes greater pain, and sometimes death may result.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	 And the reset is done this way when it can be reset: you extend his hand with your two hands; and let his arm be stretched out, and the hands of the patient according to the cut around, above and below, and push the joint back together at its base, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	 And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and strikes with the root of the palm where it is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	 And if it does not want to return to its place, administer a strong extension; and there are two administrators who extend the arm, and two who hold it so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm on each side, after you have wrapped a long and wide double cloth around it; and when the master joins the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then push the joint strongly, until it returns; and when it is in place, put a dry dressing with egg white on top, and hold it firmly, and bind the arm to the patient's neck, and leave it for some days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	 And if the joint is firmly in place, loosen the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not sit well, then start again with the poultice and the bandage, and leave it thus for some days, until it is firmly set; then loosen it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	 And if he feels pain after the resetting of the joint and it moves, then bathe and rub it well, and press until it is soothed; or place on the joint a piece of fat sheepskin, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and make him enter the bath; and when he sweats, rub the joint gently, then place the skin back on, and then into the bath; and do this two or three times until he is healed; and if you see [that it is not healing], place on top a moist warm cow's dung mixed with butter, and bind it up; thus will it return to its proper place.
li dislocation de la main	 The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	 The joint of the hand is dislocated, and its return is light, more than other joints. However, it must be brought back to its place quickly, in the same hour that it is dislocated, lest the place become swollen or an abscess form.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	 And the reset is done thus: you place the injured hand on a table, and the attendant extends his hand, and the physician places it equally, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and pushes until it returns. However, it is necessary to check if it is well in place; then the patient places the back of his hand on the table for extension and resetting.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	 And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then let the patient place the back of their hand on the table, and the doctor should place his hand on top of that part of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	 If it returns now, it is good. If not, then hold it with soothing poultices for these abscesses, and leave it thus without restarting.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	 And if the patient cannot bear it and you cannot put it in place after some days, then the joint remains twisted. And it does not harm the patient at all as long as the hand is moistened, and he cannot grasp anything: then know that the nerves are cut or the arteries; and there is no other remedy except to apply cautery near the case, and perhaps nothing else will work.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	 And when the hand is in place, put on the poultice that we have spoken of, then bind it and leave it for 5 days, then unbind and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if he cannot move it well, and there is some stiffness, then soften it with hot water, and rub until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	 of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	 Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on one side or the other, sometimes at the back of the palm or at the front; then stretch the finger and push the dislocation towards you until it returns to its place, then support the head of the finger and pull it toward the side from which it was dislocated; leave it for 2 days, then make it equal that day; and bind it with a nut as we have said, and unbind it the next day, and move it, and rebind it with a nut; and do this often until it is tight, and do the same if it is dislocated at the front of the hand, and do as you did before until it is healed; and do the same when it is dislocated on another side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	 of the dislocation of the spine
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	 When the spine or neck is dislocated, and there are several such dislocations, there is no cure, for death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	 And the sign is that the egestion jumps out of its place without will, and he cannot hold it back, and often some member is softened, either the two thighs or the two arms or one, and often the spine moves in four parts; the part that moves at the rear is called "gibbosity": the cure for this is to reverse it if the gibbosity comes from childhood: there is no cure or healing of the whole.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	 And that which comes from falling or striking or similar things, the ancients spoke of cures in great words, where there is not always great benefit; but I have shortened it according to my intention, and I have made instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	 I say that in the case of jaundice which affects the chest first, there is neither wit nor health; and likewise in the case where it strikes both sides, and one cannot heal except for that which specifically affects the back, as I said; and let the patient be stretched out on his face in an equal place, and have support underneath him so he does not get hurt; then strike a taper into the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and tie a rope under the patient's buttocks, and another at the hips, and the knees, and the ankles; and two assistants should know how to handle the ropes, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two tapers; and they should be well tied, the tapers as we have said, and the doctor places his palms on the spine firmly, until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	 And if it does not return with this treatment, take a board of three spans in length, and place it under the patient's back, and let the patient be on their side, and push the head of the board under the back, then place the middle of the board on the spine; and let the healer put their feet on the other end of the board, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see that, do the same for the shoulder that turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	 And it is that you place two stakes at the patient's head one span apart, and towards the feet two others, and there should be between each stake a palm's length in height; and let there be a hole in each stake where the shoulder passes through, and let the stakes be firmly in the ground so that they do not move; and between each pair of stakes there should be a turning stake on which the rope turns, and between the two turning stakes there should be two small stakes a palm's length long for turning the shoulder; and then tie the rope that is among the pulleys to the shoulder towards the head, and the other rope to the other shoulder towards the feet, and let each of the assistants turn their stake all the way to the rope, and the master should make the spine straight as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	 And when it is equalized, apply a drying plaster with plenty of egg, then the wool, and then a bandage from a tablet of three fingers in length, which should soak the place of the swelling and the healthy part of the vertebra, then bind with a ribbon as we have said, and let the patient use gentle nourishment until he is cured; and if anything comes at the end of the health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines along with the bandage that we mentioned before; sometimes a piece of lead is applied, and sometimes the appearance comes in the lower vertebrae of the back, and one might think it is dislocation; but it is the bone that opens, which is why one should not have presumption: by chance it could bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	 Of hip dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	 Know that in the hip and shoulder joints dislocation occurs alone, not like in other joints; and the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, front and back; more inside than otherwise, and little dislocation in front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	 And the sign of its dislocation inside is that when one joins the afflicted leg with the healthy one, it is longer and the patient's knee opens more than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend his knee to the fire; and the place where the thigh bone goes there swells hot with abscess.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	 And the signs of this occur when it happens to the contrary of those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	 And the signs of this occur when it happens to the front, which is that one straightens his leg according to its fullness; however, he does not bend the knee without pain, and if one wants to make him walk, he cannot go forward, and he retains his urine, and the ankle swells, and when he walks, he goes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	 And the signs of this occur when it happens to the back, which is that he cannot extend his knee nor bend it, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh is in the place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	 The remedies for this type of dislocation are that you observe whether the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its position, in which case there is no cure; and it should not be presumptuous.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	 And in the case where the dislocation is fresh, and it is one of the four types of dislocation, then hasten to turn the joint, and place it inside and outside, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will return, and no other treatment is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	 And if it does not return in this manner, then you must have a strong assistant, and hold the leg strongly with two hands, or with one rope tied above the knee; and another assistant extends his hand above in such a way that he pushes his hands under his heels, then pulls the rope gently on the thigh; and another holds the end of the rope; and they all pull up and down at the same time, until the patient is lifted off the ground at once, and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	 This manner of extension is common to four types, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	 If not, then it is necessary to apply treatment according to its type When the dislocation is in the hip joint, it is necessary that you position the patient on his healthy side, then place the ligament on the root of the thigh, and the place that is below the buttock, then extend the ligament upwards towards the buttock, and towards the groin; then let another assistant take his arms, and embrace the large part of the sick thigh, and stretch it very strongly: it will return to its place now; and this type of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	 And if you cannot secure it in this manner as we have said, then it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong soft ligature above the two ankles and above the two knees; and let the sick leg be extended two fingers more than the other; then let him hang from the top of a stake, and let there be two arms' length above the ground. Then instruct one assistant to embrace the top of the thigh, and let another assistant hanging with the patient strongly embrace the thigh, for the joint returns very quickly now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	 And when the dislocation is cured, let the patient lie down as we have said for those with gout, and tighten the ligature above the sick leg properly, and also above the foot; then place two splints, one at the head and another at the feet, then insert a splint between the thighs of the patient in the middle; and let there be a planting of moist cloths around it so that it does not injure the patient. Then let each assistant lean towards him, and the physician place his hand equally with the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	 If it returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	 If not, place it on the table and press as we have said in the case of dislocation, and let the patient lie on their healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	 And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the affected leg quickly, as I have said; and let the physician place his hand on the affected ankle, then press with the other hand, and draw down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 And if the dislocation is behind, do not extend the affected leg downwards or lift it from the ground, but let it be as if the hip were dislocated behind, as we have said about lying on both hips; and let it lie on its side, and the ligament stretched as we have said before, and one should press on the joint at the table; and it will be ready when the patient extends their legs, and they are equal; then bring the thighs together, and apply a poultice, and secure with a bandage, so that the hip does not move; and rest for three days or four, then unbind, and reapply the poultice; and if you see that they are equal, secure as before, and leave for three days; then unbind, and let it walk well, until the limb is comfortable. IENT
de la dislocation dou genoil	 of the knee dislocation
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	 The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inside and outside, and behind; and it does not dislocate in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend his leg to his thigh, and if it does not reach his thigh, know that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit upright, and stretch out his leg if he can, and place your back against his face, and put his foot on top of your feet; then take his knee in your palms, and draw between your thighs, then bend the two sides of the knee strongly; and another assistant extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he can easily bend his leg to his thigh; and apply a bandage, and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and bind them together strongly for three days or four, then unbind; and let the patient not try to walk, until the limb is healed.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	 And if the limb is not in place, administer strong traction, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	 of the ankle dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	 The ankle is sometimes elevated and sometimes fully dislocated, both inside and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	 And the signs are that the ankle is swollen and protrudes forward in the part where it is dislocated; the reduction is easy and one should extend it gently with their hands when it is only elevated.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	 And when it is fully dislocated, you should have the patient sit upright and have two assistants hold the leg above the ankle; then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with the left hand twice, then extend it upwards, and nicely push the foot up; and do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, begin the work again, for it will return; and if it cannot return this way, have the patient lie on their back on the ground, and firmly plant a stick in the ground between their thighs, and tie cloths around, so that it does not hurt the patient; then have one assistant hold the thigh, and another extend the foot with his hands or with a cord, which he ties above the ankle; then each assistant extends equally, and the stick should be between the patient's thighs to hold the patient when they extend; then let the surgeon place the dislocation evenly in his hands, and have another assistant hold the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will quickly return.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	 Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus,
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Et si apostemes là vient,
des dois	 et il covient
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	 Pren et pren la teste du doi qui est desaloiez, et tenez le en tel manière com nous te dirons, car tu le remettras en lor lieu si tost con il sera aroit.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the dislocation is in any of the joints of the foot, then you must make the patient sit on a flat seat or on a table completely straight.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	 Quant li doi sont desaloiez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose. Pren et pren la teste du doi qui est desaloiez, et tenez le en tel manière com nous te dirons, car tu le remettras en lor lieu si tost con il sera aroit. Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, and le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	 When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wants to restore it, it often happens that the patient dies; therefore, do not be presumptuous in the cure if you are not wise in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and cautious, but not bold; and at the beginning use soothing remedies for hot abscesses, and leave the patient in God's hands if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place before the abscess comes there; and when the limb is in place, administer soothing remedies for hot abscesses, and treat the wound as needed with dried onions; and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and small bones are displaced, remove them, and do what we have said in simple diseases; and beware of entering into a path of fear, according to what I have said, for this benefits you according to your Creator, and for the skill of your weapon and your body.
Amen	 Amen
