preface.txt
O you, my very dear sons, I have completed for you this book which is the last of the science of medicine along with its completion, and have made the end through its expositions and its declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it for you with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".	AFTER finishing for you, my sons, this book which is the part of knowledge dealing with medicine in its entirety; and having made it as clear and explicit as possible, I thought it well to complete it for you by adding this treatise which concerns surgical operating.	0.79031384
And because the work of hands is neglected in our region and is altogether restricted, so the science is lost and diminished, and nothing remains of it except small descriptions in the books of the ancients that hands have copied. And from this has come error and vanity, and understanding is obscured, and knowledge is distanced.	For the skilled practitioner of operative surgery is totally lacking in our land and time; so that the knowledge of it is on the point of being blotted out and its remains lost; and there is nothing left of it except a few traces in the books of the Ancients; where, however, it has been so corrupted by the hands of scribes, and subjected to error and confusion, that its meaning has become obscured and its value diminished.	0.80621797
Now it seems to me that I want to revive it along with the organization of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will include along with it the forms of cautery irons, and other instruments of the work with the addition of the explanation and preparation of them, as is necessary.	Therefore I decided to revive this art by expounding, elucidating, and epitomizing it in this treatise; and to present the forms of the cauterizing irons and other operative instruments, since this is an adjunct to explanation and a vital necessity.	0.79478824
And because no good master of hands is found in our time, the art of medicine is diminished. And whoever undertakes it must excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen said, so much that he knows the arrangement of the limbs, and their forms and connections and separations, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and arms and their number, and the course of the moving and resting veins, and the location of their origin.	Now this is the reason why there is no skilful operator in our day: the art of medicine is long and it is necessary for its exponent, before he exercises it, to be trained in anatomy as Galen has described it, so that he may be fully acquainted with the uses, forms, and temperament of the limbs; also how they are jointed, and how they may be separated; that he should understand fully also the bones, tendons, and muscles, their numbers and their attachments; and also the bloodvessels, both arteries and veins, with their relations.	0.8456429
And therefore Hippocrates said that the name with the name is much, and with the work is little; and especially in the art of the hand.	And so Hippocrates said: 'Though many are doctors in name, few are in reality, particularly on the surgical side.'	0.6812434
We tell you in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the aforementioned things, let him beware that he does not fall into error and kill people;	We have already spoken of this in the introduction to this book. For he who is not skilled in as much anatomy as we have mentioned is bound to fall into error that is destructive of life.	0.5980303
thus I have often seen several of those who undertake this science and so abandon themselves without knowledge and without experience.	Thus I have seen many laying claim to this knowledge and boasting of it, but having neither knowledge nor experience.	0.7862043
For I saw a foolish physician who cut an abscess of scrofula in the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries of the neck; whereby so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in his hands.	I saw an ignorant doctor incise a scrofulous tumour in a woman's neck; and he cut certain arteries in the neck so that the woman bled until she fell dead before him.	0.8761073
And I saw another physician who removed a stone from an elderly man, and the stone was large; he also removed with it a piece of the bladder, and the man was dead within three days.	And I saw another doctor presume to take out a stone from a man of advanced age. The stone was large; he rushed blindly at the task and extracted the stone and with it a piece of the bladder itself; and the man was dead in about three days.	0.9235586
And I had already been called to remove it, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and I knew well that if he were cut, he would die from it.	I had myself been previously called in to extract the stone but from what I saw of the size of it and the condition of the patient I judged that the outcome would be so.	0.6619222
And I saw another physician who took into his care a duke of our land who had a broken leg, and along with the break there was a wound;	I saw another doctor who had a regular salary from one of the high officers of our country for medical treatment.	0.5832917
and the physician, full of ignorance, tightened the break over the wound with splints, binding it very tightly, and did not leave any opening for the wound to drain, and left him like that for a period of time;	There had occurred to a negro boy of his a fracture of the leg near the heel, together with a wound; the doctor rushed in, in his ignorance, and bound up the fracture, over the wound, very tightly, with pads and splints, not allowing the wound to breathe.	0.6862581
and ordered him not to untie it at all;	He then let him go as he wished and then dismissed him for some days bidding him not to loose the bandage.	0.44239348
and it remained like that until the leg was completely swollen, and the foot as well, and it was ruined.	Eventually his leg and foot swelled and he was close to death.	0.47619992
I was called to come to him, and I hastened to come and untie the leg; and when I had untied it, it was at peace and he felt no pain.	I was called in and made haste to loose the bandage, upon which some ease and reduction of the pain followed.	0.62542087
But nevertheless the infection was already established in the limb, and I could not heal it;	Nevertheless, gangrene had already taken hold on the limb and I could not hinder its progress; it.	0.7001161
and the infection did not cease to spread through the limb until the limb was completely lost.	continued to extend in the limb until he perished.	0.55217654
And I saw another physician who lanced a festering abscess, and then it inflamed due to the poor state of the patient's health.	And I saw another doctor incise a malignant tumour; after some days the place broke out in open ulceration, thereby adding to the misery of the patient.	0.79119927
For a canker, when it is full of melancholic humor, should not be touched with iron unless it is in such a place that all that is corrupted can be removed.	For a cancer that arises from a melancholic humour should never be touched by the knife unless it should happen to be in a part of the body which may be removed thoroughly and in its entirety.	0.6729127
And therefore, dearest son, you need to know that manual work is divided into two parts: namely, work where there is danger in several ways;	Wherefore you must know, my sons, that operative surgery is divided into two parts, namely, where operation is associated with the health of the patient, and, on the other hand, where it is for the most part fraught with danger.	0.65113044
and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.	Throughout the following book I point out wherever I have described an operation that is accompanied by fear and danger.	0.6975992
Therefore it is necessary that you protect yourself, so that foolish onlookers cannot speak ill of you.	It behoves you to be wary and to shun such, lest the ignorant have an opportunity to reproach and slander you.	0.58266765
So take up your tools wisely, and treat your patients gently and firmly, and use the best method so that by the grace of God you will succeed and be praised;	Show, then, caution and care for yourselves and gentleness and perseverance for your patients. Take the best road that leads to health and a happy outcome.	0.60998714
and leave the frightening diseases of severe nature;	Illnesses that are very threatening or difficult to cure, leave alone.	0.48345205
and remove yourself from that which makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can go from this world to the next in glory.	Purify yourselves of anything which you fear may cause doubt as to your religious life and your secular life; for this will perpetuate your good name and will elevate your fortunes in this world and the next.	0.5984757
Galen says in some of his admonishments: Do not undertake to treat a serious illness, lest you be called a foolish physician.	For Galen once said in certain of his admonitions: 'Do not treat mischievous maladies lest you get the name of mischievous doctors.'	0.8383776
I have divided this treatise into three chapters.	I have divided this treatise into three books:	0.9002188
The first chapter is about fire cauteries and sharp medicinal cauteries, and the chapter is organized from the head to the feet;	BOOK ONE. Concerning the actual cautery; and cauterization by caustics. It is divided into chapters set in order from the head to the feet.	0.66192013
and about the shapes of the instruments, and the cautery irons, and everything that is necessary for the work.	The shapes of the instruments are shown and the iron cauteries and all things necessary for operating.	0.7289436
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and cupping glasses, and wounds, and extracting arrows, and similar things;	BOOK TWO. Concerning incision and perforation; blood-letting and cupping; wounds and the extraction of arrows and the like.	0.75034493
and the chapter is organized with the shapes of the instruments.	The whole is divided into chapters in order; and illustrations of instruments are given.	0.6283297
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and sprains, and similar things;	BOOK THREE. Concerning the setting of bones; dislocations; the treatment of sprains and the like.	0.60381246
and it is organized from the head down to the feet, and the shapes of the instruments.	This is similarly divided into chapters set in order from head to feet, with illustrations of instruments.	0.62387705

chapter-1.txt
Before we recall the work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of help and the harm of each complexion.	Before we expatiate on the actual operation of cautery it is necessary to mention its advantages and disadvantages and the temperament upon which it is to be used.	0.5493877
I say that the qualities of help, and of harm, are the longest discourse and subtle science and the hidden secret;	I say that a discourse on the advantage and disadvantage of cautery is a long one, a subtle learning, a hidden secret.	0.7390268
and many wise men spoke of this, and agreed on it;	A great number of wise men have spoken on the subject with differing opinions.	0.61632085
and their words suffice little for me, for I fear lengthiness.	Lest I should be over long I have reduced their opinions to a summary.	0.46071336
I say that cautery universally helps every complexion where there is matter, except for two complexions: that is to say, a hot complexion without matter, and a dry complexion without matter.	Now I say that the cautery has universal application for every ill constitution, whether organic or functional, with the exception of two: the functional hot temperament and the functional dry temperament.	0.65788
In a complexion both hot and dry with matter, some debated and said that cautery is a great help there; and others said the opposite: that cautery is not good for an illness that comes from heat and dryness. For the nature of fire is hot, and a hot illness should not be treated with heat, nor with dryness;	About the organic dry temperament the Ancients differed, some saying that cautery helps in a constitution of this kind, while others said the opposite: that cautery is of no use in a disease caused by heat or dryness; for fire is naturally hot and dry and it is obviously absurd to treat a hot dry sickness with a hot dry remedy.	0.8617166
and he who said the opposite claimed that cautery is a great help for a hot and dry illness that occurs in the bodies of men. For when you compare the body of a man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.	But he who holds the opposite view says that actual cautery may help in the case of such hot dry illnesses as arise in the human body; for when you compare the human body, humid as it is, with the nature of fire you find the human body cold.	0.81672955
And I agree with this statement. For I have sometimes found it through experience.	I myself from much experience agree with this last opinion.	0.6385991
And in any case, no one should interfere except those who have experience, and who know through long practice the chapter on cauteries, and the diversity of human complexions, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the occurrences and the length of time;	However, no one should attempt this operation unless he has had long training and practice in the use of the cautery, and is fully acquainted with the various human temperaments, and the character of the complaints in themselves; their causes, symptoms, and duration.	0.7894381
We have no fear of other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the physicians assembled and agreed on the cautery.	Concerning the rest of the temperaments there is no reason for fear, particularly the cold and humid distempers; all medical men are agreed and none differs concerning the utility of the cautery in such cases.	0.70964235
And know, son, that cautery with fire is among the secrets of healing, and of greater benefit than cautery with burning medicine.	Now you should know, my sons, that the actual cautery and its superiority over cauterization with chemical caustics is one of the secrets of medicine.	0.69262516
For fire is simple, and does not go beyond the limb that is cauterized, and does not harm other limbs except a little.	For fire is a simple substance having no action except upon the actual part cauterized; nor does it do more than slightly harm any adjacent part.	0.78194
Burning medicines spread from limb to limb, and cause diseases in the limb that are difficult to heal; and perhaps kill the patient.	But the effect of cauterization with caustic may spread to parts at a distance from that burnt; and also in the part cauterized it may give rise to a disease difficult to cure or even fatal.	0.62759465
Fire, because of its loftiness and the goodness of its substance, does not do this, unless there is excess.	Whereas fire, on the other hand, on account of the nobility of its nature and its superiority has no such effect unless it is overdone.	0.7949076
And this I have found for you through experiment and the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it was based on the truth of things;	That has become clear to us by experience through length of service, devotion to the art, and acquaintance with the facts of the matter. So I need not prolong this discourse.	0.63832086
and for this I apologize for the length of the speech, for I do not want to deprive you of the secret that is contained in fire, and the quality of the work, how it expels diseases from bodies, as the philosopher says in demonstrating it; therefore receive it in your thoughts.	So I need not prolong this discourse. Were it not inappropriate to this my book I should relate to you a deep secret concerning fire, the manner of its action on bodies and its expulsion of diseases; with a reasoned philosophical discourse too subtle for your understanding.	0.69470274
And know, son, that they agreed on what time cauterizations should be done, and they chose spring.	Know also, my sons, that the Ancients disagreed also as to the fit time for cautery, affirming that spring was the best.	0.6595832
And I say that cautery is suitable in all seasons, because the sudden harm is lessened by the help of the cautery; and especially if the cautery is for necessary, sudden, and urgent pains that cannot wait for the time when greater harm might come to the limb.	Myself, I say that the cautery is suitable at all times; for whatever harm may arise from the season of the operation is utterly outdone by the benefit deriving from the cauterization itself; especially if the cautery is applied to pains that are severe, grievous, and swift, brooking no delay, because of the fear that the consequences may be more grave than the slight harm from the season.	0.8484975
And do not ever think, dear son, as the foolish physicians do; for the illness that is healed by cautery does not return; and they say it thus;	Nor let enter your minds, my sons, the groundless notion of the laity and of ignorant doctors, that the complaint cured by the cautery never comes back later; do not cleave to this opinion.	0.75180036
and they say it thus; but it is not as they think, because cautery is only a medicine that changes the complexion, and dries the humors that are the cause of the pain, and is better than medicine because of the swiftness of its effect, and because of the power of its work and its mastery.	The fact is not as they think; for the cautery is homologous to the drug which alters the constitution and dries up the humidities that give rise to disorders. But the cautery excels the drug by the rapidity of its success, the strength of its action, and the potency of its powers.	0.80550313
And it is possible that the illness sometimes returns according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the illness and its nature;	It may be that the disease will return at some time according to the temperament of the patient, and the persistence and virulence of the disease; and from the formation of a mass of superfluities in the body; from his neglect of himself in acquiring them from food; and from causes of a similar nature.	0.65442646
and the superfluities are gathered in him by the intake of foods and similar things, unless cautery is administered in a place where there are few superfluities and moisture, such as cautery of teeth for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.	Of course, if the disease to which the cautery is applied be a slight one, and in a part only slightly liable to superfluities and humidities, as, for example, the cauterization of a molar tooth for toothache, and the like, then it may happen that the pain does not return; but that happens rarely.	0.7010939
And many people do not understand why cautery is called the last resort of medicine, and it is true;	Another common saying is that the cautery is the final remedy; which is true, but not in the way which they mean.	0.5687205
but they do not believe that cautery is effective after medicine, but their understanding is false, and cautery is the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment for any disease and they are ineffective, then we administer cautery, and it is effective.	For they believe that after cauterization no treatment, either with or without medicine, will help.	0.5980098
Then it is clear that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding of foolish physicians.	It means something precisely the opposite: after various treatments have been applied to a certain disorder without success, then last of all we apply cauterization and this proves effective; whence comes about the saying that the cautery is the final remedy—not in that sense in which it is popularly held by the laity and by many ignorant medical men.	0.4509822
The ancients said that cautery with a gold instrument is gentler than with iron, and they only said this because of the quality of gold and the nobility of its substance;	The Ancients have stated that cauterization by gold is more effective than by iron. Now they said that on account of the temperateness of gold and its noble character.	0.8133538
and they said that the site of the cautery does not suppurate, but this is not true because I have tested it, and I have found that it is true in some people;	They also stated that the site of cauterization does not become purulent, but that is not absolutely so; for I myself have experience of that and have found that it happens in some cases and not in other cases.	0.71060216
and gold cautery is better than iron, as they said. And yet when you heat a gold instrument, you do not know when it is hot because of the color of the gold, and it cools down quickly;	Cauterization by gold is indeed better and more successful than with iron, as they have stated; except that when you are heating the gold cautery in the fire you are uncertain, by reason of the redness of the gold, when it reaches the desired temperature.	0.7896185
and if it is heated too much; thus they make in the fire; and thus there is enough difficulty.	In addition to this it cools very quickly; and if you overheat it it melts in the fire, melts and runs, and the practitioner finds himself in difficulties.	0.60673016
Now I have organized this chapter from head to toe so that the way is easier to find.	Now I have arranged this book on cauterization by chapters, set in order from the head to the foot, to make it easy for the seeker to find what he wants.	0.74624413

chapter-1-subchapter-1.txt
This cautery is good for moisture and coldness on the brain, and there are two that are made for a disease called "soda," and for many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and for excessive dreams and toothache and sore throat, and especially for all illnesses that come from coldness like paralysis and lethargy and apoplexy and similar illnesses.	This cauterization helps against excessive humidity and coldness on the brain, which cause headache, abundance of defluxions from the head to the regions of the eyes and ears, excess of sleep, toothache, sore throat, and in general any sort of disorder arising from frigidity, such as palsy, fits, apoplexy, and diseases similar to these.	0.70495075
The method for this cautery is that the patient be purged by a laxative medicine cleansing the head for three or four nights, depending on what the strength and age and constitution of the patient can tolerate; and then shave the patient's head.	The manner of performing this operation is first to bid the patient open the bowels with an evacuant which will also clear his head, for three or four nights, according to the strength, age, and habits of the patient.	0.832549
And then have him sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on his chest;	Then tell him to have his head shaved; then seat him cross-legged before you, with his hands on his breast.	0.77151656
then place the base of your palm on the bridge of his nose between his two eyes;	Then place the lower part of your palm upon the root of his nose between his eyes; and where your middle finger reaches mark that place with ink.	0.7573421
And place it on the spot marked with ink, and do so while pressing down and tightening your hand little by little while twisting; then lift your hand quickly and look at the spot to see if you can see the bone just a little;	Then bring it down upon the marked place with one downward stroke with gentle pressure, revolving the cautery; then quickly take your hand away while observing the place.	0.7613344
then lift your hand quickly and look at the spot to see if you can see the bone just a little; and if you do not see it, repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you;	If you see that some bone is exposed, the size of the head of a skewer or a grain of vetch, then take your hand away; otherwise repeat with the same iron, or, if that has got cold, with another, till the amount of bone I have mentioned is exposed.	0.5518216
afterwards take a little salt and put it in water and soak cotton in it, and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days;	Then take a little salt dissolved in water; soak some cotton in it, apply to the place and leave for three days.	0.8912692
afterwards apply cotton soaked in butter; and leave it on until the burn is gone; afterwards treat the wound with the ointment called "tetrapharmacon", until it is healed.	Then apply some cotton soaked in butter and leave it on till the eschar falls off; then dress with Tetrapharmacum ointment till healed.	0.83536637
And the ancients said that the longer the wound remains open, the more it is cleansed;	The Ancients said that the more a wound is kept open, discharging pus, the better and more efficacious.	0.7251112
And some of these said that one should leave the cautery on until part of the bone is burned, and then one cuts away what is burned from the bone, and it is treated/healed.	Some said the skin was to be cauterized through to the bone and the cautery held until some of the thickness of the bone was burnt. Then the burnt bone was to be scraped out, then dressed.	0.7565189
And others say that one should leave the cautery on, and push so strongly that one lowers/scoops out the bone as wide as a whorl that women put on their spindles so that the humors come out better/faster;	Others said that the cautery should be carried through to burn a deep impression in the bone so that there should come out of the bone a piece shaped like a grain of a carob tree or a small spindle-whorl; they asserted that the vapours of the head would be exhaled through this place.	0.62918115
and one should leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards one should treat and solder/close it.	The wound should be kept open a long while, then dressed until healed.	0.7490902
And these two methods of cautery do not seem to me to be good at all, except in some men where there is cause for fear;	But these two methods of cauterization I do not consider right except on certain men; and I regard them as risky.	0.76161975
and it seems better to me that I should leave it;	In my opinion, to let the patient alone is preferable and safer, if it is to be.	0.4119667
for the head (of the bone) is weakened by the continuous discharges of (bodily) fluids, as we observe in other limbs;	For the head is weakened when its natural continuity is broken, as we see in other parts, and particularly when the patient's head is weak by nature.	0.60940415
and also when the patient's head (of the bone) is naturally weak, and the first type of cautery is safer and better for me, and this one I use with the work together for healing.	In my opinion the first type of cauterization is safer and better; therefore use that and be safe.	0.50260115

chapter-1-subchapter-2.txt
and it is necessary that the cauteries of the temples be more subtle/smaller/shallower than those with which one cauterizes the middle of the head, and this is the method/form:	I shall describe this cauterization in its own place. The cautery for the frontal prominences and occiput must be more slender than that for the middle part.	0.5631162

chapter-1-subchapter-3.txt
of the cautery of the head When in a part of the head comes a sudden pain, and the ailment extends to the eye, and the head is purged by cleansing medicines, and one has done the other treatments that I have described in the section on illnesses, and all this is of no use: then make cauteries in two ways, that is to say, with a sharp medicine and with iron.	When there occurs pain with headache in one side of the head and the pain extends to the eye; and the patient has cleared his head with purging drugs and there has been applied the other treatment that I have mentioned in the sections on diseases, but to no avail; in this disorder cauterization is of two sorts, either with caustic or with the actual cautery.	0.834157
The cautery with sharp medicine is that you take a clove of garlic, and remove the skin and cut off a little at both ends, and then split the temple where the pain is located in such a way that you can place the clove of garlic under the skin;	This is the manner of cauterization with caustic: take one clove of garlic; peel it and cut both ends off; then cut open the site of the pain in the temple with a broad scalpel till there is room to contain the clove under the skin; then introduce it under the skin till it lies completely hidden.	0.78471637
and when it is placed, bind it and hold it firmly and leave it thus for twelve hours; and then unbind it and take out the clove of garlic, and leave the wound like that for two or three days; then put on cotton dipped in butter until pus comes out.	Then bind up the wound tightly over it with pads and leave for fifteen hours; then unbind it, remove the garlic, and leave the wound open for two or three days; then apply cotton wool soaked in butter till it suppurates.	0.85741055
Afterwards treat it with ointment until it is healed;	Then dress with ointment till it heals.	0.78662467
and if you wish, do this with some burning medicines that I have written about in the twelfth treatise on burning medicines.	If you would rather, you may carry it out with one of the caustic drugs that I have included in the eighteenth treatise, on caustics.	0.77474856
The iron cautery is done in this manner. Heat the cautery, which has this shape:	The actual cauterization with iron should be done in this way: heat a cautery of this shape.	0.75503045
And it is called "closed" because the head is shaped like a nail or has a slight curve, and in the middle has a small point;	It is called the claviform; the head is nailshaped in that there is a slight curvature with a small protuberance in the middle.	0.6026819
and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand steady and turn the iron slightly, so that half the thickness of the skin is burned;	Apply it then to the site of the pain, hold your hand steady and revolve it little by little.	0.60650694
and lift your hand so that the artery, which is outside, is not burned, and a lot of blood flows out.	Let the thickness of skin burnt be about half; then remove your hand so as not to burn a subjacent artery, for thus a haemorrhage arises.	0.58447635
Afterwards, put cotton in salt water and place it on the spot for three days; then put cotton soaked in butter, and then treat the area with ointment until it is healed;	Then soak some cotton wool in saline, apply to the place, and leave three days; then apply cotton wool with butter; then treat with ointment till it heals.	0.91557014
and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery which is called "cultellare," use the very tip, and be careful not to cut the artery in this migraine which is not old.	Or if you prefer you can cauterize this migraine with the knife-edge that juts out from the cautery; but be careful not to cut an artery, specially in this kind of migraine that is non-chronic.	0.65446895

chapter-1-subchapter-4.txt
of migraine	On the cauterization of chronic migraine.	0.4633722
When you treat a migraine as we have said before in the divisions of illnesses, and it is not effective, and you see that the previously mentioned cauterizations with medicine and iron are not sufficient, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery which is called "cultellare" until it is white;	When you have treated a migraine in the way we have described and with what we have mentioned in the sections on diseases, and the treatment is ineffective, and you perceive that the malady is such that the cauterization we have mentioned before does not suffice for it, either with caustic or with the actual cautery, you should heat an edged cautery to white heat after you have marked the place with a line half a finger's breadth long or thereabouts; and impress your hand once and maintain the pressure till you cut down upon the artery and reach the bone.	0.70445013
and thus mark on the painful area a line half a finger long, and remove your hand immediately, and take care not to cut the artery and that you do not reach the bone;	You must be careful of the mandibular joint which moves in chewing, that you do not cut the muscle or tendon that moves it, causing spasm.	0.48436984
and beware of the mandible that moves when one chews, and be mindful of the nerve that moves it so that spasm does not come to the patient, and beware of bleeding from the artery when it is cut, where cutting brings great fear, especially to him who does not know it, and who is not a student and experienced; and leave the work halfway done;	Have the utmost care of haemorrhage from the artery you have cut, for the occurrence of that is dangerous, specially with one who does not know what to do, having no experience or practice; it is better to refrain from operating.	0.6327908
but I will tell you how to stop the bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you the place where it is appropriate in this book.	We shall later on mention a treatment for accidental haemorrhage of the artery, in due detail, in its proper place in this book.	0.57019734
And if you see that this cautery is not enough for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed;	But if you see that this cautery is not enough for this disorder and you see that the patient is of bodily fitness for it, cauterize him in the middle of the head as we have described, and treat the wound till healed.	0.84593886
and if you wish, administer the cautery that we mentioned in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two blades; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.	If you prefer, employ that cauterization which we have described in the chapter on the extraction of an artery, with the cautery of two blades; for that is a cauterization better and more effective than this.	0.8482616

chapter-1-subchapter-5.txt
of ear pain from cold	On cauterization of pain in the ears.	0.5240458
When ear pain comes from cold, and one has used dissolving medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section, and the pain does not change, then heat this cautery which is called "points," of which here is the form:	When the ear gets a pain from the cold and is treated with laxatives and other medicine as mentioned in its section and the pain nevertheless persists, heat the cautery termed 'punctate'.	0.7831358
Afterward, prick all around the affected ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and move a little above the base of the ear after you have marked the place with ink; and make ten points around each ear;	Then after it has been heated prick with it in a circle right round the ear, or around both if there is pain in both, after the place has been marked with ink; the cauterizations being a little away from the ear. Let the cauterization be of ten punctures or thereabouts round each.	0.892819
afterward treat the area until it is healed.	Then dress the places till healed.	0.72308546

chapter-1-subchapter-6.txt
of the torture of the mouth	Cauterization of the twisted mouth.	0.4252355
Torture that must be treated by cautery is excluded except for those that arise from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of illnesses;	The twisting of the mouth which is curable with the cautery is of that nature which arises from phlegm, as we have already noticed in the sections on sicknesses.	0.70383894
and do not cauterize similar conditions that come from dryness and nerve spasms.	But cauterization is to be carefully avoided in that type which is due to dryness or spasm of the tendon.	0.5402036
When you treat this type of torture that arises from phlegm with hydragogues and purges of the head and gargles, and this is not effective, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and another a little outside the temple, and the third at the joining of the two lips;	When this kind of deformity has been treated with electuaries, errhines, and gargles, and your treatment is ineffective, you should use three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear; the second a little below the temple; and the third at the junction of the lips.	0.7777863
and place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and make a cautery near the top of the ear, a little below the crown of the head, and another on the temple about a thumb's length long; and leave the cautery in place until half of the core is burned;	Let your cauterization be on the opposite side to the affected side, for the relaxation will arise in the side which seems normal. The form taken by the cauterization is that you burn him a little below the frontal prominence, on a level with the upper tip of the ear, and also on the temple the length of the thumb; carry the burning to a depth of about half the thickness of the skin.	0.7110976
and this is the shape of the cautery:	The shape of the cautery.	0.44575876
And it is similar to the lancet that we have shown before, but it is a little more subtle, and the blade should be a little thicker;	It is a variety of the bladed cautery such as has already been described, but is rather more slender as you see. Its blade should have a certain thickness.	0.5819054
afterwards treat the area as I have said before, until it is healed.	Then dress the place with what we have mentioned till healed.	0.69516397

chapter-1-subchapter-7.txt
When apoplexy is long-standing and you treat it as we have said, and it does not help, and the patient does not have a fever, then make four cauteries: Two on the two temples of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one in the place called "vessels" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the pit of the stomach;	When an apoplexy has lasted a long while and has been treated by those methods we have given and your treatment has been ineffective but the patient has no fever, then burn him with four cauterizations: one on each frontal prominence; one in the middle of his head as we have described; and one at the back of the head as has been said. The shape of the cauteries to be as before.	0.80955243
and be treated as we have said before.	Then treat as described.	0.5944664

chapter-1-subchapter-8.txt
of lethargy	On cauterization for lethargy due to phlegm.	0.40648586
For this illness, it is necessary to give the patient strong herbs and pills that cleanse the brain;	First, great electuaries should be given to the patient to drink; and pills to clear the head.	0.61862004
afterwards, shave the patient's entire head, and apply to the occiput the mustard plaster that is described in the treatise on plasters;	Then let his whole head be shaved and apply a mustard plaster to the hinder part as described in the treatise on plasters.	0.7455375
If he is healed thus, it is good; and if he is not, then make three cauteries down the middle of the head, descending to the neck, and let the space between each cautery be the width of a thumb;	If he is cured, well and good; but if not, burn him with three cauterizations on the back of the head, arranging them in a row downward from the upper part of the head to the base of the neck; and make an interval between each pair of one finger's breadth.	0.8615275
and treat it like the others, and if you wish to add more, and the patient is tolerant, make a cautery in the middle; and if necessary, two others on the two temples, and treat him until he is healed;	Then treat as aforesaid. If you wish to add to these cauterizations and the patient be fit to bear it, give him a burn in the middle; and if still more, then burn him on the two frontal prominences. Then dress till healed.	0.803619
and let the cautery be the one called "olivary," as I have said before.	Let the cautery be an olivary as described before.	0.6569762

chapter-1-subchapter-9.txt
It is necessary that the head be cleansed of air and of what we have said before;	Purgation of the head should come first, with electuaries and the other things we have mentioned.	0.56561464
afterwards shave the patient's head, then cauterize him in the middle of the head and on each temple, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck;	Then shave the patient's head; and then burn him with one cauterization in the middle of the head and one on either frontal prominence and one on the occiput, and three on the vertebrae of the neck.	0.85761154
and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is tolerant, and the illness is strong, make four cauteries on the spine of the back; and leave them until the thickest part of the wound is burned, and lift your hand;	And if the malady of flaccidity of the body require still more and the patient be fit to bear it, and his disease be severe and have a strong hold on him, burn him with four more cauterizations on his dorsal vertebrae and carry the cautery to burn almost through the thickness of the skin; then remove your hand and treat him in the aforesaid manner till he is healed.	0.8323148

chapter-1-subchapter-10.txt
Of epilepsy	On cauterizing for epilepsy.	0.5388549
The epileptic should not use cautery except for one who is phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first purify the brain with herbs and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section when the patient is old enough and able to take medicine.	The epileptic who may be cauterized is he whose epilepsy arises from phlegm. When the patient is an adult and can stand taking the drugs, he should first purify his brain by great electuaries and the rest of the treatment mentioned in that section.	0.767579
And if it is a child who cannot tolerate it, have them gargle and chew things that purify the brain often, along with good foods;	But if it be a boy unable to tolerate the drugs he should employ gargles and medicaments to chew, to clear his brain, for several days beforehand, with an improvement in his diet.	0.596806
afterwards shave the head in the middle, and make a cautery there according to what we have said before, and a cautery on the forehead, and on each temple; and if the patient is strong and able to bear it, cauterize them as I have said for one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the method I have described.	Then let his head be shaved and burn him with the single cauterization on the middle of the head in the manner described before, and with one cauterization on the occiput, and one on each frontal prominence; and, if the patient be fit and able to bear it, add those additional cauterizations on the cervical and dorsal vertebrae that we have already described for paralysis and for flaccidity. The cautery should be olivary, the shape before described.	0.866839
If the patient is a child, make a small cautery in this manner:	If the patient be a boy, use a fine cautery.	0.7147113

chapter-1-subchapter-11.txt
When, due to melancholy, the superfluities or humors are corrupted and the phlegm is thick, then cauterize them with such cauteries as we have described for one who has paralysis.	When the cause of the melancholy be corrupt humours and a thick phlegm, burn him with those cauterizations mentioned in the case of the paralytic.	0.71966565
And if, due to melancholy, the superfluity is tending towards melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give him to drink something by which the brain may be cleansed, according to what is stated before in the division.	If the cause of the melancholy be a redundance of humour turning to black bile, and the patient's body be humid, make him drink that which will purge his head as described in a previous section.	0.80184656
Afterward, shave the patient's head; then make a compress of well-made linen, like a circle, and place it in the middle of the head;	Then shave the patient's head and apply a compact ring-bandage of linen and put it round the middle of his head.	0.7560755
and let the patient sit cross-legged and be well supported on all sides;	Have him sit cross-legged, held firmly on all sides.	0.6211771
then present the ointment, and aged sheep butter is good; and warm it moderately over a fire, so that the finger can tolerate it if placed within; then empty the circle in the middle of the head, and let it cool;	Then take a pound of stale sheep's butter and warm it on the fire to a moderate heat so that a finger put in can bear it; then pour it out on the middle of the head inside the circle of the bandage and leave it till it has cooled.	0.81382364
and do this to the patient once a week with other good management, until he is healed.	Do this once a week with other efficacious treatment till he is cured.	0.8102486
Or if you want to cauterize it by making multiple points with the cautery.	If you wish, burn him with multiple small puncture cauterizations; nor press long on the cautery but let this cauterization be only just punctured.	0.4476085
This method of cautery softens the brain evenly;	For this kind of cauterization will moderately moisten the brain.	0.6463775
and then apply cotton soaked in butter and chicken fat.	Then let cotton soaked in butter or hen's grease be applied.	0.790733

chapter-1-subchapter-12.txt
of the water of the eyes When water first comes to the eyes, by the signs I have mentioned in the division, then begin by giving the patient a drink that cleanses the head, and protect him from all moisture, and make him sweat in a bath several times while fasting.	On cautery in cataract of the eye. When by those signs I have mentioned in the relevant section there is brought to your notice the beginning of a cataract of the eye, start with draughts for the patient such as shall cleanse his head; and guard him from all humidities. Make him also sweat for some days, fasting, in the bath.	0.7568302
Afterwards, tell him to shave his head, and make a cautery in the middle of the head, and make two cauteries on both temples if the flow of water is in both eyes together, or in one if the flow is in one eye;	Then tell him to have his head shaved; and burn him with one cauterization in the middle of the head; then cauterize him with two burns on the temples if the cataract is beginning in both eyes; or on the one side only if it is in one eye.	0.8506086
and cut with the cautery all the veins and arteries that are under the skin, and let the cauteries be long according to the width of the temple;	And with the cautery cut all the subcutaneous veins and arteries; and let the cauterizations be long, across the breadth of the temples.	0.88203835
and beware of excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it with such power as you have.	Beware of haemorrhage; if you see any, stanch it straight away with any means you can.	0.6078484
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and at the incision the precaution of how you will stop it;	We shall deal later on with the method of extraction and cutting out of arteries, and provision against haemorrhage.	0.5644165
and sometimes one makes a cautery or cauterization under the two bones behind.	Two strong cauterizations are sometimes made on the back of the neck below the two bones.	0.7030813

chapter-1-subchapter-13.txt

chapter-1-subchapter-14.txt
When you treat it according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three nights of cochies (a sort of medicinal drink) to drink; afterwards shave the head and apply a cautery in the middle of the olive-shaped cautery mark; and make two cauteries with the cautery called "clavilis" above the two eyebrows, slightly below the hairline;	When you have treated foetor by those methods given in its section and your treatment is unsuccessful, give the patient laxative draughts for three days; then shave his head; and burn with a median cauterization with the olivary cautery; then cauterize him twice above the eyebrows a little below the hair with a claviform cautery.	0.74004227
and beware of the artery so that you do not cut it.	Beware of cutting the artery.	0.59663

chapter-1-subchapter-15.txt
When the eyelid is softened by illness and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery which is called "olivare." (olive-shaped) of which here is the shape:	When an eyelid droops either from disease or humidity, then burn the lid with a single cauterization with this crescent-shaped cautery.	0.5678216
And if you wish, make two cauteries on the two eyebrows, as long as the eyebrows are;	And if you wish burn him also a little above the eyebrows with two cauterizations (; that is, one) on each side; but keep clear of the temples; and let each cauterization be of the length of the eyebrow.	0.6883304
and do not remove the hand except when the third part of the eyelid is burned, in the manner that I have said.	Nor let your hand apply the cautery longer than to burn a third of the way through the skin. The shape of the cautery.	0.5793248

chapter-1-subchapter-16.txt
of the hair that pricks the eye Sometimes it happens that the eyelashes are turned inwards, and prick the eye, and cauteries are made there in two ways: that is to say with fire, or with burning medicine.	On cauterization of the eyelid when the eyelashes are turned inwards, irritating the eye. The cauterization is of two kinds, by fire and by caustic.	0.6500803
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.	Cauterization by fire will be thus: tell the patient previously, if he is one of those who pluck the lashes, to let them grow till they are long and straight; and if during growth they irritate him, bind the eyes with a fillet so as not to move till they have grown.	0.74520934
When they grow and are even, then place the patient in your lap; then draw on the eyelid a figure like a myrtle leaf, and let the beginning of the mark be near the hairs;	When they have grown and are straight, put the patient's head in your lap and mark upon the eyelid with ink the shape of a myrtle leaf, beginning near the lashes.	0.84275866
then place cotton moistened with egg white and psyllium mucilage on the eye, then heat the cautery, which has this shape:	Then apply cotton wool soaked in egg-white or mucilage of psyllium seeds. Then heat a cautery of this form.	0.70646405
Then cauterize over the figure you have marked little by little, many times, so that the flesh is burned there;	Then burn over the shape marked out, slowly, with many small strokes, till the whole surface of the skin marked out to the shape of the myrtle leaf be cauterized, specially the outer part of it.	0.5123383
and the sign of the success of the operation is that you see the eyelid retracted and the hairs raised at the corner of the eye;	It will show the correctness of your work if you see the eyelid contracted and the lashes risen away from the white of the eye.	0.60574275
then remove your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then put cotton soaked in butter there until the burn is healed; afterwards treat it with ointment until it is healed.	Then remove your hand and let him be for three days. Then apply cotton wool soaked in butter till the scab falls off; then treat the place with ointment till healed.	0.9488076
And if after this the hairs return and the eyelid is softened, then repeat the cautery over the same spot, as you did the first time;	But if after an interval there be a return of the same condition of the eyelash and of drooping of the eyelid, repeat the cauterization in the same place just as you did before.	0.7400048
and if the hairs are burned away, cauterize it until the eyelid is raised to its natural position and is even, and the hairs do not prick the eye.	And if it be in the lower lid cauterize this also till it falls back to its normal position and the hairs do not irritate the eye.	0.699161
The cautery of burning medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make from parchment the shape of a myrtle leaf;	This is the method of burning with caustic: bid the patient let the lashes grow long and straight; then make the shape of a myrtle leaf out of paper.	0.7771833
then take French soap and quicklime, an ounce of each, and grind them well together; and do it quickly, so that it does not cool, then spread it on the shape you have made like the myrtle leaf, and place it on the eyelid; And if the patient has it in one eye only, you should work on one, and if in both, also; and place under the eye cotton moistened in egg white;	Then take of common soap and of quicklime of each the weight of a drachm or thereabouts and beat them well together rapidly lest the mass get cold; then spread this on the paper shaped like a myrtle leaf and apply to the eyelid of one or both eyes; place also under the eye cotton wool soaked in egg-white; the patient's head being in your lap.	0.8378943
and the patient's head should be in your lap and put your index finger on the medicine, and press it a little and move it every time the patient feels a burning from the medicine, for it feels like a burning fire.	Place your forefinger on the caustic and press it down a little and move it about according as the patient feels the bite of the caustic; for he will feel it sting like fire.	0.7616287
When you have done this for a long time, remove the medicine with your finger. And when the burning has passed, lift up the moistened area and see if you notice the growth elevated as if it had been raised by the use of fire or by an incision; and if it is so, it is good.	While the stinging lasts, let the caustic remain on and move it about with your finger; and when the stinging dies down take away the caustic and wash the eye with water; then look, and if you see the eyelid raised up as by a blepharoplasty, either by fire or by incision, good.	0.7061652
If not, then apply more medicine to the area where the medicine has not worked, until your work is even, and your mark is precise;	If not, repeat the caustic application in the place that the drug has not affected and which has not gone black, until your operation is complete and the eyelid draws together.	0.6509429
then apply cotton moistened with butter until the burned area falls off, afterward treat the area with the ointment called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.	Then apply cotton wool with butter till the crust of the burn falls away; then treat with Palm ointment or the like till it be healed.	0.63983756
And you must take great care in your work, ensuring that none of the medicine falls into the eyes.	But in your operative procedure take the utmost care lest the least bit of caustic get into the eye.	0.67599833
And if the paper softens afterward, and the hairs prick the eye, then reapply the medicine to the softened area of the paper neatly, just as you did before; afterward treat it until it is healed;	And if, after some days, the eyelid be relaxed and some eyelash irritate the eye, then repeat the application, particularly in that part of the lid that has dropped, in the same manner as before; and treat till cured.	0.75793743
and this is the shape of the myrtle leaf:	This is the shape of the myrtle leaf.	0.77831614
And know that people's eyes vary in size, and your restraints should be adjusted accordingly;	You should know that the human eye varies in size; so let your contracture be in proportion to this.	0.7617644
and the right way is not set forth for the one who studies this art.	The right procedure is well known to him who has experience in this art.	0.590268

chapter-1-subchapter-17.txt
of the treatment of fistula by cautery	On cauterization of a fistula in the angle of the eye.	0.46581492
When you treat a fistula as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments are not effective, then you must apply cautery in this manner.	When you have treated a fistula in those ways mentioned in the sections on diseases, without success, it should be cauterized after this manner.	0.83955264
Instruct the patient to put their head in your lap; and let the assistant hold their head between their hands in such a way that they cannot move or shake their head;	Bid the patient put his head in your lap; and let an assistant hold his head in front of you without moving or stirring.	0.8623009
then place cotton moistened in egg white or parsley juice over the eye;	Then place on his eyes cotton wool damped with egg-white or mucilage of psyllium seeds.	0.7783372
then heat the cautery, which is like this:	Then heat a cautery shaped thus.	0.71444625
and it is shaped at the tip like a feather of a vulture, together as one the cautery should be;	It should be hollow and in shape like a fine tube, like an eagle's quill, at the one end that is used as a cautery.	0.63183117
if you wish, it can be pointed from one end to the other, and if you wish, it can be like a tent;	And if you wish it may be perforated to the other extremity; or it can be solid like a probe.	0.696003
but still, this one that is pointed is better for your work.	But this hollow instrument will be better for your operation.	0.66692114
Then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus, and dry it; and if it is closed, then open it, and draw out the matter;	Then press on the fistula if it be open and get the matter out of it and wipe it away; or if it is not open, then open it.	0.882552
then apply the cautery hot, and hold your hand to the cautery on the side of the nose above the eye, so that your hand doesn't cause harm; and place the cautery in the fat of the eye, and destroy it.	Then apply to it the cautery, which should be very hot, and press it in with your hand till it reaches the bone. While you are burning keep the hand away from the eye slightly toward the nasal side, lest your hand slip or the patient draw away so that you put the cautery into the ball of the eye and destroy it.	0.7433479
If you reach the bone at the beginning of the cauterization, that would be good. If not, repeat the cauterization again, and again if you need to, and leave it for three days;	And if you reach the bone at the first cauterization, good; if not, repeat the cauterization if necessary.	0.7171711
afterwards apply cotton soaked in butter, and treat it with the drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, then apply a sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and then treat it according to what is appropriate in its chapter.	Leave it a few days, then put on cotton wool with butter and treat with hygroscopic ointment till it heals. And should forty days have passed and it does not heal, apply a sharp corrosive ointment so as to expose the bone, and strip it as will be explained in the appropriate chapter.	0.84383416
Attend to the fistula, and cut open the area; afterwards place in the incision a thin tube, of which here is the form: and they make it about the size of a third of a lead weight; and hold your hand or the tube firmly, and let the patient not move at all, so that the melted lead does not run into his eye;	Another method of cauterizing a fistula is that which some of the Ancients mentioned: apply yourself to the site of the fistula and incise it; then insert into the incision a fine funnel, this being the figure of it, and pour into it a drachm of molten lead; and keep your hand on the funnel, holding it firm all the time, and do not let the patient move at all, lest the molten lead run into his eyes.	0.7103214
and it is necessary to put on the patient's eye cotton moistened in egg white or in water:	Then you should put cotton wool soaked in egg-white or water upon the patient's eye.	0.78082836
the lead thus burns the site of the fistula, and heals it by marvelous healing.	For the lead cauterizes the site of the fistula and acts as a marvellous cure.	0.72307515
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have described, that is good. If not, it is necessary to administer a perforation to the nerve, and bring back the fistula to the body of the nerve as appropriate in its proper place.	If the fistula heals by the cauterization and medication we have described, well and good; otherwise perforation of the nose will undoubtedly have to be undertaken to lead the fistula into the meatus of the nose, by the technique that will come in its own place.	0.7682477

chapter-1-subchapter-18.txt
of cracks in the lips Very often cracks occur in the lips that are called "poil," and especially in the lips of children.	There often occur fissures in the lip to which are given the name 'hairs'; they are particularly common in the lips of boys.	0.792953
When you treat these cracks with what we have described in divisions, and the treatment is not effective, then heat a small knife-shaped cautery in this way:	When you have ineffectually treated these clefts with those things that we have mentioned in their section, then heat a small edged cautery of this shape. The hollow should be as sharp as a knife.	0.781958
And quickly put it in those cracks until it reaches the bottom;	Then quickly place it, hot, right on the fissure till the burning has reached the depth of the lip.	0.5529657
afterwards treat the area with cerate until it is healed.	Then treat with wax plaster till healed.	0.7445708

chapter-1-subchapter-19.txt
When an abscess comes at the base of the throat or in the uvula, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, afterwards it causes rotting and pus and becomes chronic and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have described in divisions, and it is not effective: then you must have a cautery according to the size of the fistula; after the opening or hole of the fistula, and hold your hand steady so that the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and to the furthest point;	On the cauterization of fistulae occurring in the mouth. When there comes a tumour in the base of the gums or in the palate or in the roots of the molar teeth, and it becomes purulent and breaks out and a fistula comes from the flow of pus, and you have treated this without effect, you should heat a cautery of a size to fit the fistula; then introduce it hot into the fistula opening; and continue the pressure with it hot until the iron, still hot, reaches the hollow and the extremity of it.	0.8694614
and do this once or twice, then treat it with what we have described in treatments, until it is healed;	Do this once or twice over. Then afterwards treat as we have mentioned until it heals.	0.7911465
and if it is healed thus, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.	If the matter stops and it heals, well and good; otherwise it is impossible to avoid opening up the place and removing the diseased bone in the manner we shall speak of in its proper chapter.	0.7716303

chapter-1-subchapter-20.txt
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are loose, and you treat them with medicines and it is of no use, then place the patient's head in your lap; afterwards, heat the cautery, the shape of which will come later, in such a way that you place a small chain on the tooth;	When the gums are relaxed on account of humidity and the teeth are loose, and you treat this with drugs, and your treatment is ineffectual, then place the patient's head in your lap; then heat the cautery whose picture will come later.	0.8821113
and place the hot cautery inside quickly, and hold your hand there so that the patient feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth;	Put a cannula upon his tooth and quickly introduce the glowing cautery into it and press a little until the patient can feel the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth; then remove your hand.	0.78056383
afterwards, remove your hand and reapply the cautery as you wish;	Then repeat the cauterization as many times as you may desire.	0.580022
afterwards, have the patient fill their mouth with salt water, and hold it for an hour and then spit it out.	Then the patient should fill his mouth with saline, hold it for a while, then spit it out.	0.835741
And in this way the tooth that was loose is strengthened, and the softened gums are tightened, and the corrupted moisture is dried.	Then the loose tooth will be made firm, the relaxed gum will be tightened, and the corrupt humidity will be dried up.	0.7842448

chapter-1-subchapter-21.txt
of the pain of the teeth	On cauterization for toothache.	0.41346213
When toothache comes from cold, or there is cold or a worm, and medical treatments are ineffective, then cautery is necessary in two ways: and cautery with butter and cautery with fire.	When the toothache arises on account of cold, or if there be a worm in the tooth, and medical treatment does not avail, then cauterization should be undertaken. There are two ways of doing this, one with butter, the other with the cautery.	0.8539685
Cautery with butter is as follows: you take cow's butter and melt it in an iron or bronze spoon; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, and soak it in boiling butter, and quickly place it on the aching tooth and hold it there until it cools;	Cauterization with butter is done thus: take cows' butter and let it boil in an iron ladle or pan; then take cotton wool, wind it round the top of a probe, and dip it in the boiling butter and quickly apply it to the aching tooth and hold it there till cold.	0.9333539
and do this often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you wish, soak wool and cotton in cold butter, and place it on the aching tooth, and place a hot iron on it until the heat reaches the end of the tooth.	Repeat this a number of times till the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth. If you prefer, dip wool or cotton in cold butter and put it on the aching tooth, then on top of that apply the hot iron until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.	0.7561816
The cautery with combined fire is as follows: you take a tube of iron or bronze, and it should be thick so that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth;	The actual cautery is administered thus: take a tube of bronze or iron with some thickness in the body of it so that the intensity of the fire does not reach the patient's mouth.	0.78639287
then heat the cautery, the shape of which will come later, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand there until the cautery cools;	Then heat a cautery whose figure will be given shortly, and apply it to the tooth itself and hold your hand until the cautery gets cold.	0.8413539
do this often, for the pain will be removed that same day or the next.	Do this several times over; the pain will certainly depart the same day or the next.	0.85022616
And the patient should fill his mouth with good butter immediately after this cautery, and then spit it out;	After this cauterization the patient is to fill his mouth with good butter and keep it in for a while, then spit it out.	0.7614054
and this is the shape of the cautery:	This is the figure of the cautery.	0.54982394
And make a cautery of whichever end you want, and according to what you are able to do;	Cauterize with whichever end you prefer according to circumstances.	0.45065838
and this is the form of the tube:	This is the figure of the tube.	0.63140005

chapter-1-subchapter-22.txt
of scrofula When scrofula is caused by phlegm and cold humors, and does not respond to digestion by medicines, then heat the pointed cautery, of which the form follows below, and it should have two openings for the fumes to escape from the cautery on the other side;	On cauterization of scrofulous tumours. When the tumours arise from phlegm and cold humidities and are not to be dispersed with medicines and you wish for a rapid dispersal, then heat the hollow cautery of which this is the figure. It is open at both ends to give exit for the fumes of burning from the other end.	0.72251517
and place the hot cautery on the abscess once, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess;	Place it hot, right on the tumour, once, or twice if need be, till you reach the bottom of the tumour.	0.7751689
and if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; and apply cotton soaked in butter until the burn is gone;	If the tumour be small, suit the cautery to the size of the tumour. Then let be for three days and apply cotton wool soaked in butter until the eschar has disappeared.	0.8607713
afterwards treat the area with ointments and tents until it is healed.	Then treat with ointments and with plugs of lint till healed. [	0.7857262

chapter-1-subchapter-23.txt
When the humors prevail over the bronchial tubes of the lung, and especially when this comes from a cold complexion, then the patient must first be purged by laxative medicines;	When humidities prevail over the windpipe, and especially when there is a frigid temperament, the patient should first have his bowels opened with a laxative.	0.7566905
afterwards make a cautery at the base of the throat, and be careful not to go down as far as the throat, and do not burn the heart but only a little.	Then cauterize him once in the hollow of the jugular fossa at the root of the throat in the hollow part. Take care that the cautery does not pierce through to the gullet, and burn no more than half of the thickness of the skin.	0.5896811
Then make another cautery at the joint of the neck at the top of the spine, and let the cautery be what is called "clavile" of which we have the image before;	Then cauterize him once more, strongly, at the junction of the neck with its last vertebra, the cautery being claviform as described above.	0.6397197
and treat the place as we have said before until it is healed.	Then treat as prescribed before till healed.	0.68250144

chapter-1-subchapter-24.txt
When the cough and lung disease are from cold humors, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the illness is chronic, make two cauteries on the chest in empty places; and another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two breasts;	When the cough and pulmonary disease arise from cold humidities and the patient suffers from no fever or wasting but the disease is chronic, sear him with two cauterizations over the two clavicles, in the soft depressions ; and with another cauterization in the mid-line of the chest between the breasts.	0.8967041
and let the cautery, which is called "clavile," be according to the form described previously.	Let the cautery be claviform as described above.	0.6015477
And if you wish, make a cautery by pricking, with the cautery called "points," the form of which is described above in the section on ear diseases;	And if you prefer, make punctate cauterizations with the cautery called 'punctate'; its shape has already been described under pricking for earache.	0.78612757
and let the pricks be up to thirty, or thereabouts.	The punctures should number upwards of thirty.	0.55708474
Afterwards, treat the area as described previously, and let the cautery have three prongs according to this form:	Then treat as aforesaid until healed.	0.46938312
And for this reason, the cauteries are easier because you make three at a time.	Sometimes also a trident cautery is prepared, in this manner, with which you can burn more speedily; for with this you can apply three cauterizations at once.	0.59331834

chapter-1-subchapter-25.txt
On the dislocation of the shoulder	On cauterization of the axilla.	0.52044123
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, have the patient lie on his back and on his side; After, lift the core that is inside the areola with the fingers of your left hand;	When the head of the humerus is dislocated on account of the synovial fluid or when it does not remain in the correct position after the dislocation has been set, so that this becomes a regular occurrence—it is set and then dislocates with the least movement, as we have ourselves seen; you must first set the luxation, then make the patient lie down on his back or on his sound side; then with the fingers of the left hand lift up the skin of the axilla if the joint has dislocated downwards.	0.79386306
And if the joint is dislocated inwards, then heat the cautery which has two nerves, of which here is the shape:	Then heat a cautery provided with two spits in this manner.	0.48808232
and cauterize the core until it pierces through to the rib, and the shape of the cautery would come to resemble four cauteries;	Then with that burn through the fold of skin till you have perforated to the other side, getting four cauterizations.	0.52830803
and for this reason, cauterization is done with the cautery that has three nerves, which is why the shapes of the cauterization are six cauteries;	The cautery may be of three prongs and then the form of the cauterization will be six burns. The prongs should be of the fineness of a probe.	0.6203793
and the nerves are as thin as a probe and this is the shape of the cautery which has three nerves:	The prongs should be of the fineness of a probe. This is the figure of the cautery with three prongs.	0.58287436
And sometimes another nerve is added to this, which makes eight cauteries.	Sometimes there is added yet one more so there will be eight burns.	0.71587074
Afterward, apply crushed leeks with salt onto the cautery; afterwards, let the patient rest, and the limb should not be moved for a long time until it is well strengthened.	Put on the burns leeks well pounded with salt; then keep the patient absolutely quiet so as not to move the joint for a time till it gains strength.	0.87924594
And if it is dislocated from above, which rarely happens, then cauterize on the thick part of the clavicle cautery, with many cauterizations by pricking.	If the dislocation has gone upwards, which very rarely happens, then cauterize him above the shoulder with one good claviform cautery or with multiple punctured cauterizations.	0.7338475
For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.	Thus the joint will gain strength and the humidity will disappear and the patient will be cured.	0.72697103

chapter-1-subchapter-26.txt
When coldness and much moisture enter the stomach, so much so that they alter its complexion, and catarrh increases in it, and the usual methods of treatment are used and they are not effective, then the patient must be laid on his back, and extend his legs and arms. After this, make three cauterizations: one below the hollow of the chest by the width of a finger, with the clavicle cautery, and two cauterizations outside on both sides, so that the shape of the cauterizations forms a triangle, and there is enough space between them so that they do not join together when they expel pus;	When cold and many humidities get into the stomach, so that its constitution is disturbed and much fluxion has come to it, and a variety of treatment has been tried to no effect, the patient must be put on his back with legs and arms outstretched; then give him a threefold cauterization: one a finger's breadth below the hollow of the chest with the claviform cautery; and two below and to the sides of the first cauterization, so that it has a triangular appearance; but there should be some distance between each lest they run together when suppuration sets in.	0.8595731
and let the cauterizations be so deep that they penetrate the two parts of the heart, and let the shape of the cauterizations be according to this form without adjustment:	Let the depth of the burning be two-thirds of the depth of the skin. Let the shape of the cauterizations be thus and of no more than this size.	0.5972322
And if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form;	If you wish, make a single large cauterization in the middle of the stomach, thus. The cautery for this single cauterization is circular, thus.	0.6327182
and he who is afraid of this cautery, should cauterize by pricking and mark a point on the stomach according to the amount of ink you want; then cauterize it with the cautery which is called "point.	The stomach may be cauterized with punctures in the case of a person who fears this operation. You will have marked the points with ink on the stomach, as many as you wish; then sear with a punctate cautery.	0.7195571
After the treatment of the ailment that we have discussed before, until he is healed.	Then treat as previously described until he be healed.	0.74450684

chapter-1-subchapter-27.txt
When pain comes to the liver from cold and moisture and from great flatulence, so much so that it is forced out of its natural complexion by the superfluities; and the patient is treated with what we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit him, so it is necessary that the patient be laid on his back; and mark three cauteries according to this form and this figure and this quantity over the liver, below the hypochondria, there where the man's elbow reaches;	When there is pain in the liver from cold and humidity or from thick vapour, so there is a severe disturbance of its natural constitution, and the patient has been treated as prescribed in the appropriate section but with no effect, the patient should lie back, and you should mark with ink the places of three cauterizations, in this form and exactly of this size below the costal cartilages, where the elbow reaches.	0.6881777
and have a space between each cautery the width of a finger; and let the cauteries be along the length of the body, and do not press your hand very hard with the whole cautery;	Let there be a finger's breadth between each pair of cauterizations and let the burning be straight along the length of the body. Do not press the cautery hard with your hand.	0.8272117
and only burn half of the core, and let the patient stand upright on his feet;	Let the thickness of the skin you burn be half its thickness, not more; and let the patient be standing on his feet during the cauterization.	0.5914843
and if he cannot, then he should lie down, and extend his legs, and raise his arms;	Alternatively he may be recumbent with legs outstretched and arms raised.	0.6210102
And if you wish, cauterize these cauteries with a knife, if you are skillful and wise in the art, and be careful not to burn the whole core, for you would dry out the whole body; and do not let it come to a boil, for the core is very delicate there, and know this for certain.	You will also be able to do these cauterizations with the edged cautery when you have craft and facility in the art. Be careful lest you go too deep with the cautery and burn the whole thickness of the skin and the abdomen and penetrate to the intestine, for the skin there is thin; bear this in mind.	0.74436706

chapter-1-subchapter-28.txt
When there is an abscess on the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels a pain, not too strong;	When there is an abscess in the liver and you are anxious to know if the tumour is in the body of the liver or in its capsule: if it is in the substance of the liver, the patient will be suffering from a feeling of heaviness and no very acute pain.	0.8453753
and if it is in the membrane, he feels a raging pain.	But if it is in the capsule of the liver there will be the sharpest intensity of pain and you will see that it has baffled the doctors.	0.4615245
And then when this treatment requires the eyes, it is necessary that the patient be supported on his head;	Then the patient should lie back on his neck; then mark the place of the swelling with ink.	0.537688
and then mark with ink the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which is similar to a spoke, of which here is the form: And cauterize with the cautery until the core is burned, and goes down to the syphac, until all the pus is out;	Then heat the cautery in the fire, this being the cautery resembling a probe, of this form, and with that make one cauterization till the whole thickness of the skin is burnt through, finishing up at the capsule so that all the purulent matter comes out.	0.739174
after treat it according to the treatment for issues until it is healed;	Then apply the treatment for wounds.	0.43908978
and no one should use this cautery except someone who has studied long in the art of medicine, and through whose hands these diseases have passed sometime.	This kind of cauterization should not be employed except by one who has a long experience of the medical art and who has frequent practice at dealing with this kind of disease.	0.7375438
Then he can work boldly, and yet it seems to me that it is better to leave it alone.	Then he can undertake this kind of operation. But in my opinion it would be better to pass it by.	0.676147

chapter-1-subchapter-29.txt
Of the cautery of pleurisy	On cauterization for pleurisy.	0.5986435
The ancients said that for pleurisy, cauteries should be made from the roots of birthwort, and in this manner: Take a long birthwort root, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and be as thick and as long as your finger; and soak it in oil, and light it on fire, and cauterize one cautery between the armpit and the neck, and two small cauteries a little lower down in the area that is below the chin;	The Ancients mentioned a cauterization for cold pleurisy by means of the roots of the long birthwort, in this fashion: you take the longest you can find of the roots of the long dry birthwort, and of the thickness of one finger; dip this in oil and light it at the fire; then burn the patient with one cauterization in the space between the junction of the neck with the clavicle; and two small cauterizations below the jugular veins, inclining slightly toward the region below the beard.	0.8539635
and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, sloping downwards a little; and one cautery in the middle of the chest, and another over the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two on the two sides of the chest outside the cautery that is between the two shoulders;	And two big cauterizations above the nipples in the space between the third and fourth ribs; and two more between the fifth and sixth ribs, tending slightly toward the back; and another in the middle of the chest; and another above the stomach; and three more behind, namely, one between the scapulae and two on either side of the dorsal spine below the one between the scapulae.	0.8973411
And some ancients said that some men use an iron cautery resembling a razor, and heat it and place it between the ribs, until it reaches that abscess; and the pain jumps out, as we have said regarding the abscess of the liver.	Now one of the Ancients mentioned that there were some people who used an iron cautery shaped like a probe, and introduced it red hot into the intercostal space until it reached the abscess itself and evacuated the pus, as we have mentioned under tumour of the liver.	0.81335366
But in this procedure, there is danger that the patient dies immediately, or a fistula develops that cannot be healed.	But in this perforation with the cautery there is a danger either that the patient may die on the spot or that an incurable fistula may arise at the place.	0.81432545

chapter-1-subchapter-30.txt
about the spleen	On cauterization of the spleen.	0.43896347
When you treat the disease of the spleen with what we have discussed in the sections on treatments, and it is not effective, then there are three types of cautery that are all good.	When you have treated disease of the spleen by the means that we have mentioned in the section and your treatment is ineffectual, there will be three ways of cauterization, each of which will be correct.	0.85219574
One of these methods is to make three or four cauteries, in a line along the length of the spleen, similar to the shape of the cautery for the liver that we discussed before;	One is to make three or four cauterizations in a row over the long axis of the spleen like the cauterization of the liver, a figure of which has been given above.	0.8027283
and do not press your hand hard during the cauterization, and have the patient lie on his back;	Do not put pressure on the cautery. Have the patient's body supine.	0.5988621
And another method of cauterization is to heat the cautery that has two prongs, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;	The second method is to heat the cautery provided with two prongs, described in the chapter on dislocation of the shoulder.	0.7457478
and lift the skin that is next to the spleen, where the patient's ribs are on the left side, and the elevation with which you lift the skin should be lengthwise along the body, and the cauteries should be across the width of the body.	Lift up the skin over the spleen at the level of the patient's left elbow; and let the fold of skin lie across the patient's body so that the cauterizations will fall longitudinally.	0.7862609
Afterward, insert the two heated prongs until the skin is pierced on the other side, and then pull out the cautery, and thus there will be four (marks).	Then push in the two prongs, well heated, till you have pierced the skin from side to side. Then take out the cautery; and there are four cauterizations.	0.73269445
And if you wish, cauterize with the three-pronged cautery.	Or if you prefer you can burn with the other cautery, of three prongs.	0.70437986
Treat it afterward when it has discharged pus for a long time, and this is better than the other treatments mentioned before.	Then dress the site of cauterization after you have allowed pus to run therefrom for many days. This is more effective than any of the preceding treatments.	0.6903007

chapter-1-subchapter-31.txt
Cautery is not useful for dropsy, except in the manner called "ascites".	The cautery is particularly effective in ascites.	0.5279041
When you treat it according to the methods we have described in the sections, and your treatment is not effective, then you must make four cauteries around the groin, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one near the chest; and let the cautery be very close to the thickness of the heart.	When you have, without effect, treated a dropsical person with the various measures mentioned in the section on diseases, you should sear with four cauterizations around the umbilicus, and one over the stomach, another over the liver, and another over the spleen, and two behind his back between the vertebrae, one at the level of the breast and one at the level of the stomach; and let the burn be almost skin-deep.	0.8124273
Afterwards, leave the cautery open to drain pus for a long time, and do not abandon the care of the patient after the cautery; and healing will be hastened, and the two intentions will be together with God's help.	Then keep the burn open so that it suppurates for a long while. Do not let the patient, after cauterization, be without the necessary treatment, so that you combine both methods for him, and a cure will speedily come to him.	0.73278993
The form of the cautery for the belly should be the key (cautery iron) that we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is placed above.	The cautery with which his belly is cauterized should be claviform like the figure previously given; while the one with which his back is cauterized should be olivary.	0.7744159

chapter-1-subchapter-32.txt
When the feet are swollen in someone who has dropsy, and are full of citrine-colored water, you must cauterize on the top of the foot between the little toe and the ring toe; and lift your hand with the cautery without twisting.	When, in the sufferer from dropsy, these swell and become full of yellowish fluid, you should cauterize the upper surface of the feet in the depression between the little and fourth toes; hold your hand upright with the cautery; do not let it slant.	0.82892704
And do not go in too deeply, thus the citrine water will come out, and the cautery should be according to this shape:	Then remove your hand and do no more cauterization whatever; for the yellowish fluid will exude. The cautery should be of this type.	0.5394592
Afterwards, make two cauteries on the legs, one on each leg at the tip of the calf muscle; and the cautery should be long, one below the knee in front and the other outside, in the middle of the leg;	Then sear the legs with two cauterizations on each leg; cauterize with the bladed end of the cautery, and let it be along the length of the leg: one under the knee, the other lower than that, about the middle of the leg; and two more cauterizations over each femur.	0.88192755
and leave the cauteries open for a long time without cleaning, so that the water comes out;	Leave the burns open without treatment for a long while during which the fluid will exude from them.	0.60316133
afterwards treat with the other treatments that we have mentioned.	Then dress with all that we have described.	0.5981511

chapter-1-subchapter-33.txt
And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, then make a cautery on the spine, and a cautery on each flank, and two small cauteries on the stomach next to the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good assistance/constitution.	And if you see that the humidities are superabundant, and the patient fit to tolerate it, then make one cauterization over the groin and one over the hypochondrium. You may also add two small ones over the stomach near the big one. This is an effective treatment that does not fail to help.	0.738382

chapter-1-subchapter-34.txt
Of the treatment of hemorrhoids	On cauterization for anal haemorrhoids.	0.5041495
When the hemorrhoids are in the anus, one or more, and are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and are treated as we have described in divisions/sections, and it is not effective, then make cauteries: Three on the spine, the one that is furthest outside, beneath the shoulder blade little by little in a triangular shape, and one cautery below the navel two fingers;	When there are one or more chronic haemorrhoids in the anus arising from thick and cold humours or corrupt humidities, and they have been treated by those measures mentioned in the section, without effect, then sear the patient with three cauterizations over the lowest dorsal vertebra a little below the flat part of the back, triangularly; and one about two fingers' breadth below the navel.	0.80113196
And if you think that his stomach is chilled, and the food does not digest, and one sees swelling in the face, then make a large cautery on the stomach, as mentioned before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with the key-shaped cautery; and leave the cautery open for a long time. After, treat the area until it is healed.	And if you consider that his stomach has become chilled and his food not being digested, and you see his face swollen, then do one big cauterization over the stomach as previously described; and one over his liver; and another over the spleen; with the claviform cautery. Keep the burn open a long while; then dress till healed.	0.9365137

chapter-1-subchapter-35.txt
When you cut the keloid, heat a cautery that resembles a razor, and then place it, while still burning, on the cut keloid; and keep your hand there until the cautery reaches the base of the vein from which the blood flows;	When you excise warts, heat a spike-shaped cautery and bring it, hot, to the site of the excised wart, and press down till the cautery reaches the mouth of the vessel whence the blood comes.	0.7635283
do this once or twice, and if there is a lot of keloid, cauterize each one as we have said; afterwards treat them with beneficial ointments until they are healed;	Do this once or twice over. If the warts be more than one, sear each one separately as we have described ; then dress with suitable ointments till healed.	0.8303525
and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the keloid, it will have a greater effect.	And if you burn the patient with one big cauterization over the lumbar region that will add to the effect.	0.66511834

chapter-1-subchapter-36.txt
When the patient cannot bear cutting or opening, which we will discuss in its place, such an illness arises that cannot be healed except by cautery.	When the patient will not submit to the cutting operation we have described in its own place, and is afraid of it, he may perhaps be cured with the cautery.	0.65758985
When someone develops a fistula, and it is aged and releases pus and corrupted fluids, you should probe it completely with a thin tent, and make sure you know with the tent how deep it is.	So when somebody gets a fistula, and pus and foul humidities have for a long while been running from it, you must first explore it with a fine probe and judge of its depth by the probe.	0.7844584
Afterward, heat the cautery that resembles a razor, and insert it into the fistula according to the depth that the tent has entered, and repeat the cautery until the rotten and corrupted flesh is burned, once, or twice, or three times, according to the amount needed;	Then heat a spike-shaped cautery and introduce it, hot, into the fistula, in the direction of the bottom of the fistula and to the depth to which the probe entered. And repeat the cauterization till all those corrupt bodies are burnt away; once or twice or three times over, as you have need.	0.8455693
and be careful not to burn the nerves that are there, and the large veins.	But beware of burning a nerve should one be there, or a big blood-vessel.	0.61507255
If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and to the intestine, beware of these places, and do not do this except in fleshy areas, and consider that it is not piercing;	If the fistula penetrates to the urinary bladder or the intestine, beware of all these parts. Do this only when the fistula is in a fleshy part and you judge that it does not open into any other part.	0.75820863
Afterward, treat the area until it is healed, and if the place is sealed, and the infected matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the area is completely healed;	Afterwards dress the place till healed. If the place cicatrizes and the flux of humours ceases and it remains so for a long while, you may know that it is perfectly healed.	0.72763574
and if the infected matter is not removed, know that the place is perforated, and the bone at the bottom is corrupted; and as with one of those that we will describe in its place.	But if the flux of humours from it is not stopped, understand that it has perforated or that at the bottom there is a piece of diseased bone or the like; which will be mentioned in its proper place.	0.711948

chapter-1-subchapter-37.txt
When kidney pain comes from cold, and from great flatulence, and there is no desire for a woman, then you must make cauteries on the kidneys on one side and the other with the key-shaped cautery that we have mentioned before;	When pain strikes the kidneys from chill or heavy vapour, and the patient's sexual vigour is impaired thereby, you should burn him right over the kidneys, once on each kidney, with the claviform cautery mentioned before.	0.65372825
and if we cauterize it in the middle, it will have three cauteries in a line, and they will do more good.	I have often burnt him with a third cauterization on the flat of the back, making three cauterizations in a line, which is most effective.	0.51353276

chapter-1-subchapter-38.txt
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make cauteries on the outside above the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, one on the right and one on the left, and let each cautery be as long as the joint of a thumb;	On cauterization of the urinary bladder. When there occurs in the urinary bladder a weakness and relaxation due to chill and humidities, so that the patient cannot retain his water, sear him once below his navel, on the bladder, where the pubic hair begins; burn him once also on the right side and once on the left side of the navel; and let the distance of the burn from either side be the length of the joint of the thumb.	0.8021513
and make one cautery on the lower back outside, or two if you need to;	Cauterize him also once on the lower part of the back, or twice if you need.	0.7394309
and let the cautery be key-shaped according to the aforementioned form.	The cautery should be claviform, as described.	0.5165547

chapter-1-subchapter-39.txt
When the spleen is cold and moist, and yet does not prevent conception, and the menses are corrupted and their periods delayed; and when they come, she feels great pain: then it is necessary to make three cauteries around the navel, as we have described in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries outside the back;	When matter arises in the womb from chill or humidities and she is thereby prevented from conceiving and her menses are upset; their flow fails or, as they pass, pain accompanies them; then you must cauterize her three times around the navel, as we have mentioned in cauterization of the bladder; and once or twice in the lumbar region in the lower part of the back over the hips.	0.7950844
and the cautery should be key-shaped, as we have described.	The cautery should be claviform.	0.4674219

chapter-1-subchapter-40.txt
When viscous humors descend to the hip socket, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when they are measured together;	Sometimes harmful humidities reach the hip joint and result in its coming out of its place. The symptom of this is that one leg is longer than the other when one is measured against the other; and a hollow is found there [i.e.	0.6850736
and the place of the separation is found empty, it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the hip socket with a cautery resembling a circle, and mark in front of the place around the socket as it turns, so that the socket is inside the circle;	at the hip]. Then you should cauterize the patient over the hip joint itself with a circular burn, after you have marked with ink a circle round the femoral joint, so that the joint falls in the middle of the circle.	0.6472919
and the cautery should be like the one used to cauterize the stomach.	The cautery should be the one whose description has already been given in cauterization of the stomach.	0.5706793
And if this cautery is not available, make three large olive-shaped cauteries, and the cautery should be as deep as the skin;	But if you have not this cautery by you, give him three cauterizations with the larger size olivary cautery. The burn should be to the depth of the whole thickness of the skin.	0.698586
and treat it until it is healed.	Then dress till healed.	0.6257741

chapter-1-subchapter-41.txt
of the pain in the hip When pain comes in the socket of the hip, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is treated as we have described in the section and the treatment is ineffective, and the illness is chronic: then you must purge the patient of the thick humors with foul-smelling pills, or other similarly good pills. Afterwards, apply cautery;	When pain occurs in the hip joint and is due to cold and humidities, and the patient has been treated by those means mentioned in the section, and the treatment is ineffectual, and the pain becomes chronic, the patient should be purged of the heavy humours with foetid pills or pills of tamarind or the like; then cauterize him.	0.8250934
and the method of cautery is as follows, in two ways: that is to say, with burning medicines together, and fire cautery.	The means of cauterization in this case is twofold: either with caustic chemicals or with fire.	0.70102936
Fire cautery is done in many ways, one of which is this:	The actual cautery will serve for several methods.	0.5332478
that you cauterize on the point of the hip, three triangular cauteries in this form, and make them good and deep and wide, and have between each cautery a space the width of a finger, and the cautery should be olive-shaped;	One of them is to make three cauterizations over the femoral joint itself in a triangular manner ; and let them be of a fair depth; and the space between them a finger's breadth. The cautery should be an olivary one.	0.7972295
sometimes one makes a cautery in the middle, on the top of the hip, therefore there are four, in this form:	Sometimes there will also be one cauterization in the middle over the actual head of the femur, making four cauterizations in all.	0.6500224
And if you wish, cauterize it with the circular cautery that we mentioned before in the dislocation of the hip;	The burning may be done with the circular cautery which has been mentioned under cauterization of a dislocated hip; a single cauterization so that the circle embrace the whole joint.	0.4528674
but do it in such a way that the circle encompasses the entire hip, and all the thickness of the flesh is burned.	Burn through the whole thickness of the skin.	0.40932778
And this is the method used for sciatica, when the pain is located in the hip, and doesn't reach down to the thigh or the leg.	This is the form of cauterization for sciatica when the pain is localized in the hip joint and does not extend to the femur and the leg.	0.78813887
And if it reaches the thigh and leg, make two cauteries where the patient says the pain is, and one cautery above the ankle, four fingers up, slightly to the left side;	But if it extends to the femur and the leg, cauterize him over the thigh with two burns at the place where the patient indicates the pain to be; and one burn four fingers above the great tendon of the heel, a little to the outer side.	0.83382756
and the cautery should be knife-shaped, and burn through the thickness of the flesh;	The cautery should be edged, and the depth of the burn only to the thickness of the skin.	0.5920554
And if the patient feels the pain extending to the toes of the foot or nearly so, cauterize where they feel the pain, three or four points with the cautery called "point cautery". And if necessary, make more;	But if the patient points out that the pain reaches to the toes, then cauterize where he has indicated to you, with a punctate cautery, three or four or more perforations if he needs it.	0.73814213
And if it is known that the pain is below the knee toward the thigh, make a cautery with the knife-shaped or circular cautery, and take great care in all your cauteries not to leave the cautery in so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient further harm and contraction.	If he indicates that the pain is under the knee towards the shank, give him one burn there with the edged cautery. Be careful in all your cauterizing not to carry the cautery so far as to burn a nerve or a large artery; for thence arises grave harm, or crippling, to the patient.	0.822556
And I myself have seen many who have made cauteries on the ankle of the foot, and left them in so long that the leg was completely swollen, and the foot as well, and the entire foot was pierced and corrupted. After a bowel movement, from which he died.	I myself have seen more than one person cauterizing over the tendon of Achilles, the cauterization being excessive, and the leg was affected with a defluxion of humours which eventually reached the foot and the whole was riddled; after that came diarrhoea, and, after that, death.	0.78118515
And if the pain is in two parts together, make a cautery in one and the other, according to this method.	If there is pain in two places, cauterize both in this way.	0.70797575
And the wise men said regarding the cautery of the hip, of which this is the method: make such an iron and let it be at the tip as thick as the fingernail of a thumb, or a little less, and let it be serrated and let it be from one serration to the other a distance the size of a thumb knuckle;	Certain learned doctors have mentioned a cauterization applicable to the hip in this manner: make a bowl of iron with a diameter of half a span; the thickness of the edge of its mouth should be that of a date-stone or a little less. Another bowl is introduced into this, and a third into that; and there is a distance between the bowls of a thumb-joint.	0.7697737
and let the serrations be angled on two sides, and let them be like knots, and let there be a well-made iron handle;	The bowls are open on both sides; and the depth of them should be a thumb-joint or two. Make an iron handle for them firmly fitted to the bowls.	0.59961236
and this is the shape:	Here is the figure.	0.5820327
And let it be heated until it is all red and throws off sparks, and then place it on the buttock of the afflicted hip, and turn it onto the healthy side;	Then heat this cautery in the fire until it is hot and sends out sparks; and so let it be applied to the hip, the patient lying on his sound side; and thus three circular cauterizations will be produced at a time.	0.689621
and cauterize it once with a round cautery and leave it for three days; and then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after treating it with ointment until it is healed.	Afterwards let it be for three days; then smear with butter and leave the wound open for a while; then treat with ointment till it heals.	0.85555655
Albucasis says that we use this cautery little because of fear of its appearance, and we see few who use it;	The author of this book says that we very rarely employ this method of cauterization on account of the ugliness and dread appearance of it, and because we find few patients who will endure it.	0.6740718
and yet this is one of the good cauteries, for those who can bear it, and where it is appropriate.	Nevertheless, it is one of the best cauteries for him who can endure it and is correctly treated by it.	0.72353846
The cautery of burning medicine is made with an instrument with openings into which the edge of the opening descends, and it should be of brass or iron with a long side, and at the top it should have two knots, and between each the width of a finger; and they should be open below and above, and joined together in this way:	Cauterization with caustics is thus: make two bowls like the ring into which a door-hinge descends, either of bronze or iron. The height of their sides should be two thumb-joints or thereabouts, and they should be separated about a finger's breadth; they should be open above and below, and joined one to another thus.	0.8348402
Then place it on the buttock of the patient lying on his healthy side, and press your hand firmly on the buttock; then pour between the two rings hot water that has been heated on the fire for a while, and leave it for an hour, and let the patient endure the heat and the burning from it.	Then place them over the capsule of the hip joint, the patient lying upon his sound side, and press down hard; then pour caustic fluid between the two rings—it should have been heated slightly—and keep it there for the space of one hour by the sand-clock.	0.8306856
For it finds there a mortification as if by fire;	The patient must endure the sting and heat of it (for he will find it stings like fire) till the causticity diminishes.	0.4086061
and when the mortification has passed, remove your hand with the instrument and wash the buttock with fresh water, and leave it thus for three days, and apply butter until what is blackened by the burn is removed; and leave it three days so that the pus comes out;	Then remove your hand with the instrument and wash away the caustic from the whole capsule with pure water. Let be for three days and apply butter to it till the eschar comes away; and let the pus flow from it for a few days, for that will be more conducive to healing.	0.82815
and this would be the final treatment after the application of ointments until it is healed.	Then treat with ointment till it heals.	0.6008858
And if the pain extends to the thigh or to the leg, make an instrument that holds water just as you did for the buttock;	If the pain extends to the hip joint or the leg, make a form in some material that will hold the fluid for that, just as you did for the capsule of the femur.	0.7013542
and this is the method for hot water, and I have written it in the treatise on the correction of medicine. Take alkali and quicklime, equal amounts of each, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot. where there is a small hole below so that the point of a razor can enter;	Now this is the description of the caustic; I have already put it in my treatise on the improvement of drugs: take of the salt of potash and quicklime, equal parts, and beat them both up well and put them into a new earthen pot, in the bottom of which you have made a small hole of a size to take a probe.	0.7742864
where there is a small hole below so that the point of a razor can enter; and place another well-sealed pot on top of this pot, and put alkali and lime and fresh water on top, until there is a finger's width above the powders when you have pressed it well with your hand;	Place under that pot another one, glazed. Pour enough water on the quicklime and potash to cover them to a finger's breadth after you have pressed them well together with your hand; and leave the pot until the caustic fluid has passed down into the bottom of the glazed pot.	0.73650277
and leave it like this until sharp water descends and falls into the sealed pot, then take all this water, and throw it onto lime and alkali as before.	Then collect all that fluid and pour it upon a fresh lot of lime and potash. Thus will the water be very caustic indeed.	0.62632823
And then it will be very sharp and is administered in many medical procedures and in cauterizations of other limbs.	Thus will the water be very caustic indeed. This is used for many medical procedures and for the cauterization of all members, as it has the very same action as fire itself.	0.50855756
For it does the same work as fire, and there are other medicines with which one can cauterize the hip well, such as orpiment and anacardic honey and lime with soap, all these things mixed together.	There are other drugs too with which the capsule of the femur is cauterized, such as Thapsia and Mel Anacardinum and inunction of lime with soap.	0.61980474
And Galen tells us of a treatment with which a man was cured of hip pain and sciatica, and praises it highly, and says that no other treatment was done, and that he was healed in a single instance when this treatment was performed, and he had bathed as he instructs below.	Galen, quoting one of the men of old, mentions a treatment for pain in the thigh and sciatica and he makes much of it, asserting that no other treatment was necessary, and that it would heal on one application, so much so that the patient would be carried into the bath and would go out completely cured.	0.82970726
And says in this manner that you take fresh, dry green litharge, and grind it well with a little fat, and put it on the hip and on the thigh and on the leg where the pain is, and bind it;	The method is as follows: take fresh green water-cress or new dry water-cress if fresh is not to be had; beat it up well with some fat and apply it to the hip where it hurts, or to the leg or thigh, and bind up.	0.63293296
and leave it for three hours, or as long as it takes until the patient no longer feels the burning.	Then let be for three hours or until the patient feels a diminishing of the caustic; and then let him be taken to the bath.	0.7799752
And then have him enter the bath until his body is a little moistened, and have him go to bed, and the pain will go away completely and he will be healed.	When his body is bedewed with sweat, get him into the pool; then the pain will vanish and he will be cured.	0.72135675
And know that no one should use cautery with such medicines, unless it is after the body has been evacuated.	But you must know that no one should have cauterization with these drugs except after evacuation of the bowel.	0.8217715
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat dung, it helps a lot;	Dioscorides has said that cauterization with goats' dung is beneficial for sciatica.	0.7169407
and the cautery should be done in this way. Take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it on the hollow that is between the big toe and the next one, which is called foscile.	The cauterization is carried out in this manner: take wool soaked in old oil and put it into the cleft which is between the thumb and the forearm but nearer to the forearm.	0.58660495
Then take dry goat dung and ignite it until it becomes coals, and put it on the wool, and leave it there until it is extinguished;	Then take the dried dung of a goat and expose it to fire until it glows like a coal.	0.6700804
and do it again this way, and do not stop doing so until you think, by reason, that it reaches the hip, and that the pain has ceased;	Place it on the piece of wool, and leave till it cools, then replace it with another, and so on until the sensation has reached the hip joint by way of the forearm, and the pain stops.	0.55606055
and this type of cautery is called "goat cautery".	This kind of cautery is called 'the dung cautery'.	0.7726301

chapter-1-subchapter-42.txt
of the pain of the back	On cauterization for pain in the back.	0.5244281
When pain comes to the back, either by falling or from a blow or by too great an evacuation, or from some sort of spread cold matter, for none of these cases is cautery useful, except for the one that comes from the infusion of cold matter.	Many different causes give pain in the back. Sometimes it happens from a fall or a blow, or from excessive evacuation or the like. It may also be due to an influx of humid matter. Cauterization is only to be employed in this last case, which arises from an influx of cold matter.	0.718311
It is necessary after the patient has been purged with foul-smelling pills or other such, that three lines marked with ink be made on his back, there where the pain is located, and on each line five cauteries or more according to the strength and the amount that the patient can bear;	When the patient has been purged with foetid pills or the like, he should be cauterized in his back where the pain is, over the breadth of the flat of the back, after the place has been marked with ink, with three rows of cauterizations, five in each, or more, in proportion to what you see of the patient's endurance and strength.	0.8129122
and if you wish, make three or four cauteries with the medium key cautery according to this form:	If you like, you may give him three or four cauterizations with the middle-sized claviform cautery.	0.6695156

chapter-1-subchapter-43.txt
Often this illness comes to small children, and the sign of the onset is that they have shortness of breath when they rise, and fear; and you find on the last spinal process of the back and on us the appearance that comes upon the other spinal processes.	This disease often occurs in small children. The sign of the beginning of the disease in a child is that he suffers shortness of breath when standing or moving, and you will find that at the end of his dorsal vertebrae there is one visibly projecting above the other vertebrae.	0.8133702
When you see this and you want to treat it, cauterize it with the circular cautery according to this form. So that the cautery affects each part of the spinal process equally.	So when you see this and you wish to stop it, cauterize him with a cautery that should be circular so that the cauterization takes in equally all sides of the vertebra.	0.7887664
And if you wish, cauterize around the spinal process with the pointed cautery two or three lines, and let the points be close to each other.	If you wish, you can cauterize two or three lines around the vertebra with the punctate cautery; let the punctures be close to one another.	0.85112095
After, treat the area until it is healed according to what we have said, and be careful not to apply cautery to a curvature that is in a nerve spasm.	Then dress the place with those remedies we have mentioned, till healed. But beware of using the cautery in the deformity arising from a nervous spasm.	0.7293861

chapter-1-subchapter-44.txt
of the pain of the joints	On cauterization of gout and pain in the joints.	0.5294832
When joint pains are from humors that are spread to each limb of the body, and when the pain comes in the feet, which doctors properly call "gout," and when it is from a cold cause and treatments with medicines cannot cure it, it is treated by cauteries in this way:	When there are pains in the joints from cold humidities flowing into whatever part of the body it may be, and specially when there are pains in the feet, doctors are in the habit of calling that 'gout'. When gout due to chill has been treated with the various treatments mentioned in its section, and the pains remain, the cautery will remove them.	0.79078305
And if the pains come up to the knees and to the other joints, and this happens many times, make three or four cauteries on each knee, on each side, with the olive-shaped cautery;	If you need to make punctate cauterizations round the front of the foot, use the punctate cautery; and if the pains go up to the knee or other joints, which often happens, burn each knee with three or four cauterizations on every side with the same olivary cautery.	0.8153446
and if you need more, make more, but do not hold your hand there longer than it takes to burn the thickness of leather.	And if you require to cauterize him more than this, do it, but do not go deeply but only about the thickness of the skin.	0.6559299
And if the pains descend to the knee and to the back, administer the cautery that we have described in its chapter.	If the pains go up to the hip joints or the back, employ those cauterizations that we have mentioned in their own chapter.	0.78391135
And if the pains are in the hands, make punctures around the wrist in two lines;	And if the pains are in the hands only, pierce a double line all around the wrists.	0.82764035
and if any pain remains in the fingers, make punctures on each joint and on the back of the hand;	If the pains remain in the fingers, pierce them once over each joint and once on the metacarpus.	0.6865865
And if the pains reach the elbows or up to the shoulders, cauterize each part, and ensure the patient has good care and takes medicines.	And if after some days the pains go up to the elbows or shoulders then cauterize both on each side.	0.677596
For if you provide good care and purge phlegm, he will be healed with God's help.	And keep the patient to good habits and taking of medicine; for if his regimen be good and the phlegm got rid of, he will be cured with this cautery.	0.517093

chapter-1-subchapter-45.txt
When a rupture occurs in the groin, and the intestines descend into the scrotum, and this is recent, it is necessary that when you intend to treat it, he does not eat anything that day; and that he uses things that loosen the bowels, so that the feces descend from his belly;	When a rupture occurs in the groin, and part of the intestine and omentum comes down into the scrotum, being the onset of the disease, forbid the patient to take food for one day and have him use laxatives to empty the bowel.	0.66442794
afterwards have him sit on his back between your hands, and tell him to hold his breath until the intestines are returned, and put them back with your fingers, and make an incision below the rupture on the pubic bone, and also another incision shaped like half a circle above the body;	Then let him lie on his back in front of you and bid him hold his breath till the intestine or omentum comes out; then put it back with your finger. Then, below the hernia over the pubic bone, mark a semicircle whose extremities point upward.	0.78047955
then heat the cautery, of which this is the form:	Then heat a cautery of this type.	0.6280813
and open the patient's thighs well, and place a cushion under him and an attendant on his thighs, and another on his chest to hold his hands;	You should first have parted his legs and put a pillow under him; let another assistant sit on his legs and another on his chest, holding his hands.	0.74919474
then place the cautery on the mark with your whole hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you don't reach it the first time, do it again until you reach the bone; and carefully watch that the intestine does not protrude when you apply the cautery; so that you do not burn it; and that because of this the patient does not die, or suffer other harm.	Then apply the cautery to the mark, keeping the cautery upright, and hold it till it reaches the bone; or apply the cautery again a second time if it does not reach the bone the first time. You must take the greatest care that the intestine does not come out while you are cauterizing, lest you burn it and it result in death or grave injury to the patient.	0.90383357
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worthless.	You must understand that if you do not bring the cauterization down to the bone your operation will not be successful.	0.63119763
And the cautery for children must be small according to their size, and for adults as large according to their size;	For boys the cautery should be slender according to their proportions, and for adults according to theirs.	0.81898206
After three days, treat the site of the cautery with butter until the burn is gone;	After three days, treat the site of cauterization with butter until the eschar from the burn departs.	0.8629081
Afterward, treat it with other ointments until it is healed, and the patient should lie on their back for forty days until the wound is well closed;	Then treat with the usual ointments till healed. The patient should lie on his back for forty days so that the wound may cicatrize.	0.803004
and their food should be cooked for a long time, so that their bowels do not move when they try to go to the toilet.	Throughout the course of his treatment you must make his diet such as will be gentle with his inside, so that the intestine should not come down during the effort of defaecation.	0.5683363
And after forty days, when they want to get up, apply a well-made support bandage, and wear it for another forty days;	Then when he wants to get up after the forty days, employ a tight bandage and keep this on another forty days.	0.8008152
and they should rest well, working little and avoiding overfilling themselves with drink and food, and avoid shouting too loudly;	He should be moderate in his exertion, his eating, drinking, and shouting.	0.52777916
and when they follow these instructions, they will be completely healed.	Thus under these rules he will be completely cured.	0.64212936
And I will discuss the treatment of cutting in its own chapter below.	I shall speak of the treatment of rupture by scission in the appropriate chapter.	0.7320744
When ruptures occur in other abdomens and are recognizable, and you see that they are not growing, then make a round cautery according to its size, and burn a third of the core; afterwards treat it according to what we have said;	When a rupture occurs elsewhere in the belly and is at its inception and you wish it not to grow, cauterize the rupture with a round cautery in proportion to its size; burn about two-thirds through the thickness of the skin and treat as we have said; he will be cured and the rupture will not grow.	0.79991937
and some of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with a three-angled cautery in this shape:	One of the Ancients said that ruptures were to be cauterized with a three-armed cautery like this.	0.66311395
but first mark the location with ink and draw a line across the width above the rupture, and another outside it, and hold your hand in the middle with the cautery firmly in place.	First mark the rupture with ink; put the transverse line on the upper margin of the rupture and the other towards the lower, and apply a single claviform cautery in the middle.	0.7481556
But the first cautery is easier and gentler.	But the first cauterization is easier and better.	0.9159343

chapter-1-subchapter-46.txt
from old pain in any limb When pain arises in a limb, either from a fall or a blow, and this pain lasts a long time, and medical treatment is ineffective, then it must be cauterized with a cautery called "points," and the cautery should be applied according to the length of the limb and its size and weakness and its strength and its location with regard to twisting and its pain.	When pain occurs in some limb due to a fall or a blow and the pain becomes chronic and medical treatment has no effect upon it, you should cauterize it with the punctate cautery. In each case the cauterization should be in proportion to the size of the limb, its strength or weakness, and the chronicity of the pain and contusion in it.	0.80844975
if he is healed from the first cautery, that is good;	If it is cured at the first cauterization, good; otherwise repeat the cauterization.	0.66429716
if not, repeat another cautery over that one, for such is the custom that it should move to the nearest limb, therefore you must perform the cauteries until the patient is healed.	For it is customary for these pains to move from one part to a neighbouring part, and you must follow them with the cautery till the patient is cured.	0.65645754

chapter-1-subchapter-47.txt
Lepers are sometimes greatly helped by cautery, and especially those illnesses that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.	Those suffering from elephantiasis are sometimes greatly helped by the cautery; especially that kind that arises from corruption of the phlegm and black bile.	0.79889035
When you see it to be cauterized, take care if the illness is at the beginning, and if it is treated according to what we have said in the division, and neither descends nor remains, and you fear that the corruption will take hold of the whole patient, then make five cauteries on the head: One in the middle of the head to the occiput, and the other towards the forehead at the hairline; and two on the two temples, and one behind on the nape of the neck;	When you wish to use the cautery, first look, and if the elephantiasis be in the early stage and you treat it with those remedies advised in the section but it does not abate and is not arrested, and you fear lest the corruption spread over the patient's whole constitution, then give him five cauterizations on the head: the well-known one in the middle of the head; the second one lower than that, toward the forehead, about the edge of the hair; and two at the temples; and one behind, on the nape of the neck.	0.8642843
and press your hand so that the cautery reaches the bone, and so that the scabs come out so that the vapors of the thick humors can escape;	And maintain the application of the cautery a little while till a slight mark is impressed on the bone and the outer table is removed from it, that there be an easy exit for the thick vapours.	0.59214365
and cauterize it on the spine according to what is described before.	Burn him also one cauterization over the spleen itself in the manner described earlier.	0.66452336
and beware of the nerves that are on the back heel, that you do not burn them;	Be careful not to burn the posterior tendons of his heels.	0.5876161
and sometimes one makes a cautery on the wrist bone, and another on the breastbone, and another on the liver.	He may also be cauterized once on the pubic bone; another on the cardia of the stomach; and another on the liver.	0.7578124
And know that the more cauteries you make, the more help you give, and the more it benefits him;	You should know that the more you cauterize the more beneficial and effective it will be.	0.6335819
and know that the sick person does not feel pain from the cautery as the healthy feel it, because the body is already completely corrupted.	You should know also that the patient will not find the cautery painful as a sound man would, since his body is benumbed.	0.7594746
And the cauteries must be large and small according to the limbs and joints, depending on how you find it in the types of irons.	The cauteries should be of the types of instrument mentioned earlier, larger or smaller in proportion to the size of the limb or joint.	0.53112215
Afterward, treat the area with vetch flour with honey and other treatments until it is healthy.	Then treat the cauterization with powder of bitter vetch with honey, together with the other treatments, till healed.	0.7924483

chapter-1-subchapter-48.txt
When swelling occurs in any limb and is treated with medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then make cauteries on the limb according to the size of the limb;	When some limb is affected with numbness and it is treated with drugs and ointments and plasters, but is not cured, burn the benumbed limb itself with cauterizations proportionate to its bigness or smallness.	0.7471887
and let the cautery go a little into the thick part of the flesh; then treat it with ointments until it is healed.	Let the cauterization somewhat penetrate the thickness of the skin; then dress with ointments till healed.	0.7547682
And sometimes one makes a cautery on the hand and on the foot and on the back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus the swelling is removed;	For numbness that occurs in the hand or foot it is possible to cauterize over the dorsal vertebrae at the exit of the nerve activating that part; and the numbness will go.	0.60330653
and yet no one should undertake this unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the nerves that move the body.	This should not be attempted except by one who has a good knowledge of the anatomy of the limbs and of the exits of the nerves that move the body.	0.7746685

chapter-1-subchapter-49.txt
When the illness called "albaras" is chronic, and medical remedies are of no use, then cauterize it with a shallow cautery, according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed and its color is changed;	When leprosy is of long standing and no device of medicine has any effect upon it, make a cauterization over it to a slight depth according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness has gone and the colour of the skin altered.	0.67634034
then treat it with flour of vetches and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and pigeon blood and lark blood, one part of each; and mix it all together, and bind it with a cloth, and leave it on the spot until it is healed.	Then treat with lentil flour, oil of roses, arnoglossa leaves, and pigeons' or swallows' blood, of each equal parts mixed all together and spread on lint; let this stick to the place till healed.	0.86255515

chapter-1-subchapter-50.txt
The treatment of chancre by cautery	On cauterization for cancer.	0.42821804
When a chancre appears at the beginning, and you want to stop it, cauterize it with a cautery that resembles a circle, all around the chancre.	When the cancer is in its initial stage and you wish to arrest it, burn all round the circumference of the cancer with the circular cautery.	0.7352177
and yet, this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen it happen sometimes;	This hardly seems right to me, for I should expect it to ulcerate out; which I have several times seen.	0.6231856
and it is more appropriate that it be cauterized around, with the cautery which is called "circular," as we have said about cauteries.	So it is correct to burn around the circumference with a circular cautery as we have said, or with multiple cauterizations.	0.61612475

chapter-1-subchapter-51.txt
When someone has an illness that is called "adubelati", and it is slow to mature/suppurate/come to a head either because of the excess matter it produces or because of the patient's age when he is decrepit (that is to say, too old) and he has little blood, or because of the weather/season; and you want to hasten its maturation/suppuration: then cauterize around it with many small cauteries by pricking/puncturing; afterwards leave it like that.	When a person gets a boil which is slow in coming to a head, either because of the superfluity causing it, or because of the patient's age if he be an elderly man lacking in blood, or because of the season, and you wish to hasten the ripening of the boil, then make a punctate burn around it with multiple small cauterizations, and then let be; it will speedily come to a head.	0.81007373
And if you want to pierce it completely with the cautery, then heat the cautery which has this shape:	If you wish to perforate it with cauterization, heat the cautery of this type.	0.6179298
Afterwards treat it until it is completely healed.	Then dress till cured.	0.6828781

chapter-1-subchapter-52.txt
There is another type of disease which is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a consumption of the limb, for it consumes the limbs as fire does dry wood.	Gangrene is a creeping corruption of a limb, consuming it as fire consumes dry wood.	0.4719589
If you see this disease in a place that can tolerate cautery with fire, then heat the cauteries, both small and large nails, according to what is suitable for the place where the disease is;	If you see gangrene in a part which can tolerate the actual cautery, heat a number of claviform cauteries, small or large to suit the site of the gangrene.	0.6219368
afterwards cauterize it on all sides until you eradicate all the corruption, and none of it remains, so that everything that is corrupted is removed.	Then cauterize it all over till the whole corruption is eradicated and none remains.	0.79650724
And then leave it for three days, and apply on the cauterized areas crushed sulfur with oil until the burns from the fire are gone, and all the corruption.	Then let be for three days, applying to the cauterized site sulphur beaten up with oil, until the whole eschar comes away, and all the corruption.	0.8916632
Afterwards treat it with ointments that generate flesh.	Then treat with stimulating ointments.	0.7295399
And if you see after three days that healthy flesh is not growing, it is good;	If after three days you see the flesh growing healthily and no corruption in it, good.	0.81920576
and if not, then repeat the cauterization on what remains of the corrupted areas.	Otherwise repeat the cauterization over whatever corrupt parts are left.	0.77909
And this affliction was sometimes treated with sharp medicine instead of fire cautery;	Gangrene is also sometimes cured with caustic, for that takes the place of fire; but the actual cautery acts more speedily.	0.53712094
but nevertheless fire cautery is of greater benefit, and I have already described the treatment with sharp medicine in the section: take it when you have need of it.	I have already spoken of the treatment of it by caustic in its section, so take it from there when you have need of it.	0.6261483

chapter-1-subchapter-53.txt
of the pores/holes that come on the feet Very often it happens that on the outside of the feet a malady arises which is called "nail/corn/boil" according to our understanding, and it is a large, infected thing which hurts the foot.	On the cauterization of corns, inverted and otherwise. This disease, which is something hard paining the foot, very often occurs in the soles of the feet.	0.4849416
And the cauterization of this malady is according to two methods.	The cauterization in this case is twofold, actual or caustic.	0.416549
Cauterization by fire is that you heat a cautery instrument like the quill of a vulture's feather, and it should be made of good iron in such a way that it can enclose the nail/corn/boil on all sides, and that it has thin edges;	The actual cautery is to heat a hollow cautery like a vulture's quill, made of iron, narrow of edge, of such a size as to surround the corn all round.	0.6266005
afterwards put it, all hot, on the nail/corn/boil, and turn your hand all around the nail/corn/boil until it reaches the bottom of the nail/corn/boil; and leave it thus for three days until it begins to discharge pus; then make a poultice of wild mallows crushed with salt, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail/corn/boil will fall off and be uprooted from its roots.	Then put it, hot, on the corn and rotate it till the cautery reaches the root of the corn; and let be for three days to draw the pus; then apply a plaster of wild mallows ground up with salt, and leave the plaster on one night; then it may be drawn out with its root.	0.8189155
Then treat the area with an ointment that generates flesh until it is healed.	Then treat the site of the wound with stimulating salve till it heals.	0.82269347
Do this one after the other, until you have removed all those that are on the body, then treat them with ointments that generate flesh.	Treat them in this manner one after another till you have accounted for all of them. Then treat the site of them, after eradication, with stimulating ointments.	0.7266844

chapter-1-subchapter-54.txt
When someone trembles from nerve coldness, or quartan fever or other, you should make four cauteries on the spine of the back, one cautery between each vertebra; and one cautery on the feet, and one on the stomach with an olive-shaped cautery;	When someone has a tremor, either from chill in a nerve or quartan fever, or from some other cause, you should cauterize him four or five times over the vertebrae of the back, one between each vertebra, and one on his breast and one on his stomach, with an olivary cautery.	0.8765922
this will stop the trembling, and hasten the recovery from the cold illness.	Thus the tremor will be stilled and the dispersal of the cold distemper will be hastened.	0.6713029

chapter-1-subchapter-55.txt
Sometimes bumps, or stinking pustules, appear on the outer body, which come from large corrupted materials/humors.	Foul pustules sometimes arise on the body, caused by heavy corrupt frigid matter.	0.6652543
So, first, when they appear, a cautery must be made on each head of the pustule: A subtle cautery of myrtle wood, whose tip is set on fire, or of long birthwort root, or with a lenticular cautery.	When they first appear you should cauterize the head of each one lightly with myrtle wood whose tip has been lighted in the fire; or with the root of the long birthwort; or with the lenticular cautery.	0.7875736
And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, in this way, and they cannot grow further from then on, but the superfluity from which they come is broken, and they are healed;	Sometimes furuncles also are cauterized in the same manner when they first arise; then they get no bigger and the superfluity originating them is dispersed and the patient is cured of them.	0.6465733
But this must be done after bloodletting.	But before you cauterize these, the patient must be depleted by bleeding.	0.631303

chapter-1-subchapter-56.txt
Often there are large flows of blood from the artery that is cut in a wound that occurs superficially, or in the incision of an abscess, or in the cauterization of a limb, and similar things; and it is very difficult to stop.	Very often there occurs bleeding from an artery which has been cut either by an external wound or in opening an abscess or in cauterizing a part of the body and so on, and it is difficult to stem.	0.8471923
And nevertheless when this happens to someone, quickly place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and press very hard until the blood is calmed under your finger, and no more drops come out;	When this happens to anyone, quickly apply your hand to the mouth of the artery, putting your forefinger to it and closing it properly till the bleeding ceases under your fingers and nothing comes out.	0.8109193
then put several small and large olive-shaped cauteries in the fire until they are all red-hot;	Then put in the fire several olivary cauteries, small and large, and blow on them to make them very hot.	0.79426205
then take one, either large or small depending on the wound and the place where the artery is broken, and put the cautery on that vein where you are holding your finger, and hold the cautery there until the blood is stopped.	Then take one, small or large according to the size of the wound and the site of the opening of the artery, and bring the cautery down right on the artery itself, after promptly removing your finger, and hold the cautery upon it till the blood ceases.	0.89279646
And if it spurts out when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, quickly take another one of the cauteries that are in the fire.	But if it bursts out after you have removed your finger from the mouth of the artery, and the cautery has cooled, promptly take another of the cauteries which you have ready in the fire.	0.84901524
And do not stop doing this one after the other until the blood is stanched;	Continue doing this, with one after another, till the haemorrhage is stanched.	0.67251384
and be careful not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient;	Mind you do not burn any nerve which may be there, so that another calamity afflicts the patient.	0.6907415
and know that when blood flows from the artery, it cannot be easily stopped, especially when the artery is large, except by one of the four methods that we have described: either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not cut, or by tight tying with thread, or by medicines applied that have the power to stop blood; and it should be tied and tightly bound.	You should know that when there is arterial haemorrhage it is impossible to stop it, especially when the vessel is big, except in one of four ways, to wit: by the cautery as we have said; or by division of the vessel when it is not completely divided, for when it is cut through the ends of it contract and the bleeding is stopped; or by a strong thread ligature; or by the application of styptics with tight bandaging.	0.8980076
Whoever attempts to stop the bleeding by tightly binding cloths or by putting burning things on it, or other similar things, will achieve little benefit.	But those who try to stop bleeding with ligatures or cloths, or by the application of caustics and the like, never stanch it by these means, or at least very rarely.	0.6412497
And if this happens to someone and they do not have a doctor or medicine present, they should put their index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and press firmly until the bleeding is stopped above the wound and above the vein; and do not remove the finger, but wet it often with cold water, very cold, until the blood is congealed and thickened and stopped;	And if this happen to anyone and there are available neither doctor nor remedies, let him at once apply his forefinger to the mouth of the vessel as we have bidden and close it firmly till the blood is stanched; and pour over the wound and over the artery, without removing the finger, water as cold as possible till the blood thickens and congeals and ceases to flow.	0.8782246
and then do what is necessary with cauteries and medicines.	And meanwhile one should be considering what kind of cautery or medicine is indicated.	0.5768739

chapter-2.txt
We told you in the first chapter every illness where cautery by fire, or burning medicine, is necessary, and the occasions and the causes and the instruments and the methods of cauterization;	IN the first book I spoke of all those diseases for which cauterization is of value, either the actual cautery or that done with caustic medicines; and of their reasons and causes; also the instruments and the shapes of the cauteries.	0.73669946
and I have arranged this chapter from head to toe, and I will continue in this chapter in the same manner so that one can more easily find what one desires.	This I set out in chapters, from head to heel. In this book I shall proceed along the same route so that it will be easy for the inquirer to find what he is looking for.	0.79536575
And before I begin this, dear son, you must understand that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first one on cauteries, and therefore greater caution is required.	But before I begin this you ought first to know, my sons, that in this book there is more risk than in the first, which treats of cauterization. Wherefore in this matter there should be greater circumspection.	0.83953416
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.	For in the course of the work of which this book treats there often occurs an effusion of the blood upon which life depends, in the opening of a blood-vessel or the incision of a tumour or the perforation of an abscess or the treatment of a wound or the extraction of an arrow, or in the incising for a calculus or similar cases; all of which are accompanied by uncertainty and fear; and in most death will supervene.	0.8431827
And I warn you not to undertake folly. For many kinds of people come for treatment. Thus come some who are so angered by their illness that they die easily because of the fury they find in their sickness, and the greatness of its malice; and of these one must be wary.	So I warn you against undertaking any case in which there is any element of doubt to you; for in the exercise of the art you will be mobbed by all kinds of persons with all manner of afflictions; some being so weary of their sickness that death itself is a relief on account of the extent of their sufferings and the length of their miseries, their illness being so settled as to presage death.	0.75121015
You should not agree with those who come to you with this attitude, but place more value on your honor than on your greed, and do not act foolishly but wisely in what you are certain of, and from which you can gain reward and praise;	You should not assist any of this kind who approach you; let your caution be stronger than your greed and desire for gain; and do not embark upon anything of this kind unless you have positive knowledge, which you judge adequate, about the way of bringing the patient a good outcome.	0.71156347
and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your patients so that it leads to healing;	In treating every patient be prescient and foretell the means whereby health may be restored to him.	0.5639636
and this will help you to acquire a good reputation, and glory, and the memory of praise.	That will help you to obtain renown, glory, fame, and praise.	0.7667263
Very dear son, Our Lord give you good understanding and righteousness, and may He inspire you with the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.	May God inspire you, my sons, with His guidance, and grant that you hit the mark and succeed; for it is in His hand; there is no God but He.	0.5331411
Now I have arranged this chapter by dividing it into sections, according to what is before in the chapter on cauteries, which I described to you from head to toe, so that you may more easily find what you need.	I have arranged this book in sections as I did with the previous book on cauterizations, from head to heel; so you will the easier find in it what you seek.	0.8456632

chapter-2-subchapter-1.txt
Know that this illness often occurs in children at birth, and when the midwife squeezes the child's head too hard;	This disease occurs most commonly in infants upon delivery when the midwife grasps the child's head roughly.	0.72148395
and sometimes it comes from a hidden cause that is unknown.	It also sometimes happens from some hidden and unknown cause.	0.8333057
And I have never seen this illness except in children, and in all those I have seen, death came quickly; and therefore it seems to me that it is better to abandon the work in such treatments.	I have never seen this disease except in very small children; and death very quickly overtook all those that I have seen; therefore I have preferred not to undertake operation in these cases.	0.8806282
And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head grew every day so much that he could not support it;	I have seen a child whose head was filled with fluid and daily growing in size, until the child could not sit upright on account of the size of his head, and the humidity increased till he died.	0.72953176
and the fluid grew so much that he died, and this fluid collected beneath the bone above the meninges, between the brain and the bone;	Now this humidity sometimes collects between the skin and the bone; sometimes it collects beneath the bone and over the membrane.	0.6679333
and the procedure is as follows if the fluid is between the brain and the bone, and the abscess is small, that you make a wide incision in the middle of the head;	The operation is thus: when the humidity is between the skin and the bone and the swelling is small, an incision should be made in the middle of the head, transversely.	0.6278101
and it should be as long as two nuts, so that the fluid can flow;	The length of the incision should be about two thumb-joints, so that the humidity may flow out.	0.67471415
and here is the shape of the spatula:	This is the form of the scalpel.	0.61323375
If the fluid has grown more, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, like this:	If the humidity is more copious and the swelling greater, make two intersecting incisions to this pattern.	0.64037716
And if the fluid is under the bone, and the signs that you see are the sutures of the head open on each side, and the water spurts out when you press it inside with your hand, and this is not resolved for you: then you must make three incisions in the middle of the head like this:	But if the humidity is beneath the bone—and the sign of that is that you will see the sutures of the skull gaping on all sides, the water manifestly yielding when you press in with your fingers—you should make three incisions in the middle of the head, in this pattern.	0.7616167
And after the incision, extract all the fluid out. Afterwards, bind the incisions with bandages and powders, and apply wine and oil, and leave it like this until the fifth day;	After incising, draw out all the humidity; then bind up the incisions with pads and bandages; and over the bandages foment with wine and oil till the fifth day.	0.863503
then unbind it, and treat the wound with tents and ointments, and keep the head evenly bandaged, and give the patient dry food with little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.	Then loose the bandage and dress the wound with lint and ointments. And do not forget to bandage the head lightly; and feed the patient with a dry diet with little fluid, until the part is strengthened and healed.	0.8293259
And another method of incision is that you observe or perceive the size of the abscess, and the collection of fluid;	Another pattern of incision is to see where the tumefaction and collection of fluid is apparent.	0.69262266
for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.	For sometimes it is greater in the posterior or anterior part of the head, or to the right or to the left.	0.7323604
Therefore cut where the abscess appears, and the accumulation of fluid, and split it open as much as you can;	Therefore make your incision where the tumefaction and dropsy are apparent; incise that place in whatever way you can.	0.71138763
and be careful not to cut the artery; and if a flow of blood comes, so that the patient dies from the loss of blood and the evacuation of fluid.	Be careful not to cut an artery lest you cause haemorrhage and the patient die of that haemorrhage at the same time that the humidity is evacuated.	0.8127268

chapter-2-subchapter-2.txt
When someone experiences an illness called "catarrh" in the eyes or chest, and the illness is chronic, and medical treatment is not effective, then the last resort is cauterization, along with cutting the two arteries.	When a person gets painful defluxions into the eyes or chest which become chronic, and medical treatment is ineffectual in this case, then section of these arteries will be the most efficacious treatment.	0.6321403
It is therefore necessary, when you are about to cut them, that the patient tilt their head back; afterwards rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then have the patient constrict their neck with a cloth; then observe where the vein pulsates, and the location of each is behind the ears, and a little recessed;	When you decide on section, you should shave the patient's head with a razor; then rub the place with a rough cloth to show up the artery; then bind the patient's neck with an end of his garment; then you will observe where the artery is pulsating (the sites of both are the depressions behind the ears) for it is uncommon for them to remain hidden, except in a few persons.	0.8227521
then mark the locations with ink, then cut one and the other with a sharp scalpel in two places, so that the cut reaches the bone, and this should be across the width of the head.	Then do you mark with ink over both; then cut with a hooked scalpel, cutting down to the bone; the incision should be lateral to the head.	0.8004527
And if you wish, place the scalpel under the artery and cut it from above, cutting like two fingers across.	Or if you prefer, introduce the scalpel beneath the artery and make a thrusting cut up at it. The incision should be of about two fingers' breadth.	0.7683476
And when the vein is cut, the blood spurts upwards continuously.	When cut, the artery gives out a pulsating jet of blood spurting intermittently.	0.6522881
And if the artery cannot be felt, then you must measure the distance of three fingers, then mark with ink and cut to the bone;	If the artery is not discernible, you should measure three fingers' breadth from the ear, than mark with ink, and cut down to the bone.	0.7902167
and the necessary amount of blood to let out is six hundred (600 ml), and perhaps a little more or less, depending on what the patient can tolerate, and the fullness of the artery;	The quantity of blood that should be let is six ounces on the average, but often more blood, or less, is withdrawn; all in proportion to the strength of the patient and the fullness of the arteries as they appear to you.	0.6636021
then examine the wound: if any of the periosteum remains on the bone, cut it so that no abscesses form there, then tighten the wound and bind it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.	Then examine the wound and if there remains on the bone any part of the membrane cut it off to avoid a haematoma. Then bind up the wound with a bandage of linen cloth and dress with ointments till healed.	0.73850155

chapter-2-subchapter-3.txt
of migraine When an old migraine comes, and acute catarrh, because of the moisture of tears and the heat in the temples and chronic raging headache and similar things, and he is treated with various medical cures and none of it helps him, we should open the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.	When a man has a chronic migraine or acute catarrh, on account of acrid humidities and heat in the temporal muscles, or a violent chronic headache, or the like, and he has been treated with various medical treatments without success, we have sometimes in these diseases tried extraction of the arteries from the temples or cauterization of them, already described.	0.74471414
And the way to open them is for the patient to pull back the hair from his temples, and pay attention to the artery that appears in the temple, because it is clearly visible by its pulsation, and is rarely hidden except in some men who are too cold;	The manner of extraction is for the patient to shave the temporal hair; then you press upon the artery appearing on the temple; for it will be manifest to you by its pulsation, and is rarely invisible save in a few people or on account of severe cold.	0.73554015
and if it is hidden, the patient should tighten his neck with some cloth, then rub the area with some rough cloth, and sprinkle the area with hot water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatula which has this form: then lightly scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then pull it up with the forceps, and separate it well from the tissues that are underneath it on each side;	But if it is not plain to you then let the patient bind his neck with the end of his garment; then do you rub the place with a piece of cloth or foment with hot water, till the artery is obvious to you; then take a scalpel shaped thus; then with it gently scrape away the skin till you come to the artery, then stick a hook in it and draw it upward till you extract it from the skin and free it all round from the membranes that are beneath it.	0.82561344
and if the artery is thin, turn it with the point of the hook, then cut it on that side according to the size of the two heads. For if it is not cut, the blood will not spurt out completely.	But if the artery be thin, twist it with the tip of the hook and cut out enough of it for the two ends to be well separated from one another and contract so that no haemorrhage occurs; for if it is not divided and cut it will not let blood flow at all.	0.7278221
And draw blood from six hundred up to three hundred;	Then let blood, from six to three ounces.	0.7046491
and if the artery is large, you must tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread, so that no decay comes before the healing of the wound, and bleeding occurs;	If the artery be large it should be ligated in two places with a strong double thread; the threads should be either silken or lute-string, lest corruption attack them before the wound is healed, and haemorrhage occur.	0.8191352
then cut the excess between the two ties at that very moment, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with the cutting cautery down to the bone until the heads are severed;	Then cut away what remains between the two ligatures; do that immediately or later. If you wish, you may cauterize it down to the bone with an edged cautery so that the ends of the artery be divided; for this will replace that operation.	0.7613431
and that is the better way, if the patient has no fever and is of a warm complexion. For cautery helps to dry up moisture: therefore it is of greater help with moistures.	It is in fact better, as we have said, unless the patient is feverish or of a hot constitution; cauterization is one of the means of eliminating humidities, so it will be of surer efficacy.	0.7001043
Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the place with old cotton and puts on well-made tents;	After extraction of the arteries the place must be packed with teased-out cotton wool, and on top of that must be put firm pads.	0.4802016
and when they are untied, they should be treated with drying medications that promote flesh growth, and with tents, until healed;	And after loosening the ligature, dress with dry medicaments that encourage growth of flesh, and with bandages,, till it heals.	0.77378166
and if blood flows from the artery while you are working, hasten to stop it with cautery, or fill the place with vitriol and compress it with your hand until the bleeding is stopped; and if you don't have that available, put your finger on the spot until the blood clots, and sprinkle the area with cold water until the bleeding stops, and compress it as needed;	But if arterial bleeding hinders you in the course of your operation, hasten to stanch it either by cauterization or by filling the place with vitriol, compressing it with your hand till the blood stays; or, if you have nothing of this kind by you, put your finger on it till the blood clots and rinse over the place till the flow dies down; then tie off as you should.	0.88011783
and what is better and easier in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cutting cautery from two sides, but the cutting edges should be quite thick to retain their heat longer.	Less serious and easier than excising the artery is to cauterize the vessel with this cautery provided with two blades, having first marked both places with ink.	0.6551846
For when the instrument is too thin, it holds its heat less. And there should be a finger's width of space between the two blades, and then when you have marked the two places with ink, and you place the burning iron on it until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and they should be spaced apart between the two ends for it is not completely fused with this cautery from one end to the other;	Bring it down, very hot, till it reaches the bone and the artery is cut in two places, so as to put some distance between the two ends, for it will certainly not unite after this cauterization.	0.64935356
and this is the form of the cautery:	This is the form of the cautery.	0.6811142

chapter-2-subchapter-4.txt
of tears When the tears from the eyes descend from the veins that are on the top of the head because of heat, and medical treatment is of no benefit, and you see the patient's face redden, and feel a throbbing in the forehead like a tremor; and under the eye is tender and moist, so that the hairs of the eyelids have fallen out, and the eyelids are heated and chafed by the burning of the tears, then this treatment is necessary. And the ancients called it "cure by contusion", and it is that you shave the hair from the forehead of the patient who has this disease, then make three incisions in the forehead equally along the length of the forehead;	On the treatment of a chronic flux of bitter tears into the eyes. When lachrymation is chronic and arises from the external vessels on the cranium, nor does treatment by any kind of medical remedy have any effect, and you see the patient's features flushed, and he feels a creeping in his forehead like that of an ant, and his eyes are wasted and moist, and the roots of the lashes itch, and the eyelids are burned by the bitterness of the tears, the Ancients were compelled to treat it by this operation which they called 'treatment by the sword'.	0.8114815
And the ancients called it "cure by contusion", and it is that you shave the hair from the forehead of the patient who has this disease, then make three incisions in the forehead equally along the length of the forehead; and let one of the incisions be about two fingers wide in the middle of the forehead, going down to the nose, and the other two on the sides above the eyelids, and beware of cutting the arteries that are on both sides above the eyelids;	You bid the patient shave the hair of his forehead; then you make three parallel incisions across his forehead a little apart; and let the length of each incision be two fingers' breadths; the first incision continuing the line of the nose in the middle of the forehead; and the second at a little distance from the temporal muscle; and the third incision on the other side of the forehead.	0.75525
and keep your hand away from the connection of the two jawbones, and let each wound be the width of three fingers joined together across;	Beware of cutting the two arteries which are at the sides, and keep your hand away from the mandibular joint; and let there be a distance between each incision as of three fingers joined.	0.8104509
and have ready a piece of sponge and plenty of cloths to wipe the blood, then apply the sharp spatula on both sides of which this is the form:	Have ready by you some pieces of sponge or a number of linen towels to wipe away the blood.	0.42563245
from the incision which is towards the temple to the second incision; and scrape all the flesh that is between the two incisions, along with the pericranium which is on the bone, then do the same from the middle incision to the other second one, and then remove this spatula. then put in the first incision the instrument which is called "cultellaire", which is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is smooth, not sharp, and this is its shape:	Then introduce the double-edged scalpel shaped thus through the incision near the temple to the middle incision, and with it pare off all the skin between the two incisions with the periosteum; then do the same from the middle incision to the third one; then draw out this scalpel and introduce into the first incision another instrument which is known as 'the knife-shaped': sharp on one side, smooth and blunt on the other, thus.	0.8250031
And put the cutting side toward the flesh close to the heart, and the smooth side towards the bone, and insert it until it reaches the middle incision.	The sharp edge of it should be turned upward to the subcutaneous tissue and the smooth edge toward the bone; then push it on to reach the middle incision and with it cut all the vessels passing from the head down toward the eyes, without letting the incision come through the outer skin.	0.62615114
And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous to that which opens to the heart, and then do the same in the middle incision up to the other outside [incision];	Then do the same from the middle incision to the third.	0.42262894
and then draw blood evenly, and compress the area because of the blood taken;	After a moderate quantity of blood has flowed, express the bits of blood-clot from the place and pack into each incision a pad of teased-out cotton wool.	0.46182197
then put in each incision a tent of old cotton, and put on cloths soaked in wine and oil and vinegar, and watch that no hot abscesses develop;	Over all put a pad soaked in wine and oil, or vinegar and oil, lest an effusion occur.	0.64735866
and on the third day untie the bandage, and apply a large amount of warm water, then treat it with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other treatments with which one treats wounds, until it is healed.	On the third day loosen the bandage and rinse with plenty of tepid water and afterwards dress with balm of basilicon with rose-ointment and other treatments for wounds, until healed.	0.89207864

chapter-2-subchapter-5.txt
When someone experiences acute, recurring catarrh, and you see their eyes dim and small, and their vision weakening, and their eyelids burned; and the hair falls out, and there is a sharp pain deep in the head, and the patient sneezes; then know by these symptoms that these matters and this catarrh come from many veins, and the best treatment there is, is this one.	When anyone has a quantity of painful defluxions, acrid and continuous, and you see the eyes wasted and sunken and their sight is weakened and the eyelids are ulcerated and lose their eyelashes; while deep in the head there may be a vehement and grievous pain with incessant sneezing, then you may know from these occurrences that those humours and catarrhs arise from many deep blood-vessels.	0.85890794
And it is that you instruct the patient to shave their forehead, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another one the width of a thumb. And begin from the incision at the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision go down to the bone;	The best treatment in this case is that which follows: you bid the patient shave his forehead; then you make one incision in the middle of his forehead or a little above, crosswise (begin the incision from the left temple going toward the right temple; the incision should be down to bone; and avoid the temporal muscles that move during mastication) until the bone is laid bare.	0.74069077
and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, and then separate between the two edges of the incision and put in old cotton and linen tents; then tie over it cloths soaked in wine and oil, and beware of a hot abscess;	Wipe away all the blood with a sponge and separate the edges of the incision with teased-out cotton wool or with rolls of linen; then bind up with pads over; the pads should be soaked in wine and oil to guard against an effusion.	0.74945426
when it is removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow there, then treat it with drying agents, which promote the growth of flesh.	When you undo it, if you see that an effusion has erupted, you should scrape the bone until a growth of flesh begins in it; then treat with a drying treatment which generates flesh.	0.7733817
In this manner: take two parts wheat flour, and four parts colophony, and make a plaster; and apply it to these wounds to generate flesh everywhere.	For example, two parts of wheat flour are taken and of colophonia four parts, and of them a salve is made which may be used to encourage the growth of flesh in wounds of this sort.	0.73835343

chapter-2-subchapter-6.txt
On the blocking of the ears	On the treatment of things that fall into the ear.	0.4741158
Everything that falls into the ears is one of four things: either grain, or an insect, or a mineral stone or similar thing such as iron; or a seed, such as vetch, beans, peas; or a flowing thing such as water and vinegar and similar things.	All that falls into the ear comes under four categories: mineral stone, or what resembles stone, such as iron or glass; vegetable grain such as pea or date-stone or the like; or liquid such as water or vinegar; or animal.	0.8910442
When a stone or other type of thing falls into the ear that does not stick to the ear, nor grows in the ear, place the ear in the sun.	When a stone or something of that sort that does not grow gets into the ear, turn the ear toward the sun.	0.873837
If you see the stone, then instill a little violet oil or sesame oil, then attempt extraction; and make him sneeze with condiments, and block his nostrils when the sneeze comes, and wrap pieces of cloth or wool around his ear; and stretch the ear upwards.	If you see the stone, pour upon it a little oil of violets or sesame; then try to get it out by moving the head or by inducing sneezing with ptarmica and keeping the nose closed at the onset of sneezing, having first made round the ear a circle of pieces of cloth or wool and drawn the ear upwards.	0.8680023
Often it will come out with this treatment;	This treatment will usually bring it out.	0.7482444
and if it does not come out, attempt extraction with fine forceps, of which this is the form:	But if it does not come out, try to get it out with a fine pair of tweezers shaped thus.	0.7513051
If it jumps out with the forceps, that's good;	If it comes out with the tweezers, good.	0.7970309
If not, then attempt extraction with a fine hook, slightly curved;	But if not, try to extract it with a fine blunt hook slightly curved.	0.8094921
and if it doesn't jump out with that, then make a tube of bronze and push the end of the tube into the opening of the ear firmly, and plug what is around the tube with soft wax so that air cannot enter with the tube; then pull it out strongly, because it often comes out as we have said;	And if this does not bring it out, make a bronze tube and introduce the end of the tube well into the meatus of the ear and fill in round with wax softened with oil so that there may be no outlet save through the tube; then suck it out with all your breath; it will often come out with this.	0.8314749
And if it doesn't come out in this manner, then take birdlime, which is used to catch birds, and put some on the tip of an instrument suitable for this purpose, and put a bit of cotton around it; then press the birdlime onto the stone or whatever it may be, and pull it out.	But if it does not come out with these means we have described, take turpentine resin or bird-lime, a very little; twist some compact cotton wool on the end of a probe and put this on the tip; then introduce it gently into the ear after you have dried out all the moisture from the ear.	0.6560066
And if it does not come out with all these things that we have said, then hurry to cut open the ear before a hot abscess and spasm develop;	But if your treatment so far is unavailing, then be quick and incise before an abscess or spasm supervene.	0.5304159
And the way to make the incision is that you first have the patient bleed from the cephalic vein, and draw blood according to their strength, then have the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the base of the ear in the fatty or adjacent area; and the incision should be crescent-shaped, until you reach the stone, then remove it according to your ability, and quickly suck it out with your mouth;	Now this is the way to incise: first, the patient's cephalic vein should be cut and blood drawn, in proportion to his strength; then seat the patient in front of you and turn his ear upwards; make a small incision at the lobule of the ear in the depression there (the incision should be crescent-shaped) until you reach the stone; then extract it with whatever instrument you may.	0.85459626
and treat it until it is healed.	Immediately afterwards sew up the incision and dress it till healed.	0.4672174
And if it is a grain that is inside and it swells, then administer extraction;	If the object that falls into the ear is one of those grains that grow or swell, then try to extract it by the means already mentioned.	0.4328416
and if it cannot come out, then administer a thin, subtle spatula according to this form: and administer an incision of that grain.	If it does not respond to your efforts to get it out, take a fine narrow scalpel like this and with it attempt to cut out whatever kind of grain has entered the ear.	0.54059577
But do not do this when you think the grain is moist because of the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces of it;	You should not do this except when you are sure that this grain has become moist by reason of the vapours of the ear, so that you may cut up the grain into several small pieces.	0.661739
then extract it with fine forceps and by suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is alleviated.	Then you may extract them with a blunt hook or fine-headed tweezers, or by suction, as we have mentioned; for their extraction will be easy.	0.6608942
For water that falls into the ear, the patient must first use sneezing powders, and fill the ear with old cotton. And lie on the same ear where the water is. If it comes out because of this, that is good.	As for water getting into the ear, the patient should first employ sneezing excited by ptarmica, his ear having been plugged with a piece of teased-out cotton; he should lie upon that ear in which the water is; and if it so come out, well and good.	0.7805142
If not, take many stones the length of your little finger, thin and light, and heat them a little in the fire; and the patient puts one in the opening of his ear, and jumps up and down on one foot, and strikes the stone that is in the ear with another stone; and do not stop doing this from stone to stone until all the water comes out, and thus it will all come out;	But if not, take a number of small stones about a finger's length, thin and smooth, and warm them a little in the fire; and have the patient put one of them into the meatus of the ear and let him hop on that one foot on that side; and, with another stone, tap upon the one put into the ear; he should keep this up with stone after stone till all the water has come out.	0.90164757
and if you wish, take a rush, and put one end in the ear, and light the other end until most of the rush is burned;	Sometimes the water is extracted by taking a reed or quill and introducing one end into the ear; then the other end is set alight till the greater part of it is burnt; then repeat time after time with more quills till all the water is got out.	0.535958
then do the same with other rushes until all the water comes out, as we have said with the stone.	Or else suck it out with a cannula as described for a stone.	0.4773836
In extracting the creature, if it is small-bodied, like a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the section;	As for the extraction of a creature getting into the ear, look to see if it is small of body, such as a flea or the like, in which case treat by those means mentioned in the section.	0.7626343
but if it is large-bodied so that it can be felt, then administer extraction with forceps; and this is the easiest thing to remove that is in the ear.	But if it has a large body, conspicuous to the touch, try to get it out with tweezers and hooks; for of all things that stick in the ear this is the easiest to extract.	0.79481715
In the extraction of worms generated in the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the section on and in the treatment of distillations, and the treatment is not effective, then you must examine the ear in the sunlight: if any worms appear, pull them out with fine forceps, and if they don't appear, take the cannula which has this shape:	As for the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you have unavailingly treated it by those methods mentioned in the section in the treatise on instillations, you will need to examine the ear in the sunlight; and if you can see any worms, extract with tweezers or fine hooks.	0.82030976
And let it be narrow below and wide above. And put the narrowest end into the ear according to the degree of the patient's discomfort, then suck strongly with the cannula; do this often until all the worms come out.	But if you cannot see any, then take a cannula of this form narrow in its lower part, broad above; and introduce the narrow part into the ear as far as the patient can bear it; then make strong suction through it, repeatedly, till all the worms are extracted.	0.7518121
And if they don't come out, then pack cotton around the cannula as I described for stones;	But if they do not come out in response to your treatment, plug all round the cannula with wax as bidden in treating for a stone.	0.62609386
and if they don't jump out as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proven effective in killing worms, and you will find them in the treatise on distillations;	If nothing will bring them out, employ the instillations which I mentioned as having been tried by the Ancients for killing worms; you will find that in the treatise on instillations.	0.7915826
and distill your oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, of which here is the form as you see: And it should be made of silver or brass, narrow below with a small hole, and open above for distilling;	The instillation of oils or drugs should be done with an instrument like this, as you will see; you make it of silver or bronze, narrow at its lower end, with a small perforation, and wide at its upper part.	0.78464496
and to press the distillation inside, use a well-made brass instrument for this purpose, and if you wish, take a razor and carefully wrap cotton around the tip; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever medicine you want, into the cannula, and the cannula should be in the ear;	If you wish, you may make the obturator which goes in the cannula of strong bronze; or, if you like, take a probe and wrap cotton wool tightly round its tip; then pour into the cannula oil, juices, or whatever of these remedies you want, with the cannula in the ear.	0.82556415
then insert the razor with the cotton, and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled into the cavity of the ear; and the patient should feel it inside, and the distillation should be slightly warmed by fire before it is distilled into the ear; and be careful that it is not too cold, because the medicine would not be as effective.	Then introduce the probe with cotton wool on it and press moderately until the oil is ejected into the meatus and the patient feels it enter. Let that which you put into the ear first be slightly warmed at the fire; and be careful that it be neither very hot nor very cold, for the ear is not suited to bear that.	0.89247507

chapter-2-subchapter-7.txt
On the blockage of ears	On the treatment of obstructions in the ear.	0.6676754
Some children are born without any openings in their ears;	Infants sometimes are born with an imperforated auditory meatus.	0.6175509
and this same thing happens to men by the blockage of a wound, or by flesh born inside the ear, and this blockage sometimes occurs deep in the ear, so that it cannot be seen;	Some people also get an obstruction in the passage of the ear, either from an injury or from flesh growing in it.	0.6160099
and sometimes it happens that the opening is almost closed, and one sees it well.	Sometimes this obstruction is at the bottom of the ear out of sight, but sometimes it occurs a little outside the passage and is invisible.	0.47673157
The one that occurs deep inside, so that one cannot see it, is difficult to heal in several situations, and in the one that can be seen, you must place the patient's ear in the sunlight; and look inside: if you see the blockage apparent, then open it with this spatula of which the form is here:	The sort which occurs in the depths of the ear and is invisible is, in general, difficult to cure. As for that which is within sight, set the patient's ear in the sun and examine it; and if you see that the object is something external you should make an opening with a fine scalpel like this.	0.8134801
And it should be sharp and cutting at the front and back, entirely flat, so that it does not injure the ear;	Let its extremity be slightly broad, with a sharp point; while the rest of the scalpel should be smooth on both sides so as not to harm the ear.	0.6165006
if the blockage is from flesh born in or on the body of the ear, grasp it with fine forceps, and cut it lightly, until all that flesh is removed.	But if the obstruction be from flesh growing in the auditory meatus, catch it with a fine hook and cut it, with the utmost gentleness, till all the flesh is gone.	0.7460636
And if the blockage is deep within the ear, take a thin, light razor and warm it a little in the fire, then place it in the body of the ear.	If the obstruction be in the depth of the ear, take a fine smooth probe and warm it a little in the fire; then push it into the meatus.	0.82159936
If you feel the blockage which causes the patient difficulty hearing, pierce it lightly, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear;	If you feel the obstruction (what time the patient will experience hardness of hearing), seek to perforate it gently, being careful not to injure the nerve of the ear.	0.7439854
then place in the ear a tent according to the width of the opening, and soak it in Egyptian ointment. Do this for several days until the wound is healed, or take a tent and soak it in rose water, and powder it with crushed vitriol;	Then put in a plug the width of the meatus, which you will have anointed with Egyptian ointment; do this for some days till you are sure that the wound is healing. Or take a plug and dip it into water and sprinkle it with powdered vitriol and use that.	0.86099297
and if you see the ear swell, you must remove the tent and replace it with another tent soaked in cerate which is made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then treat it until it is healed.	If you perceive the ear swelling with an abscess you should remove the plug and put in its place another previously prepared by soaking in wax made with oil of roses, till the abscess has subsided; then dress till it is healed.	0.8494273
And if bleeding occurs, soak a sponge and cloths in cold water and place them on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding which are in the treatise on distillations.	If a haemorrhage occur, dip a sponge or piece of material in cold water and put it on the ear, and apply the rest of the treatment to stop haemorrhage mentioned in the treatise on instillations.	0.8499141

chapter-2-subchapter-8.txt
These little growths that appear on the eyelids when they are moist and dry must be pulled out with forceps and tweezers, and the root cut with a small spatula; then apply ground vitriol to the area.	These warts which occur on the eyelids are sometimes humid, sometimes dry. You should hold them with forceps or a hook, and cut them away from the roots with a scalpel; then put powdered vitriol on the place.	0.73540473
And if blood flows, cauterize it with a fine lenticular cautery, and cauterizing after the incision is worth a lot;	If there is bleeding from them, cauterize them with a fine lenticular cautery.	0.51620215
and they often return, when some of their roots remain; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and they do not return.	Cauterization of them after excision is best, for they often return when a part of their roots is left behind; but when they are cauterized the roots are burnt and they will not come back.	0.71896446

chapter-2-subchapter-9.txt
of hail Often there appear in the eyelids things that resemble hail in their form and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "hailstone", and it is a collection of thick moisture in the eyelid above and below; the procedure is as follows:	On the treatment of stones occurring in the eyelids. There often occurs in the eyelids a thing resembling a hailstone in its strength and hardness, and therefore called 'hail'. It is actually a collection of thick humours in the upper or lower lid.	0.7924044
the procedure is as follows: observe if the hailstone moves from one side to the other, and this is easy to determine;	The operative treatment for it is thus: examine; and if the stone is external on the outer aspect of the lid, and mobile in all directions, dealing with it is simple.	0.640069
then make a wide incision, then peel it gently from each side, then grasp it with tweezers, and cut it out.	You make above it a transverse incision; then scrape gently around it till it is free; then catch it up with a hook and cut it away.	0.67944366
if you cannot cut it out without piercing the eyelid a little, it does not harm the patient;	If it is in such a position that you cannot excise it without cutting through the lid, that will not harm the patient at all.	0.6808088
and if the tear is large, join it with a suture, and treat it until it is healed;	If the incision be big, gather it up with a suture and dress it till it heals.	0.73351204
and if it is small, do not exert any force, for the ointment will soon restore it and generate flesh.	If it be small, it will be no trouble, for ointment will restore it and heal it.	0.70692873
And if the hailstone is descending inside the ear toward the upper part, invert the eyelid, and grasp the hailstone with tweezers, and cut it out and press from both sides;	If the stone is rather toward the inner aspect of the eyelid, then invert the lid and catch up the stone with a hook—you will not need to incise the lid—and cut it all round.	0.6343757
and if the eyelid is separated by the incision, it does not matter;	If the lid is pierced in the cutting, it will do no harm at all.	0.4366033
and when the hailstone is removed, wash the eye with salt water, and treat the area with something that generates flesh until the patient is healed.	Then, after cutting away the stone, wash the eye with salt water; then treat with cicatrizing medicines till healed.	0.7437203

chapter-2-subchapter-10.txt
of the fat of the eyes Exinach is a fat that is generated in the tissues of the upper eyelids, and this happens more to children than to any other people, and it greatly bothers their eyes, and they have mucus in the mornings, and they cannot look at the sunlight because tears rush to their eyes;	Hydatid is fat which arises in the folds of the upper lid. It is a disease chiefly occurring in children, irritating their eyes, giving them morning catarrh; they are unable to look full into the light of the sun, since they get an immediate secretion of tears.	0.716529
and because of this they constantly lie on their faces, and sleep on them, and their eyelids below their eyebrows are moist, which swelling and appearance are covered by the exinach that is visible in the eye. And when you press the area with your fingers and feel the exinach between them.	And for that reason you will find them lying always on their faces, and they also sleep on their faces; and the eyelids below the eyebrows are moist and covered with swellings, while the hydatid stands out prominently; and when you press upon the place with your finger you can feel the fat beneath it.	0.855255
And the method of the procedure is that the patient puts their head in your lap;	The manner of operating is for the patient to let his head rest in your lap.	0.70297575
and then take a linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the amount of exinach contained on each side, then put it on them; and press with your fingers on one side and the other, so that the exinach is gathered in the middle of the circle;	Then you take a scrap of linen and prepare a pad of it. Make it into a circle of sufficient size to enclose the whole of the hydatid on all sides, then place it on it and squeeze with your fingers on all sides, so as to gather up the hydatid in the centre of the circle.	0.81974566
then split the moisture in the middle with a sharp spatula, making a cut the width of, and no larger than, the incision made for bloodletting;	Then in the middle of this humidity make a crosswise incision with a lancet, but do not let the incision be larger than that made for a venesection.	0.6421212
and cut the skin deeply until you reach the exinach; and in several instances, exinach comes out of the cut, looking like a piece of white fat.	As to the depth, the skin should be incised right through till you come to the hydatid, which in most cases will come out from the incision, in the shape of a white piece of fat.	0.582432
Then extract it all in one piece with a cloth grasped between your fingers over the fire, and turn your hand right and left until it is removed;	Draw it out with a cloth rolled between your fingers, turning your hand to right and to left till it is separated.	0.75945044
and be careful not to push into the cut, that you do not reach all the way to the eye with the spatula, lest you injure it.	Be careful not to go so deep with your scalpel that it sticks in the eye and injures it.	0.6588434
And if the exinach does not appear at the beginning of the incision, then enlarge the incision slightly until it appears;	If you do not see the hydatid at the first incision, you must gently cut a little deeper till it comes forth, then draw it out as described.	0.5605215
then extract it as we have said, then soak cloths in vinegar and water, and place them on the area, and bind with bandages.	Then dip some cloth in vinegar and water, apply to the place and bind it up with pads.	0.72565496
And there are some men who grind salt and apply it to break down the remaining moisture.	There are some who grind up salt and put it in the hollow of the incision to liquefy thereby the remains of the humidity.	0.7529195
Then treat it until it is healed.	Then dress till healed.	0.79575
And if a hot abscess develops at the site, treat it with soothing plasters until it is healed.	If an effusion occur in the place, treat with sedative plasters till healed.	0.7544514

chapter-2-subchapter-11.txt
of the hairs of the eyelids When hairs grow on the eyelids in addition to the natural ones, and become irritating, they harm the eyes and cause various ailments such as habitual tears and softening of the eyelids and albugo, to the point of causing the destruction of the eyes;	When superfluous lashes grow on the eyelid outside their natural place, below the natural lashes, and continue, they injure the eye and give rise to many kinds of disease, such as chronic lachrymation, dropping of the eyelids (ptosis), and whiteness and opacity, eventually resulting in the destruction of the eye.	0.6739595
and the treatment is according to four methods: either by cautery with fire, or by sharp medicine according to what is described above in the chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by small tubes/pipes, as I will explain.	The plastic operation on the eye is carried out in four ways: by the actual cautery; by caustic in the way mentioned above in the book on cauterization; by incision and suture; or with canes, as I shall describe.	0.7486852
You should place the patient's head in your lap, then turn back the eyelid with your left hand;	You should place the patient's head in your lap, then with your left hand turn out the eyelid.	0.9020026
if not, then insert a needle with a thread through it; and let this be near the edge of the eyelid where the eyelashes grow, near these hairs, and pull the thread up along with the eyelid, and turn it towards the surgeon/barber;	Now if it thus becomes everted, good; otherwise introduce a threaded needle beneath the eyelid and pass the needle up; let that be near the hair itself.	0.7083751
then cut in the part below the eyelid, beneath the eyelashes, with the spatula-shaped knife, from the large tear duct to the small one;	Then draw the thread up with the lid and invert the lid with a probe; then make an incision on the inside of the lid below the superfluous lashes with the lancet, from the greater to the lesser angle.	0.64149344
then remove the thread, and place under the eyelid a small tent of cotton and cloth, then draw on the eyelid a figure with ink, like a myrtle leaf, and however, it must be that the figure is according to the amount that you want to raise the eyelid which is separated from the others.	Then draw out the thread and put beneath the lid a small pad of cotton or linen; then mark with ink on the eyelid the shape of a myrtle leaf. The shape should be according to the amount you wish to raise the lid, and varies in different people.	0.8410039
And there are some who need a large amount of the eyelid cut, depending on how softened the eyelid is;	In some cases you should cut away a fair amount in proportion to the ptosis but in others a smaller incision is enough; all this in due proportion to the extent of the ptosis.	0.44720268
then cut with the spatula-shaped knife along the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the large tear duct to the small one; and let one of the cuts be near the natural eyelashes about the thickness of a hair, then place the hook in one of the two angles of the heart shape, then peel it all off;	Then with a scalpel incise over the two lines you have marked, beginning at the greater angle and going toward the lesser angle; and let one incision be close to the natural lashes, at a distance of about the breadth of a probe.	0.8257772
then join the two edges with a suture using a needle and a thin woolen thread, and wipe the blood, and burn the excess threads above the eyebrows with some sticky substance, if you wish to do so;	Then introduce a hook into one angle of the skin and peel it all off; then join the edges with a needle and a fine woollen thread and wipe away the blood; and stick the ends of the threads to the eyebrow with adhesive, if you like; but if you do not it does not matter.	0.76945335
and if not, don't worry about it, then leave the suture and the threads for three or four days;	Then let the suture and the threads remain for about three or four days, then dress.	0.682205
then treat the wound without stitching, with drying and constricting substances, for the eyelid lifts itself up when the wound closes and joins together, but stitching is better (as the ancients said), and this is a painless procedure; and there is another method:	If you like, you may leave the wound without suture and treat it with drying medicaments and styptics; then the eyelid will be lifted as the wound heals and comes together; but suture is better. The Ancients mention this method of operating. It involves some burden for the patient; but the operation is good and safe.	0.7864307
and there is another method: and that is you mark the eyelid with a figure shaped like a myrtle leaf, as we have described, with three points separated according to the shape shown here:	Yet another way of operating is to mark on the eyelid the figure of a myrtle leaf as we have described; then lift the eyelid with three hooks, either separate or joined thus.	0.7772878
then cut what is protruding with small, even cuts according to the shape shown here:	Then cut away the superfluous lid with a small pair of scissors with an even incision. The scissors are of this pattern.	0.6032019
And if you are unable to hold the forceps, and the thing is not even, then take a needle with a thread in it, and place it in the middle of the figure; and place another thread next to the large tear duct, and the second thread next to the small one, and gather the threads evenly between your fingers;	But if you cannot conveniently hold with the hooks, take a threaded needle and introduce it into the middle of the marking; and put another thread through near the greater canthus, and a third thread near the lesser canthus.	0.80201864
then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin on which you have made the mark, as we have described, then bring together the two edges of the wound by stitching, and treat it until it is healed;	With your fingers hold the threads evenly and then raise your hand evenly and you will raise up the whole of the marked skin as we have said. Then bring the edges together with a suture and dress till healed.	0.7889844
and if an abscess develops at your incision, soothe it with a plaster and similar soothing ointments;	But if in your incision, or the opening you have made, a swelling arises, then allay the swelling with wax and similar sedatives.	0.70589834
and sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyelid are turned inwards:	Sometimes the lower lid also has the lashes inverted.	0.55645293
so you must use what we have said about the incision;	For this you should use any of the methods we have mentioned: the incision and suture, and the operation by the actual cautery and by caustic. (	0.45770073
but the stitching in one and the other is more specialized.	The operation by the actual cautery or caustic) is more effective, and easier on the patient, than incision and suture, (but incision and suture) is more workmanlike in either lid.	0.4710815
The treatment of dog bites is as follows: and it is that you turn the eyelid and slit it inside as I have said, and then make two incisions skillfully, and two fine threads as long as the eyelid and the width of the spatula; and cut at the two ends on the two sides where you hold the threads;	Trimming the lid by means of canes is done as follows: you invert the eyelid and cut the inner slit as I have described; then you prepare two slender canes or rods of a length equal to that of the eyelid and a breadth less than that of a scalpel; and at either end of each you make a notch to hold the threads.	0.799824
then join one and the other delicately over what protrudes from the eyelid, and tighten the two incisions of the two parts firmly; and leave it thus for some days, and the skin that was constricted will die and blacken and rot, until it falls off by itself.	Then gently put them together over the superfluous part of the eyelid and tie them firmly together at both ends and leave for a few days; for the ligated flesh will necrose and turn black and putrefy and eventually fall away spontaneously.	0.8646078
If it delays, then cut it with scissors, then treat it until it is healed;	But if it is slow in sloughing, cut off with shears; then dress till healed.	0.6951897
and when the wound is closed, the eyelid will be lifted, and the hairs will no longer prick;	And when it is healed the eyelid will be raised and the lashes will no longer irritate the eye.	0.7446272
and this is the shape of the two incisions that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:	Now this is the figure of the canes; you should prepare them exactly in this shape and of this length and breadth.	0.6913889

chapter-2-subchapter-12.txt
The procedure is such that you take a fine needle, and thread a soft and fine silk thread through it; then bring the ends together and knot them both subtly, and the length of the threads should be one palm long;	If it be one or two hairs the operation will be to take a fine needle, thread it with a fine smooth silk, bring the ends together, and knot them with a tiny knot; the thread should be about a span in length.	0.81611884
then arrange in the instrument another short, fine silk thread, and knot the ends of the thread;	Then in the loop insert another fine thread, shorter than the first, and join the ends with a knot if you wish.	0.64767337
then have the patient put their head in your lap;	Then let the patient put his head in your lap in full sunlight, so that the operation may be clearly seen, because it is very fine work.	0.49667564
and be near the sun so that the work is illuminated, for it is a subtle and delicate task, then insert the needle with the instrument at the root of the hair next to it, and pierce it through the caruncle quickly until you pull it out over the natural hair;	Then introduce the needle with the loop to the root of the superfluous hair and run it quickly through the eyelid till you make it come out above the natural hair.	0.55581135
then pull the hair up to the instrument, and insert that hair into the instrument, whether there is one or two or three or more;	Then draw the thread to the top of the loop and introduce that hair into the loop if it be one, two, or three, but not more.	0.6682005
then pull your hand so that the hair comes out with the instrument in the caruncle along with the natural hair.	Then draw away your hand with it until the hair emerges with the loop on the eyelid among the natural hair.	0.8100488
And if the instrument is pulled and the hair does not come out with it, then you will pull the instrument from below with the thread that you have arranged there, until the instrument comes out of the hole above and you see it with the vision of your eye;	If you pull the loop and the hair does not come out with it, you draw the loop down by means of the thread which you have previously passed through it, until the loop comes out at the upper perforation. Then put the hair back in and draw them both up; keep on until the hair rises up in the upper perforation and you can see it.	0.71550363
then you will pull the instrument and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair is burned in its place and the flesh grows over it;	Then extract loop and thread and take them both out, and bind the eye and leave it bound for two or three days till the hair be fixed in its place and there is regeneration of flesh over it.	0.8152509
and if the hair is short, add a long natural hair, and lift it with the one where you leave it, until it is lengthened and then remove it.	If the hair be short, put with it a long natural hair so that it may be raised together with that; or let the hair grow till it reach a greater length, then raise it.	0.77856296

chapter-2-subchapter-13.txt
of the rotting of the eye When this disease, which is called "alacratia" or rotting, affects the eye, there are two types:	The eye that suffers this inversion of the lid is called 'leporine' (i.e. hareeye).	0.5151706
one natural, and the other unnatural.	Now sometimes this inversion is natural, sometimes acquired.	0.4614256
And it occurs from a sudden wound, or a cut, or a cautery, and similar things.	It is acquired either from the cicatrization of an injury, or an incision, or cauterization, or the like.	0.7174823
And the method of treatment is that you cut open that seam/suture, and separate its lips/edges, and put linen tents inside, and bind it until it is healed;	The idea of the operation is to excise the scar, separate the edges of the wound, pack linen between them, and bandage up till healed.	0.6454937
and you must not use in its treatment things that dry and constrict. For if you do this, the illness will return worse than the first time;	In the treatment of it you should not use anything styptic or drying, for if you do the inversion will return worse than ever before.	0.71092653
but treat it with softening things, such as fenugreek; and bathe it with water in which marshmallow and linseed have been boiled, and ointments of melted diachylon in some oil, and wrap a tent in it, and treat it with this.	Employ relaxing substances such as fenugreek; and fomentation with water in which mallows and linseed have been boiled; and diachylon plaster which has been previously softened with one of the oils and spread on the packs; and treat it with this.	0.8516381
And the key to your treatment is to be careful that it does not heal in the same shape as it was before;	The main thing in the treatment is to use every device to prevent the healing up of the place as it was before.	0.603982
and this work that we have described is nothing other than the correction of this illness, so that it does not return in the form it was before.	This operation which we have described is but some correction of the inversion, not that the appearance of the place will necessarily revert to what it was.	0.6609117

chapter-2-subchapter-14.txt
This disease, which is below, is truly called "axacrati", and is both natural and accidental.	This inversion in the lower lid is that which is truly called entropion; and it is either congenital or acquired.	0.4217875
The accidental type comes from wounds and cracks and cauterization and similar things;	It is acquired by injury or incision or cautery or something like that.	0.63487756
and the way to operate on it is that you take a needle, in which there is a double thread, and stick it in the flesh, and make it pierce from the left tear duct to the right, so that the thread comes out at both ends of the flesh;	This is the method of operating for it: you take a needle through which has been passed a double thread and you run it into the flesh, making it penetrate from the left angle of the eye to the right angle so that the thread is fixed in flesh both ends.	0.81056726
then stretch the flesh above with the needle, and cut it with a spatula one finger wide. And if the form of the eyelid returns as it should, it is good;	Then with the needle stretch the flesh upwards and make an incision with a broad scalpel; and if the eyelid returns to its proper shape, well and good.	0.8552954
if not, then take a razor and put it in the crack, and turn the eyelid, and make two incisions on the side inside the eyelid;	But if not, take a probe and put it on the site of the incision and with it turn back the lid.	0.58885705
and let the ends of the two incisions be at the two angles of the incision that you cut, and make an angle so that when they are assembled, the shape is like the shape of a letter called "Greek I"; (or "Y")	Then make two incisions on the inner side of the lid; the two incisions should begin from the angles of the incision already made and run together making an angle so that when they join they are like this. It is the Greek letter lambda.	0.5534395
then remove that flesh, according to how much its sides are sharp underneath, from what is attached to the eyelid, then join the two separated parts, and sew them with a woolen thread;	You remove that flesh in proportion as the angled side is lower than that adjoining the lid; then bring the divided parts together with two sutures made with a woollen thread.	0.7747961
then treat it with what we have said about softening medicines, and with tents, until it is healed.	Then treat with the relaxing medicaments and dressings we have mentioned, till healed.	0.8153043
And if the illness comes from a crack or a seam or a cautery, then you must make a full incision under the hairs of the eyelids, and according to what is described above; then separate between the two edges with a tent, as I have said;	But if the inversion is acquired, from incision, suture, or cautery, you should make a simple incision below the eyelashes, as has been described, then bring apart the two edges with a packing, as we have said. The sum of what there is to say about the treatment of inversion, whether it is in the upper or the lower lid, is that you should make your procedure follow the actual lines of the inversion itself ; for this is of varying shape.	0.70570016
then separate between the two edges with a tent, as I have said; and the work must be done according to the form of the illness, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise master devises with all his power how he can return the appearance to its natural form;	The sum of what there is to say about the treatment of inversion, whether it is in the upper or the lower lid, is that you should make your procedure follow the actual lines of the inversion itself ; for this is of varying shape. The experienced practitioner will make use of his skill in any way he can to re-establish the natural form or approximate to it.	0.5634116
and the patient himself, according to what is required in terms of work and instruments in various arrangements.	The disease itself will generally indicate to you the appropriate operation and instruments.	0.5315366

chapter-2-subchapter-15.txt
When this adhesion happens to some men in such a way that the upper eyelid is attached to the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must insert the point of a razor under the eyelid, and lift it upwards;	This adhesion happens to many people, the upper lid sticking to the white of the eye and hindering its movement and preventing its natural functions. You should introduce the end of a probe beneath the lid and raise it upward; or stretch it with a hook.	0.7760582
and stretch it with small tweezers, until you cut what is stuck with a subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp or too cutting, so that the patient can tolerate it and the too sharp spatula does not injure the eye;	Then cut the adhesion with a fine scalpel; it should not be so sharp as a cutting scalpel, but somewhat blunt, lest during the operation the patient should shake, and the scalpel slip, and the edge injure the eye.	0.7335713
and make your incision, with which you peel away this adhesion, lightly, so that the eyelid returns to its natural shape;	Let your incision be as if peeling off the adhesion. Wait until the lid regains its natural shape and the adhesions be wholly healed.	0.52594507
and this entire adhesion is healed, and they sometimes put salt water in the eye, and then rinse it with fresh water, and with an eyewash;	Then rinse the eye with saline and cleanse it; or instil into it drops of a watery solution of eye-lotion of verdigris.	0.57532954
then place between the eyelid and the eye a linen tent, and place over the eye wool soaked in egg white; and after the third day, use the eyewash and desiccating remedies until it is healed.	Then separate between the eye and the lid with a linen pad and put over the eye a piece of wool moistened with white of egg; and after the third day employ healing eye-lotions till it is better.	0.9192439

chapter-2-subchapter-16.txt
Know that the nail (pterygium) is of two kinds: one is fibrous and resembles a hard tumor, and the other is not fibrous, but resembles a frozen white moisture, that when one touches it with iron and tries to grasp it with forceps, one cannot;	Ungula occurs in two forms: either the nervous, which resembles a fine hard membrane; or the non-nervous, like a white congealed humidity; which, when the iron touches it or you try to pick it up with a hook, is cut through and the hook has no hold on it.	0.6325766
and both kinds begin near the tear duct, and grow little by little until they cover all the sight and all the light and the movement of the eye.	Both kinds grow from the greater angle of the eye, whence they spread little by little until they cover the pupil and block both the vision and the movements of the eye.	0.7644328
And the manner of the incision is that the patient puts his head on your lap, then opens his eyes; and lift the eyelid with your hand, then grasp the nail with the forceps, bending it slightly, and stretching it upwards; then take a needle, and put in it a horsehair, or a cow hair, or an ox hair, and a strong thread; and bend the point of the needle a little and insert it in the middle of the nail, and pierce it through with the whole needle, and tie the nail with a thread and stretch it upwards, and scrape with the hair the side of the nail that follows the pupil and the white of the eye up to the top, then cut the remainder at the root of the tear duct with a very fine spatumile and with little force, and leave the natural flesh in the tear duct, so that the flow of tears does not become accustomed to the incision;	This is the method of incision: the patient places his head in your lap and opens his eyes; then you raise the lid with your hand; then with a gently curved hook pick up the ungula and pull it upward; then take a needle threaded with a horse hair or an ox hair, and a strong thread; slightly curve the end of the needle; then thrust it into the middle of the ungula, piercing it with the needle; and tie the ungula with the thread and pull upwards; and, with the hair, peel the side of the ungula adjoining the pupil, and divide it with a sawing motion right through. Then what is left in the root of the angle cut out with a fine scalpel, or with small scissors; and leave the natural caruncle in the canthus lest, in cutting it away, a chronic flux of tears occur.	0.9179083
and sometimes the nail is stretched with the hook only, and with the thread, as we have said; then it is scraped with the spatumile gently, which has this shape:	The ungula may be drawn out with the hook alone or with the thread as we have said, and scraped away with the smoothtipped scalpel of this form.	0.6377301
And be careful that the spatumile does not touch the fleshy tissue and tear it, and that the pupil is not pierced;	But beware lest the scalpel touch the corneal covering and cause a fissure in it and the pupil protrude.	0.5794973
and after the incision put a little crushed salt in the eye, and some collyrium made of litharge, and leave it until the next day; then treat it with what is necessary until it is healed.	Then after the incision put into the eye a little powdered salt or an eye-lotion of verdigris, and leave it till the following day; then treat as may be necessary till it heals.	0.7965702
And if the nail is not sinewy, and you cannot insert the needle, and the hook cannot enter, often this type of nail is treated with medicines;	If the ungula is non-nervous in origin and you cannot transfix it with a needle nor get a hook to hold fast in it, this sort is often successfully treated by medical means.	0.69732004
and they grow as I have explained in the section, and if you wish to cut it, then open the patient's eye, and take a smooth spatumile, slightly sharp, in this shape: And scrape the nail above subtly, and if you see that it diminishes somewhat and the root comes close, then instill in the eye a collyrium made of litharge and red collyrium and crushed salt from your mouth, and cover the eye until the next day;	So treat as described in the section. But if you prefer to cut it, open the patient's eye, and take a fine smooth scalpel, rather blunt, like this and with this gently scrape away the ungula from above; and if you see that it is crumbling away and breaking down under the scraping, then immediately instil into the eye some eye-lotion of verdigris, or the red eye-lotion, or a little powdered salt, and bind the eye up till next day.	0.7997484
then recommence the other work according to this same method, until it is completely removed.	Then repeat the treatment with the same scraping till healed.	0.6831701
And if the appearance of the flesh of the caruncle harms the eye greatly, then lift it with a hook, and cut a part of it and not all, so that a flow of tears doesn't come;	As for a protuberance of flesh in the angle, if it causes great hurt pick it up with a hook and cut part of it away, with not too big an incision lest there be a flux of tears.	0.6658586
then instill in the eye red collyrium which is made of litharge.	Then into the canthus instil red eye-lotion or lotion of verdigris till healed.	0.5850941

chapter-2-subchapter-17.txt
In the eyes of some men sometimes grows red flesh, and it covers the pupil and presses on the eyelids and turns them outwards, and resembles a pomegranate blossom;	Sometimes in the eye of certain people a red granulation grows up and increases so as to block the pupil or nearly so; or it grows over the eyelids and often turns the lids outward, and it resembles the blossom of the pomegranate.	0.804083
and the procedure is that the patient puts his head in your lap, then you open his eyes, and lift all this flesh with hooks suitable for this, and hold it firmly;	You operate for this by having the patient put his head in your lap; then he opens his eyes and you gather up the granulation whole, with suitable hooks, or hold it with tweezers or forceps.	0.7352561
then cut the first layer of flesh, and continue cutting with the scalpel to the end, and be careful not to injure the eye during the procedure;	Then you cut away the first bit of flesh and then the next, until you have cut it all away; and beware of damaging the eye in the course of operation.	0.7461696
and make the incision with the spatula that we mentioned in the incision of the nail and with the small forceps with which the sebum is removed, as the figure after this chapter shows;	Your incision should be made with the scalpel which we described for the incision of pterygium; or with small scissors like those with which one gathers up pannus, as shown in the chapter after this.	0.6894949
and when the incision is complete and all the flesh removed, then fill the eye with crushed salt or instill red bile and similar corrosive medicines, and put on the external eye cotton with egg white, so that it is protected from a hot abscess;	And when you have finished your incision and removed all the chemosis, fill the eye with powdered salt or instil the red powder or similar corrosive; and apply to the outside of the eye cotton wool with white of egg to ward off an abscess.	0.83435076
and if anything remains, and hot blood overcomes you, and you fear a hot abscess, then leave the eye and treat the abscess with things that soothe a hot abscess;	If there is any chemosis left and blood is getting the better of you and you fear an abscess, then desist and treat the eye with those means for settling a tumour.	0.6838714
then return to your work until it is healed, and thus you make flesh grow back in the eye by this method.	Thereafter return to your operation till cured. So must you do with superfluous flesh that arises in the eye.	0.7759838
But nevertheless, you must lighten the treatment of each weak eye in a natural way;	But you must avoid treating surgically any eye that is weak, whether congenitally or by acquired disease.	0.62848246
and do not put your hand to any of these works until you see that this member is able to tolerate that work.	Never set your hand to an operation of this kind till you have seen if the organ can endure such an operation.	0.70896244

chapter-2-subchapter-18.txt
Sebel are red veins that cover the eye, and impair vision and weaken the eye constantly.	Pannus is a network of blood-vessels spreading over the eye so as to interfere with the function of sight and, in the course of time, weakening the eye.	0.5429101
It is therefore necessary first that you see if the eye, in which the sebel is, is strong, and there is no other disease besides the sebel; then treat it in this manner:	You must first examine, and if the eye with the pannus be strong, with no fault other than the pannus, then the pannus should be gathered up.	0.6583207
tell the patient to put their head in your lap, then lift these veins with the hook according to your knowledge, and let the hook be subtly double according to this form:	This is done by bidding the patient put his head in your lap; then, as skilfully as you may, pick up those blood-vessels with one or two hooks. The hooks should be of a gentle curve, like this.	0.7009219
And let there be two hooks by degrees in one body according to this form:	Or there can be two hooks joined together on one handle, thus.	0.54528856
then when you pull on those veins subtly, and draw out the blood a little at a time, until you see those veins removed from the eye;	Then take up the blood-vessels gently with the fine scissors, and wipe away the blood constantly, till you see all those blood-vessels removed from the eye, and the blood wells forth.	0.77903
and be careful not to injure the eye with the points of the spatulas, and do this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very careful in your work so that you only cut those veins;	But be careful of the eye lest you damage it with the points of the scissors. Let your work be done in broad sunlight at midday; and be very steady in your action so as to cut nothing beside the bloodvessels.	0.77964437
and when you have done this, then instill in the eye green and red collyrium to dissolve what remains of the sebel.	When you have finished, instil the red or green lotion into the eye to destroy by its caustic action the remnants of the pannus.	0.6408386
And if you are unable to remove all of it at that time, apply a plaster over the eye made of things that soothe eye pain, and leave it for a few days until the pain subsides and a warm abscess is ensured, then start again according to the method described above until it is healed;	If you are unable to gather it all up at that one time, apply a plaster to the eye such as will allay the pain, and leave him* for a few days till* the pain be eased and there is no danger of an abscess. Then repeat the operation in the same manner till it is healed.	0.79300624
and this is the form of the hooks:	This is a figure of the scissors. [	0.5098182

chapter-2-subchapter-19.txt
Physicians call a fistula "arissati":	Doctors give the name 'fistula' to what laymen call 'a quill'.	0.638102
When you treat it with cautery and with a sharp, burning medicine as I have said before, and it is not healed, the method is to cut open the abscess where it should remain, and draw out all the moisture that is there, until the bone is exposed.	When you have treated it with the cautery or with caustic according to the instructions given previously, and it is not healed, there is no clear method of treatment except to cut down on the tumour at its ripening and let out all the humidity or pus therein, till you reach the bone.	0.74476504
And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, then scrape it with the instrument, of which this is the form;	When bone is reached and you see necrosis or blackness, scrape it with an instrument like this.	0.60502136
and it is called a "rough head," and it should be made of Indian steel with a round head, and pointed like a file as it is in the present form:	It is called 'rough-head' and is made of Indian iron. Its head is round like a button but is engraved with markings finely engraved, like those of a file or a rasp.	0.707324
And place it on the site of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two fingers, and press your hand a little so that you know that the corruption is scraped;	Place it on the site of the diseased bone and spin it between your fingers, pressing down a little with your hand, till you are sure all the diseased bone has been scraped away.	0.7285125
and do this a few times, then restore the area with drying medicines.	Do this several times. Then let the place be dressed with stanching and styptic remedies.	0.6754208
If the place is healed, and flesh grows there, and the body of the boil is healed, and remains so for 40 days, and it does not reopen and is not abscessed, and no bad accident occurs, know that it is healed;	And if the place heals and flesh is generated there and the flow of sanies is stayed and there is no return after leaving for forty days, and there is no swelling, and nothing emerges, you may know it is perfectly healed.	0.79786694
If not, there is no other solution than to bring the fistula back to the opening of the nerve according to this method: and that is to uncover the bone a second time with an instrument, and with sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered, take a drill according to this form, and let the head of iron be three-angled, and the shaft be thinned down to the tip as you see here:	But if not, there is no other means for it but to turn the fistula into the cavity of the nose, in this style, namely, that you lay bare the bone a second time, either by an instrument or by caustic; and when the bone is uncovered, then take a drill like this. Its extremity, which is of iron, should be triangular; and its wooden handle should be conical in shape, and, as you see, tapering to the extremity.	0.82084405
then place it on the bone next to the tear duct, and move your hand a little away from the eye, then turn the drill completely until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it because the air comes out if he holds his hand over his nerve/nose;	Then put it to the bone itself near the canthus; but keep your hand a little away from the eye; then with your hand rotate the drill till the bone is perforated; and the patient will have the sensation of this, since, if he holds his hands over his nose he will find the breath coming out through the hole.	0.83369565
and then restore the place with dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows and the place hardens, the matter goes to the nerve/nose; thus it is easier for the patient.	And then dress the place with styptic and stanching remedies as I have taught you. And when the flesh begins to grow and the place gets hard, the matter which before was coming outward will be turned into the nose; and this will be easier for the patient.	0.79574597

chapter-2-subchapter-20.txt
When the eye is completely open, and there is no disturbance or lessening to the nose/nerve, then you must tie the patient;	When the whole eye is prominent and there is no reduction or impairment of vision, you should get the patient's bowels open.	0.7748219
then bleed him, then apply cupping glasses or a tube without lancing to suck, then put on the eye a plaster made of acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcocolla, and then constrict the eye, and the plaster over it with bandages and cloths;	Then venesect him in the cephalic vein; then apply cupping vessels to his neck without scarification and draw off by gentle suction; then put to the eye a poultice made of acacia and aloes and olibanum and sarcocolla; then bandage the eye over the application with many pads.	0.8155307
and the method with the cloths is that you take fairly soft cloths, and fold each one in four, and then place one on top of the other according to the quantity the eye needs;	The way to make pads is to take a number of soft rags and fold each into four thicknesses. Prepare a good many.	0.65123785
then tighten over it with a very hard bandage, and repeat the cupping glasses to suck without lancing;	Then put them one on top of the other as the eye requires; then bind on stiff bandages over these, tying them firmly. Repeat the cupping with suction and without scarification.	0.69985646
then remove the cupping glasses and leave the eye constricted day and night, and if the plaster softens, then you must tighten it a lot;	Then take away the cupping vessel and leave the eye bandaged a day and a night. If the bandaging slackens during that time, it must be tied properly.	0.7642502
then remove the plaster after a day and a night, and if you see the eye improving, that's good;	Then remove the bandaging after a day and a night, as we have said. If you see that the eye has receded, good.	0.7117697
if not; then repeat the plaster and the cloths and the bandage and the cupping glasses until it is healed.	Otherwise repeat the applications and pads and bandages and the cupping till it does recede.	0.8036727

chapter-2-subchapter-21.txt
of the breaking of the uvea When a disruption occurs in the uvea, then it opens, and matter comes out of the eyelids like a grain of resin, and it is frightening to see;	When a rupture befalls the uveal membrane so that it swells and protrudes outside the eyelids looking like a grape, and on this account the man's features are disfigured; if you intend to cut it away the operation will be as I am about to describe.	0.60955673
then if you see fit to cut it, the procedure is such that you insert a needle into the root of the part underneath, up to the one above, then insert another needle with a double thread from the corner of the eye; and pierce it there, and leave the first needle according to the arrangement;	You introduce a needle to the root of the uvea from the lower to the upper segment; then you introduce another needle threaded with a double thread, from the region of the canthus major where you will perforate it; and leave the first needle in its place.	0.7223469
then cut the place of the double thread and tie one part of the uvea around it, and tighten it well, then remove the needle and place wool soaked in egg white on the eye;	Then cut the place of doubling of the doubled thread, and with it ligature that part of the excrescence around the needle and tie it well. Then remove the needle and apply to the eye wool moistened with egg-white; and leave till the thread falls away with the growth.	0.81057477
and leave it until the thread falls off with the uvea, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed;	Then treat the eye with fortifying dressings till the wound be healed.	0.63776386
and sometimes the wound is held together by the uvea, all around, with a circle of cloth, until it is healed.	Sometimes the uvea is tied all round with a circle of material so that the prominence of the eye is greatly increased.	0.55636823
And if the eye swells considerably, pierce it at the thin spot that comes from deep within the eye, and drain the albuginous moisture so the eye goes down, and enter it immediately;	Then you perforate it with a fine scalpel going to the depth of the eye; and an albuminous humour will flow out and the eye will shrink and return at once.	0.6719305
then remove it once it is healed.	Then bandage till healed.	0.59175944

chapter-2-subchapter-22.txt
This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing but a swelling that has gathered in the eye, resembling dripping water, and yet it is not water;	This disease which is called 'hypopyon' is a collection of pus in the eye which resembles cataract but is not so.	0.71534157
and the way to perform the procedure is to have the patient sit on a prepared and straight chair, then take their head in your hands on both sides, and move it until you see the swelling rise up towards your eyes; then it should be inserted, so that it does not descend, and the light is unobstructed, and the patient can see things as they used to;	The method of operating in this disease is to make the patient sit upright on a chair before you. Take his head on either side with your hands and shake it about till you can see the pus come down; then it will be fixed and not move; and the light will pass and the patient will see things as he was before.	0.8764371
and if it does not descend, know that it is water, and the appearance of the swelling is not as we have described.	But if it does not come down, we know it is cataract.	0.56324446
have the patient sit between your hands, then take a fine spatula and make a small hole in the cornea at the junction of the conjunctiva with the cornea and the iris, so that the swelling comes out;	But if the pus is not ready to be brought down by this method, then seat the patient in front of you; then take a fine scalpel and cut a little above the corneal tunic near the coronal junction of conjunctiva and cornea, till the pus comes out.	0.6422683
and when it has come out, instill warm water mixed with honey into the eye, or water in which fenugreek has been boiled with honey, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.	When it comes out, instil warm water mixed with honey, or water boiled with fenugreek and honey. Then treat as usual till healed.	0.7836252

chapter-2-subchapter-23.txt
of the waters of the eye We have already described the appearances of the waters in the section, and what is necessary for piercing; So act according to the health/condition.	On the couching of cataract. We have already mentioned in the appropriate section the varieties of cataract and those in which depression is useful, in full detail; so you may take it accurately from there.	0.55690837
You must have the patient sit between your legs crossed, away from the sunlight, and bind the healthy eye and tighten it very firmly;	You should cause the patient to sit down cross-legged before you, facing the light in full sun, and firmly bind up his sound eye.	0.7884226
then place the eye chart in your left hand if the eye is left, or in your right hand if the eye is right;	Then lift up his eyelid with your left hand, if it be the left eye in which the humour is; or with the right hand if it be the right eye.	0.82681054
then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument which is called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eye is right;	Then take the couching needle in your right hand if it be the left eye; or in your left hand if it be the right eye.	0.7524184
then place the tip of the instrument next to the pupil about the thickness of a spoke in the white of the eye towards the smaller tear duct, then push the instrument which is called "almagda" forcefully, and twist your hand until it pierces the white of the eye, and feel that the almagda reaches the empty space;	Then put the tip of the needle near the corona, about the thickness of a probe away, onto the white of the eye itself, on the side of the lesser canthus. Then thrust the needle firmly in, at the same time rotating it with your hand, until it penetrates the white of the eye, and you feel that the needle has reached something empty.	0.7472796
and the depth of the almagda's path must be equal to the distance from the pupil to the edge of the iris; and that is the pupil of the eye;	The depth the needle goes in should measure as the distance from the pupil to the edge of the iris, which is the corona of the eye; you will see the metal in the pupil itself because of the transparency of the corneal tunic.	0.5587313
you will see the bone in that spot because of the clarity of the cornea, and then place the instrument up to where the fluid is, then press it out from one path to another.	Then put the needle up to the place containing the humour; then press the point downwards time after time.	0.484677
if the fluid descends immediately, the patient will see in front of him and the instrument in his eye.	If the humour comes down at once, the patient will at once see whatever his vision is opened upon while the needle is still in his eye.	0.67230695
Afterwards rest a little, and if the fluid rises again the second time, place the cautery with the instrument, and when it is inserted and it does not rise, then remove the almagda gently by turning your hand little by little;	Then let him rest a little while; and if the humour goes back up again depress it a second time without taking the needle out. When it stays down firmly and does not come back again, gently draw the needle out, twisting it ever so slowly with your hand.	0.81008655
and then put a little bit of rock salt in water, and bathe the eye in this. Then cover the eye completely with tow or wool soaked in rose oil and egg white, and bandage it with the healthy eye.	Then dissolve a little pure rock-salt in water and wash the eyeball with the solution; then apply all over the outer aspect of the eye carded linen or wool moistened with oil of roses and egg-white, and bandage it up together with the sound eye.	0.85108364
We, and those who are of our time, apply ground cumin with egg white.	Now we and our contemporaries apply pounded cumin with the egg-white.	0.8381352
And if the almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are such men who have very hard eyes, then you must take the instrument which is called "alberit", of which this is the form:	But if the couching needle does not serve, failing to enter the eye on account of its hardness (for there are some whose eyes are hard indeed), you should take the scalpel called al-baridl figured thus.	0.70823085
And then pierce the conjunctiva only, and do not go too deep, but make a small hole, then put in the almagda, as we have said;	With this make a perforation in the conjunctiva only, not piercing any further; for that is only to make a little entrance for the needle. And then thrust in the needle as we said before.	0.7521357
and at the completion of the work, prepare for the patient a suitable dormitory, where he may sleep on his back in a dark place;	At the end of your operation, prepare a solidly-built bed on which the patient may lie on his back, in a dark room; and keep him from all movement or coughing.	0.7454186
and let him be free from all movements, and take light meals, and not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and be bandaged according to his condition until the third day;	And prescribe such a diet for him as will relax his system; neither let him move his head to right or to left. Let the bandage remain in the same position till the third day.	0.77600557
then unbind him in that same dark house, and test his sight, and make him see some things, and then reapply the bandage until the seventh day;	Then loosen it in the same dark room and make trial of his sight, putting before him objects to be seen; then replace the bandage till the seventh day.	0.8688396
and you should not do this at the time of the treatment or immediately after the incision, but you must delay this, because the humor rises quickly.	You should not do this at the time of treatment nor immediately after the perforation by the needle; but on the contrary you should avoid it, for intensive use of the eye causes a rapid ascent of the humour.	0.79796076
If hot abscesses arise, untie the eye before the seventh day and treat it with that which soothes abscesses;	But if an abscess occur you should unbandage the eye before the seventh day and restore it to health by those methods that allay swelling.	0.6437157
and when it is calmed, then uncover the sight and place a pad on his face to cover it for a few days, and he should still be in that dark house.	When it has subsided, allow him free sight, putting over his face a dark veil beneath which his vision may be exercised for a few days while he is still in the dark room.	0.7374189
And then he should leave the house little by little, and return to his affairs;	Then let him come out of the room gradually and take up the exercise of his business.	0.6394069
and know that no apprentice should interfere in this case. And one came to us who was from Iraq, who told us that in his country they made perforated almond paste through which they sucked water, but nevertheless I never saw any in our land, nor did I ever read about it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.	I have heard that a certain Iraqi has said that in Iraq he makes a hollow needle by which the humour is sucked out. In our land I have never seen anyone do it in this fashion, nor have I read of it described in any of the books of the Ancients; perhaps it is newly invented.	0.7950391
And these are the likenesses of the forms of almond paste, so that those who don't know them can see them;	Here are the figures of some kinds of needle for the information of those who do not know them.	0.4651306
and they should be made of brass specifically: And let their tips be of this same fineness, and the last part in three sharp angles.	They are mostly made of brass; and their extremities should be of this very fineness, triangular at the tip and sharp.	0.7031921

chapter-2-subchapter-24.txt
Sometimes there arise in the nose diverse fleshy growths, some of which resemble scorpions with many legs;	Sometimes there arise in the nose various superfluous fleshy growths.	0.7110941
and there are some where there is flesh ingrained with a pale color, and there is soft flesh of good color. In the case of the flesh that is soft, and not ingrained, you must have the patient sit between your hands facing the sun;	One of these is a thing resembling a centipede; another, a cancerous growth, stony, hard, and pale in colour; another again is a soft growth, not pale. Any of these growths that is soft is not malignant or cancerous.	0.5003196
In the case of the flesh that is soft, and not ingrained, you must have the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and open his nostrils, and cast the hook at those fleshy growths, and draw them out; then cut what you can hold with a thin, sharp spatula on one side, until you know that the flesh is entirely removed.	Any of these growths that is soft is not malignant or cancerous. You should make the patient sit before you, facing the sun, and dilate his nose and introduce a hook into these polyps and draw them out; then amputate what you can take hold of, with a fine scalpel sharp on one side, till you know that all the growth is gone.	0.7749587
And if anything remains that cannot be cut, then open it with one of the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and if blood overcomes you, or a hot abscess, then treat it as appropriate;	And if there be anything of them left behind that you cannot cut away, then gently scrape away with any fine instrument till nothing of them remains; and if the bleeding be too much for you, or an abscess occur, then combat it by suitable means.	0.8659306
and if it is a malignant abscess, hurry and cauterize it until the bleeding is stopped and all the flesh is removed, then put in clean vinegar and water or wine. If the nose opens, and moisture comes down to the palate, know that he is healed;	If it be a malignant swelling, then speedily cauterize till the bleeding stops and all the polypi are gone. Then introduce into the nose, after the incision, vinegar and water, or wine; and if the nose be free and fluid flow into the throat from it, then know that he is cured.	0.86252266
and if moisture does not flow as it should, know that there is dead flesh on the bone above, which the instrument cannot reach to cut:	But if fluid does not pass through it as it should, you may know that there is a polyp within in the upper part of the ethmoid bone where the instrument could not reach to make incision.	0.659881
then you must put in a rather thick linen thread, knotted by hand, with about a finger's width or less between each knot; and have the patient put the end of the thread in his nose as far as he can, and pull it while smelling until it comes through the nose into the mouth;	In this case you must take a linen thread, rather thick, and tie many knots in it with a space of a finger's breadth or less between each pair of knots; and let the patient try to get one end of the thread into his nose with a probe or anything he can, after making it into the form of a button; and let him make a full inspiration till it reaches the cartilage and comes out through the throat.	0.83776855
and children in schools often do this, and it is an easy thing for anyone who wants to do it;	Boys at school often do this sort of thing, and it is quite easy for anyone who wishes.	0.80731714
then hold the end that comes through the nose in one hand, and the other end that comes through the mouth in the other hand, and pull one after the other, tugging on the knots that are in the thread.	Then hold together the two ends of the thread, one coming out through the mouth and the other remaining in the nose; then saw off the polyps by means of the knots in the thread ; continue doing this till you are sure that the growth has been cut off by the knotted thread.	0.7842628
Do this until you know that the knots have broken down that flesh, then pull out the thread, wipe the blood, and soak the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back in the nose as before;	Then take out the thread and, after wiping away the blood, put into the nose a plug dipped in Egyptian ointment.	0.50652826
do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrodes all the remaining flesh;	Do this for three days or longer till the ointment has consumed the remnants of the polyp.	0.80146307
and then put a lead tube in the nose for a few days until it is healed, and if drying medications are needed, use them;	Then, last of all, insert a lead tube in the nose for a few days till healed. If he need treatment with drying medicaments, use them.	0.80094254
and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:	This is the figure of the instrument for instillation by which oil or medicines are dropped into the nose.	0.6766822
And let it be of silver or brass, similar to an open lamp, like a tube, and the conduit likewise;	It should be made of silver or bronze like a small lamp, its oil-container open, and with its channel likewise.	0.7464826
and if you wish, make a closed tube, and let the instrument be full to purge the head;	If you like you may make its spout closed like a reed; and the oil-container of the instrument can be made covered over.	0.6092621
and it should have a handle at the end to hold it when heating the oil or some liquid.	It has a handle at the end, as you see, to hold it when heating the oil or whatever juice or other liquid you wish.	0.701722

chapter-2-subchapter-25.txt
of the flesh on the nose	On warts growing on the end of the nose.	0.40057698
Often a disease arises at the tip of the nose which is called "telul," and grows and becomes increasingly large, until it is a hideous thing to look at;	There frequently spring from the end of the nose warts that grow and increase daily till they disfigure the man.	0.47135854
and therefore you must cut it at the beginning, and remove it all away, then put on the spot the cautery or the burning medicine;	So you should cut them out when they first appear; totally eradicate them and apply to the place cauterization, either actual or by caustic.	0.68952405
and if one delays cutting it until it is large, then take care if it is hard, of a dark color, of little feeling:	But if excision of them has been overlooked till they have grown big, then examine, and if the growth is stone-like, hard, and pale in colour, and with little sensation, do not interfere with it with an instrument, for it is a cancerous tumour.	0.5932369
do not touch it with iron for it is a cancerous abscess, for when it is cut sometimes, great harm comes to the patient;	For I have often seen people cut these tumours, and great affliction resulted to the sufferer.	0.5357473
and if the abscess is soft to the touch, not of a dark color, and you see that it can be completely cut out, then bleed the patient and cut it without fear, and treat the area with drying and astringent things.	But if the tumour be soft to the touch, not pale coloured, and you see it can be wholly removed, then purge the patient, and cut it off him fearlessly, and treat the place with astringents and styptics till healed.	0.84683967

chapter-2-subchapter-26.txt
Know that when a break occurs in one of these cartilaginous structures, it heals poorly, except in some people.	You should know that when discontinuity occurs in one of these cartilages, treatment of them rarely does any good, except in a few people.	0.83751196
It is therefore necessary when this happens to someone, to see if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then join the two lips with a suture, then treat it until it is healed;	When such a thing happens to anyone, look carefully, and if the wound be fresh and bleeding, bring the edges of the wound together with a suture, and dress them till they are healed.	0.7297454
and if the lips are already separated on one side and the other, then you must scrape all the parts of their core until they bleed, then bring the two lips together with a suture, and tighten it, and sprinkle on powder of dragon's blood, and ground incense; and put over the powders a piece of strong plaster or other binding plaster, and leave it until it falls off by itself, then treat it with ointment until it is healed.	If the discontinuity has separated the edges, and both edges have healed, it is necessary to scrape both edges on the external skin till they bleed; then bring the edges together with a suture and dust over it dragon's blood and olibanum; and put over the powder a plaster of Palm ointment or some other of the regenerative ointments, and leave bandaged for two or three days; then unbandage and change the medicine, and let the sutures come away of themselves; and afterward dress with ointment till healed.	0.8310917
The method of suturing is that you bring together the separated parts: either with needles, as we have said in the suturing of the abdomen; or with thread, as I have explained to you.	Now the manner of suturing is to close the discontinuity, either with a needle, as we describe for suture of the belly, or with a thread as we tell you there.	0.74953747

chapter-2-subchapter-27.txt
of abscesses of the lips	On the extraction of nodules occurring on the lip.	0.41811365
In many men, hard abscesses appear inside the lips, resembling vetch grains, both smaller and larger;	A good many people sometimes get little hard swellings inside their lips, some resembling the vetch grain; some larger, some smaller.	0.7847789
then you must turn the lips, and cut into each lump, and grasp it with pincers and cut it on each side;	You should invert the lip, incise all along each nodule, catch it up with a hook, and cut it away all round.	0.74616575
then fill the place after the incision with crushed vitriol, until the bleeding is stopped;	Then after incising rub pounded vitriol into the places until the bleeding stops.	0.79340947
and then wash it with vinegar, and treat the area with dry things until it is healed.	Then let him rinse with vinegar and salt, and dress the place with styptic drugs till the wounds heal.	0.7266333

chapter-2-subchapter-28.txt
Many times, extra flesh grows on the gums, which the ancients call "albulus";	There often grows on the gum superfluous flesh which the Ancients call 'epulis'.	0.73746026
so you must hold it with tongs, and cut it at its root, and let the pus or blood flow;	You should take it up with a hook or grasp it with forceps and cut it at its root and let the pus or blood flow out.	0.7596932
then put on the area crushed vitriol, or other astringent and drying powders;	Then put on the place either pounded vitriol or one of the absorbent styptic powders.	0.7155149
and if this flesh returns after the incision, and it often does, then cut it a second time and cauterize it: thus it will not return after cauterization;	And if the growth returns after treatment—for they often return—excise a second time and cauterize; it will not come back after cauterization.	0.79455173

chapter-2-subchapter-29.txt
Sometimes there are gathered at the top of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs that are ugly and rough; and sometimes the teeth are black and yellow and green, so much so that the decay reaches the gums, and the teeth are foul-smelling;	Sometimes there collect upon the inner and outer surface of the teeth and also between the gums, rough scales, ugly, sometimes black or yellow or green, from which corruption is communicated to the gums and thus the teeth become unsightly.	0.8156632
so you must have the patient sit between your hands, and his head be in your lap, and scrape the teeth where the scabs appear, until nothing remains there; and do the same with the blackness and the greenness, and the yellowness and the other stains, until they are cleaned;	The patient should sit before you, putting his head in your lap; and you should scrape the teeth or molars on which you can discern crusts or gritty substance, till nothing remains; do them all in the like manner, black, green, yellow, and the rest, until they are all gone.	0.86430943
and if what is there is removed on the first scraping, that is good; if not, then begin scraping again the second day and the third, until you have scraped everything away;	If they disappear at the first scraping, good; but if not repeat the scraping on the following day and the second and third until you attain your purpose.	0.80416226
and know that the teeth require various shapes of instruments for scraping, according to what the work demonstrates, because the scrapers with which one scrapes outside the teeth have other shapes than those with which one scrapes between the teeth; and these shapes and others should be prepared with you.	You should know that molars need scraping-tools of many diverse forms and shapes according to the character of your undertaking; for the tool with which the inner surface of the teeth is scraped differs from the tool with which the outer surface is scraped; and that for scraping between the teeth is different again. Here is a number of scrapers, all of which you will have ready by you	0.8106612

chapter-2-subchapter-30.txt
It is advisable, when you treat a toothache, that you delay extracting it as long as you can, because one should not do this; because it is a very important substance unless one has no other option than to extract it.	You should treat toothache with every device and be reluctant to extract; nothing can replace the tooth when it is extracted, for it is a noble substance—until there is no means of avoiding extraction.	0.7226777
Then, when the patient is compelled to have it extracted, you must be certain of the aching tooth. Many times the pain deceives the patient, and they think it is in a healthy tooth, and have the good tooth extracted; and yet the pain does not go away because of this, until the bad one is extracted, for we have already seen this done to these healers;	When the patient is determined to have it out, act with deliberation till you are sure which is the painful tooth; for often the pain deceives the patient and he thinks the pain is in a tooth that is sound, so he has that one extracted; but the pain does not abate until the diseased tooth is removed. We have frequently seen this happen in the practice of the barber-surgeons.	0.8668151
and when you are quite certain of the aching tooth, you must scrape around the tooth with a strong spatula to protect the gum on all sides;	When you are quite sure which is actually the painful tooth you should cut away all round the tooth with a scalpel having a certain measure of strength, until the gum is separated all round.	0.72753716
then loosen it with your fingers or with fine tongs at the first push and push, until it is well loosened, then firmly grasp it with the tongs; and let the patient's head be in your lap between your knees, and hold it well so that they do not move.	Then, with your fingers, or with a pair of fine forceps, first move the tooth slowly and gently till you stir it; then get a good grip on it with a pair of large forceps, holding the patient's head between your knees so that it does not move.	0.87031794
Then pull the tooth straight out without breaking it, and if it does not come out, take one of these instruments and insert it gently on each side, and move it as you did before.	Then draw the tooth straight out so as not to splinter it. And if it will not come out, then take one of these following instruments and gradually introduce it beneath the tooth all round; then try to move it as you did before.	0.85899377
And if the tooth is decayed and damaged, you must fill it with cloth, where the holes are; and grip it carefully with the tongs so that it doesn't break when pulled;	If the tooth has a hole in it or is decayed, you should plug the hole with a rag, forcing it in with the tip of a fine probe so that it will not break when you grip it with the forceps.	0.7386246
and you must work very carefully around the gum to loosen the tooth.	You must completely scarify all round the gum.	0.54836553
And be very careful not to break it, leaving a piece behind, which would cause the patient even greater pain than before due to the harmful nature of the root.	Take the utmost care not to splinter the tooth lest a piece should remain behind and arouse the patient's ills afresh, causing greater pain than before.	0.7429522
And be careful not to do as ignorant healers do, who through their haste and recklessness sometimes damage the gums and don’t achieve what we have described;	Take care not to do those things that the ignorant barber-surgeons do in their rashness and haste in dental extraction, neglecting to employ the methods we describe.	0.64970064
but sometimes, because of this, they cause serious illness due to the roots that remain, or because of the gum tissue they damage, as we have often seen;	For they often bring great troubles upon people, the least of which is to break the tooth off short, leaving the whole or part of the root behind; or to remove the tooth together with a piece of the jaw bone, as I have often seen.	0.60174537
and when the tooth is extracted, wash the area with wine or vinegar and salt;	Then after the extraction let the patient rinse with wine or vinegar and salt.	0.67931086
and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, fill the area with ground vitriol;	If there occur haemorrhage from the place—a common occurrence—then pound up a little vitriol and stuff the place with it.	0.6663863
and if that doesn't work, cauterize it.	If the vitriol does not avail, cauterize.	0.57764184
The shapes of the instruments, which are used to move the teeth first, should have long points and thick handles so they don't bend when you pull the tooth;	The shape of the fine forceps with which you first move the tooth should be with long jaws and a short handle, thick, lest they bend when you take hold of the tooth.	0.7963278
and these are the shapes:	And this is the shape of the large forceps.	0.56013834
And they should be of thick parts so they don't bend when pulling, and be made of good Indian steel, and be toothed for a firm grip.	They should be of Indian iron or of steel, strongly made, the jaws tempered and having teeth fitting into each other so that a sure and firm grip may be obtained. Sometimes the jaws are made like a file, also to give a strong grip.	0.7296325

chapter-2-subchapter-31.txt
of the root of the teeth When the root remains after pulling, you must put on the spot cotton moistened with butter for one or two days, until the area is softened, then apply the forceps that are called "algefri", whose head resembles a heron's beak;	When, in extracting a tooth, a broken-off root remains behind, you should apply to the place cotton wool soaked in butter for one or two days to soften it; then insert the tongs or forceps with stork-bill jaws; this is the figure of the forceps.	0.62573564
and inside they are made like a file and this is the shape:	The point should be made like a file or rasp on the inside.	0.43423516
And if the roots do not want to come out with these forceps, then you must expose the flesh all around the root, and apply the instrument called "althali", that is to say, a levator, of which this is the form:	If it does not respond to your attempt to extract it with these forceps, you must dig down over the root and remove all the flesh, and then insert the instrument that resembles a small crowbar; this is its figure.	0.6263298
And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out because of this, that is good;	It has a short rather thick extremity, and should not be tempered lest it fracture.	0.4708547
If not, then help yourself with all the instruments, the forms of which follow here below:	If the root comes out, good; if not, get assistance from the other instruments figured here.	0.5697611
And one uses this instrument which has two prongs, of which this is the form: and other iron tools which are earlier in the section on teeth, and this instrument that resembles large forceps/pincers, of which this is the form:	Another, triangular and slender. Sometimes also we get help from this forked instrument and beside this, from other instruments and appliances mentioned above under scraping of teeth. Sometimes also recourse may be had to this instrument resembling a large hook, figured thus.	0.62956655
And let this instrument be strong so that it cannot break, and know that there are many dental instruments; and also other instruments, which are not counted/mentioned;	The hooked extremity is triangular in section, of some thickness lest it break, not tempered. You should know that dental instruments are very numerous, as are the other instruments, almost beyond reckoning.	0.5922046
and the wise and subtle master finds for himself his instrument, according to what his works and the illness show him, for there are such illnesses where the ancients did not teach any instrument because of the diversity of bones, and if one does not break the cartilage or the other bones, where it is decayed, then he searches for the instruments that are suitable there, as I have told you, and makes use of the procedures, of which this is the form:	And the experienced worker with a knowledge of his craft may devise fresh instruments according as his work on actual cases suggests them to him. For there are certain diseases for which the Ancients did not mention any instruments, on account of the variety of them. Now if the mandible or one of the bones of the mouth be broken or decayed, explore the site with some instrument that is suitable for it, namely one of the instruments or forceps mentioned for extraction of roots.	0.7907369
And let them be large and gripping well to hold the bone, so that it does not escape, but can be held and removed;	They are fairly thick, to grip the bone firmly lest it slip before the bone has been got out.	0.5409057
and then restore the place with appropriate medicines, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, then scrape it with this instrument:	Then cicatrize the place with suitable drugs. If the bone is only slightly decayed, scrape it clean of its decay and blackness, then dress till healed.	0.6695881

chapter-2-subchapter-32.txt
When the tooth appears not according to the natural body, and the form is ugly, and especially in young women, then you must know if the tooth has grown behind the (other) tooth, and is not in the right place, and it cannot be filed or polished:	When teeth grow in other than their natural place the appearance is very bad, specially when it occurs in women or slaves. So you should examine; if the tooth has grown out behind another tooth and it is impossible either to saw or file it down, then extract it.	0.731794
then scrape it; and if there is space beside the tooth, then take this instrument whose form is here, and is similar to a small beak, and let it be made of Indian steel, sharp at its tip:	But if it be attached to another tooth, cut it down with an instrument of this kind. It resembles a small chisel and should be of Indian steel with a well-sharpened end.	0.70051765
And cut it little by little over several days, due to the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it is apparent that it can be filed, then file it with such a file as is shown here:	You should spread your cutting with it over several days on account of the hardness of the tooth and so as to leave the others undisturbed. If the tooth projects in such a way as to make filing possible, use a file of Indian iron, shaped like this.	0.6248011
and it is like the file with which needles are made;	It should be wholly manufactured of Indian iron, its handle too, and covered with very fine points to resemble the file used in making needles.	0.44272724
and file the tooth little by little over many days, lightly, so that it does not move until it falls out;	You should file the tooth with it very slowly and gently over a period of many days so as not to shift the tooth and cause it to fall out; then finally smooth it and scrape it with one of the scrapers.	0.66141784
then smooth it at the end with some kind of scraper, and if the tooth is too sharp and injures the tongue, it should be filed down until it is even, so that it does not injure the tongue or corrupt speech.	If it be a tooth of which part has broken off and it hurts the tongue in speaking, file it down till you have disposed of the roughness of the break and the tooth is smooth and neither injures the tongue nor hinders speech.	0.7237312

chapter-2-subchapter-33.txt
When the front teeth become loose, either by being struck or by falling, and the patient cannot chew what they eat without them falling out, and you have treated them with astringent medicines, and it is of no use;	When the front teeth are loosened by some blow or fall and the patient cannot bite upon what he is eating lest they fall out, and you have without avail treated them with styptic medicines, the technique in this case is to bind the teeth with gold or silver wire.	0.7547022
then they must be bound with a gold wire, because silver wire turns green and rots, but gold never changes;	Gold is the better, for silver oxidizes and corrodes after some days, but gold remains for ever in its state and does not suffer this change.	0.5087911
and the wire should be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, according to the size of the space between the teeth;	The wire should be moderate in thickness in accordance with the distance between the teeth.	0.6802476
and if you want to straighten the teeth, take the wire and put it doubled between the two healthy teeth, then put the ends between the loose teeth, whether there is one or more, until you come carefully to the healthy tooth on the other side; then repeat the wrapping up to the part where you began, and tighten it carefully and skillfully with your hand, so that it does not move;	The method is to take the wire and run it doubled between two sound teeth; then with the two ends of the wire you weave between the loose teeth, either one or several, until you bring your weaving to a sound tooth on the other side; then you repeat your weaving back to the side whence you began; tighten it gently and judiciously till they do not move at all.	0.8164792
and the ligature should be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.	You should tie the wire at the root of the teeth lest it slip.	0.68968546
Then cut the ends of the wire with pliers, and bring them together, and fold them back between the healthy tooth, and place it so that it does not hurt the tongue;	Then with the scissors cut off the two ends of the wire remaining over, and bring them together and twist them with forceps and hide them between a sound tooth and a loose tooth so as to not injure the tongue; then for the future leave them thus bound.	0.7863593
and then leave it tightened as much as possible, and if it comes loose, or the wire breaks, tighten it with another wire;	But if it comes undone or breaks, bind them with another wire; so may he have the use of them all his life.	0.5927279
it will remain and serve thus for its entire time, and this is the form of the teeth and the illustration of the straightening of the two healthy teeth and the two loose ones, as you see:	This is a figure of the teeth and the manner of interlacing two sound and two loose teeth, as you see.	0.60520846
And when the tooth falls out, one puts it back in its place, fresh by fresh, as we have said;	After one or two teeth have fallen out they may be restored to their place and bound in as instructed, and become permanent.	0.4547944
and let no one interfere who is not wise and experienced, and sometimes one makes the shape of a tooth from cow bone, and puts it in the place where the defect is, and tightens it as we have said, and it remains and serves thus for a long time.	This can be done only by an expert and gentle practitioner. Sometimes a piece of ox-bone may be carved and made into the shape of a tooth, and placed in the site where a tooth was lost, and fastened as we have said, and it will last and he will get long service from it.	0.74723446

chapter-2-subchapter-34.txt
Sometimes this frenulum that comes from under the tongue is natural, that one is born with; or by accident of a healed wound;	Sometimes this ligament that occurs under the tongue is natural and congenital; or it may be accidental, owing to scarring from an injury.	0.81251884
and the procedure is such that you open the patient's mouth, and have his head on your lap, and lift his tongue;	The operation for it is to open the patient's mouth, having his head in your lap, and lift his tongue; then cut that sinew-like ligament transversely till the tongue is freed from its hold.	0.7599577
then cut the nervous frenulum widely, so that the tongue is freed from its attachment, and if there is hardness or a knot, and it is from the healing of a wound, then insert the hook and cut that ligament widely;	If it is hard and nodular, arising from scarring after an injury, catch it with a hook and slit it transversely until the ligament is severed and the knots undone.	0.5414847
and be careful that the cut is not too deep, because of the artery that is underneath;	Beware of making the incision deeply into the flesh, or you may cut an artery there and haemorrhage may occur.	0.5465033
and when you have finished, wash the area with rose water and vinegar, or with cold water, then place a linen tent under the tongue;	After the cutting, let him rinse with rose-water or vinegar and cold water.	0.5805254
and the patient should hold it there each night, so that the area cannot close up.	Then put under the tongue a pad of linen, which the patient must keep in position at night to prevent the adhesion from forming again.	0.58243597
And if bleeding occurs, apply crushed vitriol to the area; and if the bleeding overcomes you, cauterize it with a lentiginous cautery, which is good for this; then treat it with other remedies until it is healed,	If there should be haemorrhage, put pounded vitriol on the place; and if bleeding still prevails burn the spot with a lenticular cautery of suitable size and treat in the usual way till healed.	0.76946187

chapter-2-subchapter-35.txt
and if you see it with a dark or black or hard color, so that the patient cannot feel it, do not touch it at all, because it is a canker;	If you see that it is dark or black, and hard, and the patient has no sensation in it, do not interfere with it, for it is a cancer.	0.75023115
and if it is tending towards white, and there is moisture, then apply a hook, and split it with a fine spatula, and free it on one side and the other; and if the bleeding overcomes you in your work, apply ground vitriol until it is stopped, then return to your work until you draw out all the fire (or core);	But if it is inclined to be pale and has fluid in it, put a hook in it and incise it with a fine scalpel and free it all round; and if haemorrhage hinders you while operating apply pounded vitriol to it till the bleeding stops.	0.71249485
then clean the place with vinegar and salt, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.	Then proceed with your work till all is extracted; then let him rinse his mouth out with vinegar and salt. Then give all the suitable treatment till healed.	0.69040084

chapter-2-subchapter-36.txt
of abscesses of the throat Sometimes lumps come inside the throat which are called "godath," and they are properly called the two tonsils, and when you treat them, as we have said in the section (or chapter), and they are not healed, then take note:	CHAPTER THIRTY-six. On the treatment of swelling of the tonsils and other swellings in the throat. Sometimes there occur in the throat buboes called 'tonsils', which resemble the buboes occurring externally.	0.6050816
if it is a hard abscess with little feeling and a dark color, do not touch it with iron (a surgical instrument).	When you have employed the remedies described in their own place, without effect, examine, and if the tumour be hard, dark coloured, and devoid of sensation, do not touch it with an instrument.	0.54964507
And if it is red and the base is large, do not touch it with iron, also because of the risk of bleeding; but leave it until it is ripe, and then you will open it, or it will rupture on its own;	If it be of a red colour, with a thick root, do not touch this with an instrument either, for fear of a haemorrhage; but let it be till it come to a head; then you may perforate it or let it burst of its own accord.	0.80060416
and if it is a round white color, and the base is thin, have the instrument ready to cut, but first check if the abscess is calm and appeased.	But if it be pale coloured, round, with a slender pedicle, this is the kind that should be cut. The operation for this is first to see, before operating, whether his inflamed tumour has already completely subsided or to some extent diminished.	0.57918423
Then have the patient sit facing the sun, with their head in your lap, have them open their mouth, and have the assistant take their head between their hands and press the tongue down with the instrument, the shape of which is shown here;	Then make the patient sit down in the full light of the sun with his head in your lap; open his mouth; and have an assistant before you to press back the tongue with an instrument like this.	0.84004533
and it should be made of silver or thin brass like a knife:	It should be made of bronze or silver, and slender like a knife.	0.7756171
When you press the tongue down with this instrument, and you see the abscess, take the hook and insert it into the tonsil, and pull it out above as much as you can;	And when the tongue is depressed with its help, the tumour will be made manifest to you and your direct vision will fall upon it. Then take a hook and fix it in one tonsil and pull it forward as far as it will go; but be careful to not pull away with it any of the mucosa.	0.61432886
and pull some of the tissue with it, then cut it with the instrument, the shape of which is shown here, that looks like scissors; and the tips are curved, and one towards the other, and are very sharp, and made of Indian steel or hardened steel:	Then cut it with an instrument of this form; it is like scissors except that its extremities are curved, the beak of each meeting the other, and very sharp. It should be made of Indian iron or Damascene steel.	0.7838863
And if you do not have this instrument available, cut it with forceps/pincers, of which the shape is shown here: And let it be sharp on one side, and not on the other;	If you have not this kind of instrument, cut it with a scalpel of this form, on the one side sharp, on the other quite blunt.	0.57686377
and when you have cut one of the tonsils, cut the other in the same way, and after the incision, have the patient gargle with hot water, and water and vinegar, and if bleeding occurs, have the patient gargle with water, in which pomegranate rinds have been boiled, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding is stopped; then treat him until he is healed;	And when one tonsil has been cut away, remove the other in exactly the same manner. Then after the excision let the patient gargle with cold water or vinegar and water. But if there occur a haemorrhage let him gargle with water in which have been boiled pomegranate peel or myrtle leaves or similar styptics till the haemorrhage is stanched; then treat till healed.	0.8937948
and sometimes other abscesses grow in the throat besides the two tonsils, so cut them in the same way as the two tonsils.	Sometimes there grow in the fauces tumours other than the tonsils; remove them just as described for tonsils.	0.68637276
And I treated a woman with an abscess that was inside her throat, that is to say, an abscess of little sensation;	I once treated a woman for a tumour that had grown in her throat and was rather dark in colour and had little sensation.	0.62125516
and it had almost completely closed her throat, so that the woman could not breathe because the passage was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained that way for a day or two.	It had almost blocked the throat and the woman had only a narrow opening to breathe through, and was quite prevented from eating or drinking, so that she was at death's door, if she had so remained for a day or two.	0.85466725
And the abscess had risen so high that two tubes had been placed through the two nostrils.	From the tumour there arose two offshoots, which had eventually emerged through the nostrils.	0.5369594
I therefore acted quickly and inserted a hook into one of them, then pulled it out, and drew out a large amount of pus;	So I made the utmost haste and, fixing a hook in one of them, drew it forward, and out came a sizeable piece.	0.8216742
then I did the same in the other nostril, and I worked her mouth and pressed her tongue;	Then I cut it off where I had hold of it near the nostril. Then I did the same with the one projecting from the other nostril.	0.58478415
afterwards I inserted the hook into these abscesses, and cut a part of them, and only a little blood came out; and thus the woman's throat passage was opened, and she immediately began to drink water and then wine, and I did not stop cutting this abscess for a long time;	Then I opened her mouth and depressed the tongue; then fastened the hook in the tumour itself and cut off a part of it, with only a little haemorrhage; and the woman's pharynx was freed and immediately she had a drink of water, then took some food. And from time to time, for long after, I continued to cut away this tumour.	0.8511149
and the abscess kept growing back, filling the space that I had emptied, until it was very large again;	But fresh growth continually replaced what was excised till we both grew weary of it.	0.48592767
then I tricked it and cauterized it inside the throat: thus it stopped growing;	Then I went about it astutely and cauterized the tumour high up in the throat, and it stopped growing.	0.6873503
and I left those parts, and I don't know what God did with her after me.	Then the woman left the district and I do not know what God has done with her since I had charge of her.	0.7222278

chapter-2-subchapter-37.txt
of the uvula	On removal of the tumour of the uvula that is called 'uva'.	0.5208545
When a rheum descends to the uvula, and it is swollen and elongated, it is called "perpendicular";	When a flux descends to the uvula and it swells and the uvula becomes white and elongated, then it is called 'columella*.	0.7312546
and if it is large and round underneath, it is called "uvula".	And if it should be swollen below and rounded then it is called 'uva'.	0.8024401
When it is treated as we have described in the section, and the treatment is not effective, and you see that the hot abscess is subsided, and it is thin, then you must cut it;	When it has been treated as mentioned in its section, and the treatment is unavailing, and you see the inflamed tumour subsiding and the uvula becoming thin, you should amputate it.	0.7924812
and the one that is round and compact and not long; and it is bloody or dark-colored or black, then you must avoid cutting it. For there is great danger for the patient.	Now those of them that are bunched up and rounded and not elongated, full of blood, or of a dark colour or black, and without sensation, these you should avoid incising; for this course is dangerous for the patient.	0.7955669
It is therefore necessary, when you see it, according to the manner I have described, by its whiteness and its length, that you have the patient sit facing the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument that we mentioned earlier; then insert the hook into the uvula, and pull it down, and cut it with one of the two instruments that I mentioned for the incision of the tonsils.	But when you see them as I have described, somewhat pale and elongated, get the patient to sit in the sunlight and depress his tongue with the instrument described above; then take hold of the uva with a hook and draw it down and cut it off with one of the two instruments described for excision of the tonsils.	0.8197875
And you must not cut more than the excess that is beyond the natural limit;	You should not cut away more than up to the natural limit.	0.7811546
for if you cut more, you will harm the voice and speech;	For if you cut more off you cause injury to the voice and speech.	0.8686339
and after the incision, use what we have described for the incision of the tonsils, and treat it until it is healed.	Then, after excising, carry on the treatment on the lines described under removal of the tonsils, and treat till healed.	0.7460455
And if the patient is afraid of being cut, then you must use a trick for cauterization without him fearing.	But if the patient flinch from operation, then you must contrive to cauterize it, fearlessly and boldly.	0.6455151
And the patient should place his head on your lap, and then you press the tongue with the instrument that we mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and moisten it with hot vinegar, so that it is neither too thick nor too thin; and fill the hollow of this instrument, of which here is the form:	The method is to employ a caustic; you put the patient's head in your lap; then, having depressed the tongue with the instrument described above, take some of the corrosive fluid mentioned in the book on cauterization, make it up with quicklime to a medium consistency, and fill with it the hollow in this instrument, whose form is thus.	0.75446093
And it has a bowl at the end where the medicine is placed, like the bowl of a spoon, and place the instrument with all the medicine on the uvula;	The end of it where you put the caustic should have a hollow like that of the spoon of a spoonprobe.	0.4790191
and the patient should be lying on his side, so that the saliva and mucus run out of his mouth with the medicine inside, so that it doesn't go down the throat and harm him;	With the patient lying on his side, letting the mucous secretions flow from his gullet out of his mouth so that none of the corrosive may run down his gullet and cause harm, you place the instrument right on the uvula.	0.70452887
then hold your hand with all the medicine and press it on the uvula, for about half an hour, until you see it numbed and the burning sensation of the medicine has subsided;	Then, steadying the hand that is holding the medicament, press it out on to the uvula for the space of half an hour until you see the uvula turn black and the corrosive action cease.	0.8049888
and if you wish, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, and soak the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument with the cotton in the mouth above, so that the cotton rests on the uvula;	If you wish, you can take some cotton wool twisted on the end of a probe, and, having soaked it in the caustic, apply the probe with the wool, down through a cannula till the wool sticks on the uvula.	0.6342738
and do this often, until the cauterization is complete, then leave it to dry, and it will fall off after four or five days.	Do this over and over again till you have done all the cauterization you want, then let be; for it will shrink and fall off in three or four days.	0.7380541
And if you need to repeat the cauterization with the medicine, then repeat it, and after the cauterization wipe around the uvula, with cotton soaked in butter, and clean what is around the medicine;	If you need to repeat the treatment, do so. After the cauterization, wipe all round the uvula with wool soaked in butter, and with that mop up all the caustic remaining round about it.	0.77249205
and it should be rinsed with cold water, and treated with gargles until it is healed.	Then let him rinse his mouth out with cold water and do you treat with external embrocations, and gargles within, till he is well.	0.61938083
This treatment is safer than incision, or than cautery;	This kind of treatment is safer than incision and less to be feared.	0.73598224
if it is treated with fumigation in this manner, take calamint and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and southernwood and similar herbs, and put them all together or some of them in a pot, and add vinegar, and boil it;	Sometimes uva is cured by a method milder than either incision or cautery, namely by means of vapour in the following manner: take pennyroyal and artemisia absinthium and organy and rue and wormwood and chamomile and southernwood and similar herbs and put them all, or some of them, in a pot, cover them with vinegar, and boil them.	0.6719823
and the pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and in the middle of the pot there should be a hollow instrument like this: And it should be made of silver or brass, and one end should be placed in the patient's mouth so that the vapor rises to the uvula through the tube, until the uvula is deadened;	The pot should be luted with clay; and there is to be a hole in the middle of the lid to which is fitted a hollow instrument like this, made of silver or bronze, and the end in which is the protuberance should be put in the patient's mouth so that the vapour passes up the tube to the uvula, which becomes of a very dark colour.	0.8106872
afterwards repeat it often, until the uvula dries up, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the appearance of the hot abscess, because several things can happen; and do not perform this cauterization until the decline of the hot abscess.	Do this repeatedly till it sloughs away. Be careful not to apply this treatment at the first appearance of the tumour, for often you will aggravate the tumour; but you should do it at the decline of the inflammation.	0.7226447
And if this instrument is not available, then take a tube and place inside the end an eggshell, so that the patient's mouth is not too hot; because the eggshell does not allow the vapor to irritate the mouth, and this is a good treatment together with healing.	If you do not have this instrument, take a reed and fit an egg-shell on the end so that the patient's mouth is not burned; for the egg-shell will prevent the heat of the vapour from burning the mouth. This is a really good and safe treatment.	0.8819032

chapter-2-subchapter-38.txt
Many times a bone or fishbone, or some other thing, gets stuck in the throat;	There often sticks in the throat a bone or fish-bone or something else.	0.820603
therefore you must pull out what you can see, and depress the tongue with the instrument towards the light, so that you can see the thing move;	After you have depressed the tongue with the instrument in the full light of the sun, so that what is stuck in the throat is made as conspicuous as possible, you should then remove whatever can be seen and comes into view.	0.5802003
and what you cannot see and is lodged in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach; perhaps the stuck object will come out through vomiting;	But when it is not visible to you, and lies hidden in the throat, you should make the patient vomit before the food in his stomach is digested, for often the object comes out with vomiting.	0.76670897
or have the patient swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of turnip, or a lettuce root, or a morsel of dry bread; and tie a thread to the sponge, and then swallow it; and when it reaches the spot, it will swell, and then you will pull it out;	Or let him swallow a piece of turnip or a heart of lettuce or a morsel of dry bread; or take a marine sponge, dry, and tie it on a thread; then let him swallow the sponge and when it reaches where the sharp body is then quickly pull on the thread.	0.8492873
and if it doesn't come out with what we've said, then take a lead instrument of this shape:	If it does not come out by the methods described, in this case employ an instrument made of lead, thus.	0.6792358
And let the instrument be curved at the end so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the tip raised upwards; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, so that coughing does not occur, nor push the bone inwards;	The patient himself should introduce it into his own throat gently; he should raise the head backwards and take care not to touch the larynx lest coughing be aroused. And let him remove therewith the bone or sharp body.	0.7042292
and it's better that the patient inserts the instrument, because he knows better where the thing is lodged; then he pushes it down, or pulls it out with the instrument evenly, until it is out.	Or else let the doctor introduce it with his hand (although it is better if the patient himself introduce it, since he knows the site of the obstruction) and push it down and then draw up his hand with the instrument; all this according to the way it presents itself to him, till it is removed.	0.7312257

chapter-2-subchapter-39.txt
of the leech in the throat	On the removal of a leech sticking in the throat.	0.4461159
Sometimes the leech is treated, as I have said in the division, by the application of medicines; and when that is not effective, then look into the patient's throat in the sunlight, after you have pressed down their tongue with the instrument that I told you about.	When you treat a leech by the medical means spoken of in the appropriate section, with no effect, then inspect the patient's throat in full sunlight after depressing the tongue with the instrument I have described.	0.77199167
And if you see the leech, then pull it out whole with a small hook, or with fine forceps suitable for this purpose.	If your gaze falls upon the leech, pull it out at once with a small hook or a fine pair of forceps.	0.6488597
And if that doesn't work, then take a hollow cane, and put it into the patient's throat, then insert a hot iron into the hollow of the cane, and do this often. And let the patient abstain from water all day.	But if you cannot get hold of it, take a cannula and introduce it into the patient's mouth near the leech, then pass through the cannula a red-hot iron; do this repeatedly; while the patient must not drink at all that day.	0.782485
Then take a glass full of cold water, and open the mouth, and pour it in without swallowing, and move it around with his hand often; and as soon as the leech feels the water, it will fall off.	Then let him take a vessel full of cold water, open his mouth in it and rinse out with it, but let him not swallow a drop of it; and he should keep the movement of the water going by hand time after time; for the leech straightway falls off when it feels the water.	0.86898667
And if it doesn't fall off as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafoetida, using the instrument I described in the fumigation of the uvula;	If it does not come away by these means, fumigate the patient's throat with urine or with the juice of asafoetida, using the instrument described for fumigating the uvula.	0.719843
Do this several times, because it will fall off without delay.	Do this several times, for then it will fall away.	0.86660016
And the method of fumigation is that you take a pot containing live coals, and the pot should be covered with a lid pierced in the middle, and in this hole should be the head of the instrument;	In fumigating, this is the way to set about it: take a pot containing live coals, fitted with a lid and a hole in the middle of the lid into which is fitted the end of the instrument.	0.7462662
then throw your fumigant in it, and the patient puts the end of the tube in his mouth and closes his mouth so that the smoke does not escape, but reaches the leech;	Then put in the aromatic; and the patient should apply his mouth to the end of the cannula, with his mouth closed to prevent the escape of the vapour, until he knows that the vapour has reached his throat; for the leech will at once come away.	0.76520175
and the leech will fall off immediately, and if it does not fall off, repeat the fumigation several times;	But if it does not come away, let the inhalation be repeated many times.	0.4979468
and let the patient be thirsty, and eat salty and sharp things, and do not drink water;	Let the patient endure his thirst, and eat salty food and garlic and drink no water.	0.8044328
and then it will be necessary that it comes out by this treatment.	It will inevitably be removed by this treatment.	0.6853374
And the shape of the instrument with which one extracts the leech, if one can see it, is similar to curved tongs made to enter the throat;	This is the figure of an instrument for extracting the leech from the throat when visible. It resembles forceps, as you see, except that it has this bend for entry into the throat; and the two extremities are shaped like a bird's bill, with the roughness of a file.	0.6443933
and it has a resemblance to the beak of a snipe, and has a roughness from a file, so that what it grips, it cannot release; and see here the shape:	It is a wide ring of iron, of such a size as to go into the mouth above the tongue. It is inserted into the mouth standing on its side, and the mouth stays open without the patient's volition; nor can he dislodge it at all until you turn it. Inside the ring appear the words: 'The pattern of the instrument for opening the mouth; exactly of this size'	0.48176685

chapter-2-subchapter-40.txt
There are many kinds of abscesses, as will be recalled later in this book, one after another, and they differ in perforation and in incision;	The kinds of tumour are many and various, as will be mentioned in order in this book. They differ in the way they are to be perforated or incised, according to two criteria.	0.7268648
and this is in two ways, one of which is in its appearance itself, and in that it holds moisture.	One is the kind of tumour it is in itself and the humidities it contains.	0.617671
And the second way is because of the places where they are on the body.	The other is the part of the body where it occurs.	0.61596
For an abscess of the head is different from one of the buttocks, and an abscess of a fleshy place is different from one that occurs in the joints, and each has its own treatment in practice.	For the tumour occurring in the head is different from the tumour occurring on the posterior, and a tumour occurring in a fleshy part differs from one on the joints; each having its separate category of operation.	0.842739
And there are abscesses that one should not pierce, until the pus is ripe according to its maturation;	There are some tumours that should not be opened till after the pus in them is matured and ripe.	0.6135924
and there are some that must be pierced when they are raw, and do not ripen according to their maturation, such as abscesses that are near joints.	But others should be opened when still raw and immature, such as a tumour near the joints.	0.69542223
For when an abscess develops near the joints, and it is left until it rots around it, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which causes contraction in that limb.	For when a tumour occurring near a joint lasts long enough to putrefy its surroundings, it often breaks down the ligaments or the tendons of the joint and causes paralysis in the limb.	0.8083035
Or the abscess is near the principal member, and if you delay the piercing until it is ripened, it will harm the principal member;	Or if the tumour be near a major organ, if you delay the opening of it until it ripens you will damage that major organ.	0.7986179
or it is near the anus, so it is pierced before it is ripe;	In the same way, if it be near the anus you must open it, although unripe for opening.	0.554544
and you should not pierce a raw abscess without complete digestion, except for the one that is near the anus, so that it does not rot deeply inside, and become elongated within, and a fistula develops there; and cannot heal for a long time.	The reason why you must open an abscess near the anus while still unripe, before it is brought to a head, is to prevent it from putrefying the cleft and penetrating to the inner part of the anus and becoming a fistula, and incurable.	0.6934546
And you must know the time for the piercing of the abscess that is ripe according to its completion, and that is when the pain is appeased, and the fever subsides, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and the throbbing and the sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs;	It is necessary too to know the time to open fully mature swellings: it is when the pain of the swelling is lessened, the fever departs, the redness and the throbbing are reduced, and the head of the abscess becomes wrinkled, with other signs.	0.749051
and you should make the perforation in the most dependent place of the abscess, and where it appears soft;	The perforation should be made in the lower part of the swelling if possible, so that the pus may more easily drain downwards; or else in the thinnest and most swollen part of the swelling.	0.575452
and the perforation should be along the length of the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints and near nerves and arteries, and in all similar places where there is no bending. In those that bend, along the length of that limb.	Your incision should be longitudinal if the swellings are in such places as hands or feet or in the site of joints, tendons, nerves, or arteries; and, in short, in all flat places where there is no curvature. In curved places let the perforation proceed according to the place.	0.81747985
And when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said.	But when the swelling is in the fleshy parts it is best to leave the perforation, as we have said, until it is fully matured.	0.8044036
For if you pierce it before that, the body of the poison will be elongated, and it is full of much filth; and perhaps the edges and the depths of it will harden.	For if you perforate it prematurely the sanious discharge will go on longer and will be excessively foul; and often both the edges and the depths of the opening will become indurated.	0.7425795
And there are some abscesses that are pierced along the width of the body, according to what the limb requires.	Some swellings are perforated latitudinally if necessary, or having regard to the requirement of the part.	0.50805974
And you must manage, with small abscesses, small openings; and with large abscesses, large openings, and many incisions according to the size of the abscess;	In small swellings you should use a single perforation; while in large ones you should use wide or multiple perforations according to the size of the swelling.	0.60255575
and there are some abscesses where it is necessary to shave the core and cut; when it has become yellow like a cloth, and is dead, one must do as one does with buboes:	There are also some swellings that need a circular incision of the skin, and should be cut when they have become like a rag, and necrosed —which actually happens often in abscesses and sinuses.	0.598891
and there are some that are split into three angles, and there are some that are cut like a myrtle leaf, like abscesses of the groin;	And there are some that should be incised triangularly; and others with an incision of myrtle-leaf form; e.g. a tumour on the groin.	0.7812295
and there are some where a round cut is made, and other cuts and similar incisions.	There are others again to which should be applied circular and lunate and similar incisions.	0.69922316
Those that have no head, such as a soft superficial abscess, you must pierce completely;	Those that have no head, such as the smooth and flat ones, should be incised with only a simple perforation.	0.67612576
and when the abscess is large, and it has collected a lot of pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus at that time, but draw out a part; then plug the abscess until the next day, then draw out some more again; do this many times, little by little, until all the pus comes out;	When a swelling is large and has collected a large quantity of pus, and you perforate it, do not be in a hurry to get it all out at once; but get some of it out and then bandage it till another day; then again remove part of the pus; and so do, again and again, gradually, till it is all got out.	0.9184499
especially if the patient is of weak constitution, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or a decrepit old man. For the spirit sometimes leaps out with the exit of the pus, so that by chance the patient dies, and you do not perceive it.	This particularly applies if the patient be in a weak state, or a pregnant woman, or a baby, or a decrepit old man; for the animal spirit is very often dissolved with the sudden evacuation of the pus, and the patient dies unexpectedly.	0.8611816
Therefore avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, wipe the wound and see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a full incision, then administer tents of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, then you must put a tent in each one so that they come against each other;	Be very careful therefore, with this sort. Then, after you have opened the tumour, you should cleanse the wound and consider: if the tumour has only a small opening, or it is one simple incision, employ swabs of lint or cotton wool; but if it is a large tumour with multiple incisions, introduce a swab into each incision so that they meet.	0.81382143
and if you have cut into the abscess a part of the skin, and you have lifted it around, then you must fill it with old cotton or lint from linen cloths without moisture, and tie it up until the third day;	And if the tumour was such that you cut away a part of the skin, or sliced the tumour, you will need to pack it with cotton wool or plucked linen, dry; and bandage until the third day.	0.8307367
then remove it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.	Then remove it and treat with the needful ointments until healed.	0.8257597
And if bleeding occurs during your work, then administer cold water and vinegar, and wet a cloth, and place it on the bleeding area several times.	If a haemorrhage occurs while you are operating, use cold water and vinegar, soaking a lint rag in both and frequently applying it to the place.	0.79532814
And if the bleeding continues, administer treatment and care, and the powders that I have mentioned in many places in this book, and if it is in winter, and the area where the abscess is located is very sensitive, then you must put on tents and cloths soaked in warm wine and oil;	And if the bleeding still persists then it is necessary to employ the method and the treatment and the powders that we have prescribed in many parts of this book and in their own sections. Now if this should be in winter and the site of the tumour abound in nerves, you should have some pads soaked in hot wine and oil and then apply to the place.	0.80272955
and if it is in summer, and the area is fleshy, you should apply cloths soaked in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said;	But if it be in summer and the parts be fleshy, apply the pads soaked in water and oil, or wine and oil, all being cold, till the third day, as we have said.	0.85791194
and then open the abscess and drain it and treat it, as appropriate, until it is healed.	Then unbandage the tumour and wipe it and give it the treatment suitable to it, until cured.	0.81796503
And this should be universally understood in the treatment of abscesses:	This is the information you need about the treatment of tumours in general.	0.5172365
Now I have told you how one should proceed in the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.	As for the particulars, I now review the way to treat each tumour, by chapters, in detail.	0.6040188

chapter-2-subchapter-41.txt
In the head small abscesses arise, and they are like knots which are in webs, like the wattles of a hen, and there are many that are similar.	Small swellings form in the scalp, which are of the various kinds of cyst, contained within membranes which form a capsule to them like the crop of a chicken. There are many kinds of these.	0.7482485
There are some of them fat and some in which there is moisture like pus;	There are fatty ones, there are those containing a liquid resembling black slime, there are those containing a liquid resembling porridge and gruel and the like, while others are stony hard.	0.65417373
and there are some which are hard and stony to cut, and there is no danger unless an artery interferes.	It is not dangerous to open and extract any of them, so long as you do not encounter an artery in excising them.	0.53933823
And the work of the cutting is that you test with an instrument which is called a "probe," the form of which comes hereafter, what thing it contains.	The operation for incising them begins by exploring them with the instrument called an explorer, figured lower down, so as to get to know what sort of contents they have.	0.6034306
For if it contains moisture, then split it lengthwise from above.	If they are the sort that contain fluid, incise them with a simple longitudinal incision, thus.	0.52034473
And when the moisture is emptied, then flay without leaving anything of the skin that contains this moisture, for it always returns if anything is left;	Begin your incision at the letter b, to letter g; and when the humidity is emptied dissect away the capsule containing it, whole, not leaving the least remnant. For often it comes back if any has been left behind.	0.6547
then soak cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is available; if not, in water and salt, and fill the wound with it, and leave it until the next day; and this will corrode what remains of the dead tissue.	Then dip some cotton wool in Egyptian ointment if you have some; if not, in saline; and pack it in the wound and leave till next day, for that will destroy the remains of the capsule.	0.8495528
And then replace the cotton, as before, the second day, and the third, until you know well that none of the dead tissue remains;	Then repeat the cotton wool with Egyptian ointment a second time, or a third if need be, till it is certain there is nothing of the cyst left.	0.5690295
then treat the wound with a suitable ointment, until it is healed.	Then treat the wound with ointments until healed.	0.82330716
And if the abscess holds a core of fatty substance, cut it along its length, in this way; and insert your hooks, and peel it away on all sides, and put all your effort into drawing out the covering where it lies;	If the tumour contains a fatty cyst, incise thus, a cruciform incision; then hook up the edges of the incision, dissect away every direction, and strive to extract the containing capsule.	0.7679732
and if the artery gives you trouble, do what I told you afterwards.	If you should come across an artery, deal with it in the manner already described.	0.49703914
And do the same with the abscess if it is stony, both in cutting and treating it as I have told you.	Carry out the same manner of incision and treatment for a stony tumour, just as I have described.	0.6720223
And the incision on a stony abscess, and a moist one, is easier, because they contain little blood. And if some of these abscesses are on the head where there is no moisture, as there was one abscess I cut from the head of an old woman;	It is easier to open a hard tumour, for it has little blood and humidity; and sometimes these tumours on some people's heads have no humidity at all.	0.668049
and I found the abscess like a rough, coarse, and white stone, and it could not be broken; and if one had struck it, one would have made a wound in it like in a stone.	I myself cut down upon a tumour in the head of an elderly woman and I found the tumour as hard as a stone, rough and white, which it was impossible to break, and which if thrown at anyone would have injured him.	0.7239374
In other abscesses occurring on the head, except those that come on the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, the opening should always be at the most dependent place, to allow the pus to drain;	For all tumours arising in the head other than these, such as those which occur in children's heads and those at the root of the ear, make a simple incision. You should always begin your incision from below to allow an easy downward flow for the pus.	0.6729483
and treat them as appropriate.	Then treat with suitable after-treatment.	0.5859984

chapter-2-subchapter-42.txt
Often these abscesses occur in the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes they come elsewhere on the body, and they are numerous and intertwined with each other.	Tumours of this kind often occur in the neck and in the axilla and in the groin; and sometimes in other parts of the body.	0.8056074
And each scrophulous swelling is properly within its own membrane, like the kernel and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and the variations of these scrofulous swellings are many.	Those occurring in the neck are sometimes single and sometimes multiple, one arising from another; and each scrofula is contained in a capsule of its own, like the cysts and tumours of the head that we have described.	0.7192608
and the variations of these scrofulous swellings are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are malignant ones that do not respond to treatment.	There are many kinds of these glands; some are stony, some contain humidities, some are malignant and do not respond to treatment.	0.74375975
In the one that you see to be of good disposition to the touch, and is similar to the color of the body, and movable on all sides and is not near the nerves of the neck nor to the artery nor to the throat, and is not deep;	But those that you find by touch to be benign and are of a colour not greatly differing from the skin, freely movable in any direction, not adherent to the nerves of the neck nor to a jugular vein, nor to an artery, and are not deep-lying; these should be incised with a simple incision from above downwards, from line g to line b	0.71932995
you should cut it from above, and peel it on each side, and spread the two lips of the core with hooks, if you need them, as we have said for abscesses of the head;	and dissect away all round and draw the edges of the skin apart with one or two hooks or with several if necessary, as we said on the subject of tumours of the head, and draw them out very slowly.	0.7191484
and pull it little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and the spatula should not be sharp or pointed, so that the hand does not slip, and does not go too far, so that you do not cut what you should not.	Be most careful not to cut a blood-vessel or nerve. The scalpel should not be over sharp lest you make the incision too big, or the patient flinches and so you cut open that which does not need cutting.	0.66850954
And if you cut the vein or the artery, and this prevents you from working, put ground vitriol into the wound, or some powders that stop blood, and compress the wound; and leave it until the abscess is calmed, and the wound is softened, and begins to rot.	If you cut a vein or artery and be thus hindered in your operating, apply powdered vitriol or some styptic powder to the wound, and bandage the wound and let be till the worst of the swelling has subsided and the opening is relaxed and threatens to turn purulent; for then the bleeding will stop.	0.85005957
And when the blood is stopped, return to your work, until you have completed it;	Then return to your operation and finish it.	0.46701473
then search with your index finger if any small scrofulas remain, then cut and clean them.	Then feel with your forefinger to see if there are any small glands left, in which case dissect and clean them away.	0.84162605
And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, you should not cut this scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it fall off by itself, without harm;	If there is a large blood-vessel at the root of the gland, then you should not cut that gland at its root but should ligature it with a strong double ligature and leave it till it sloughs away of its own accord without harm.	0.7549829
then fill the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then treat it.	Then pack the wound with cotton wool previously soaked in Egyptian ointment; then continue dressing.	0.84747565
And if you cut the entire scrofula, you must bring the two edges of the wound together, and sew them immediately, then make sure there is no excess remaining due to the size of the scrofula. you must take care to cut the root of it, and draw out fire, and sew it as we have said.	If you excise the whole gland, you should at once draw together the two edges of the wound and suture them, when you are absolutely certain there is nothing of it left. But if you see that, on account of the size of the scrofula, there is still some superfluity left behind, you should carry the incision to the root and base of it, and employ suturing and the rest of the remedies mentioned.	0.77451664
you must take care to cut the root of it, and draw out fire, and sew it as we have said. Those scrofulas that contain excess fluid, pierce them where they appear ripe;	The glands that contain humidities you should open with a single perforation where they seem to have matured; make your perforation from below, as we have said.	0.6042623
and pierce it like the one mentioned before, downwards, then apply tents with ointment and similar things, so that it dissolves what remains of the corrupted matter; and when the wound is well cleaned, then treat it with ointment generating flesh, until it is healed.	Then after opening use swabs soaked in Egyptian and similar ointments to do away with the unhealthy remains, till you see that the wound is clean; then dress with nourishing ointments until healed.	0.66215026

chapter-2-subchapter-43.txt
The ancients spoke and discussed the incision of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their words.	The Ancients mentioned this laryngeal incision, but I have not seen anyone in our parts who has done it. Now here is the gist of what they say.	0.80724794
For those who have quinsy, it is necessary that the opening of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be avoided; and that no help be given by this, because all the veins and the lung of the patient are [affected] in those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or in the throat or in the two tonsils.	Incision should be avoided in those suffering from quinsy, for they will not benefit from it, since all the passages and the lung will be diseased.	0.6437112
When the illness is in the trachea of the lung, it is necessary to cut the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.	But in those with an abscess in the mouth, throat, or tonsils, and when there is no disease in the windpipe itself, you must employ laryngotomy to avoid the mischief of suffocation.	0.430624
It is necessary, then, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it below three or four rings, a small transverse incision, between the two rings or by the amount of the incision of the uvula, but not in the cartilage;	Now when we wish to undertake this we should incise the larynx under the third or fourth ring of the windpipe with a small incision transversely between two rings, so that the incision may be through the membrane, not the cartilage.	0.722494
and this place is suitable for the incision of the epiglottis because there is no flesh there, and the vessels are far from there.	This spot is suitable for incision, for it is deficient in flesh, and there are no blood-vessels near.	0.6729596
And if the practitioner is fearful, it is necessary that he stretch the skin of the throat with the hook, then cut the flesh until he reaches the trachea; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see anything, and then cut the uvula, as we have said;	If the practitioner be nervous, he must stretch the skin of the throat with a hook, then cut down through the skin till he reach the windpipe, and avoid blood-vessels if he see any. Then let him incise the membrane which we have spoken of.	0.85125077
and it is demonstrated by the expulsion of phlegm from the trachea which jumps out through the place that is opened, and by the loss of voice;	You can be certain of having opened the trachea by the emission of phlegm when it is pierced, and by the loss of voice.	0.6503569
and leave the wound open for a while.	Then leave the wound open for some while.	0.82290745
And when the time has passed during which strangulation is feared, bring together the two lips of the wound of the flesh, and sew it alone without the cartilage;	When the danger of suffocation is passed, bring the two lips of the wound together by the skin, which alone must be sutured, without the cartilage.	0.699692
then administer medicines that promote the growth of flesh, until it is healed.	Then use medicaments stimulating granulation till healed.	0.7220174
Albucasis says that one should not do this until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged near death, and lacks breath. Then one cuts the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death;	The author of this book says, the interpretation of this account that we have given is this: when they see that one of the tumours that they mention has obstructed the patient's throat and he is approaching death and is anxious himself to be incised, they resort to laryngotomy so that the patient may breathe somewhat through the wound and his life be saved.	0.57433903
and for this reason the ancients instructed to leave the wound open until the danger of the illness has passed, and it passes in three or four days. And then they instructed to sew the wound and treat it, until it was healed;	They bid leaving the wound open till the worst of the disease abates; its height will last about three days; then they bid sew up the wound and dress till healed.	0.7333014
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw a young woman take a knife, and stick it in her throat, and cut part of the channels of the lung;	My own experience was this: a slave-girl seized a knife and buried it in her throat and cut part of the trachea; and I was called to attend her.	0.7084713
and I was called to treat her, and found her as if dead.	I found her bellowing like a sacrifice that has had its throat cut.	0.50290275
I uncovered the wound, and found the blood which had come out, and knew well that she had not cut a vein or any vessel but the throat, and the wind was coming out through the wound.	So I laid the wound bare and found that only a little haemorrhage had come from it; and I assured myself that neither the jugular vein nor an artery had been cut, but air passed out through the wound.	0.8162047
I hurried, and sewed the wound, and treated it until it was healed;	So I hurriedly sutured the wound and dressed it until healed.	0.7407402
and nothing happened to the young woman except that her voice was hoarse, and later returned to normal;	And no ill befell the maid except for a hoarseness in the voice, but nothing more; and after some days she was restored to the best of health.	0.69075716
therefore I say that in cutting the epiglottis there is no need for fear.	Hence we may say that laryngotomy is not dangerous.	0.5147906

chapter-2-subchapter-44.txt
This abscess is called "throat hernia," and it is a large abscess the color of soot, and is very common in women;	This tumour which is called 'Elephant of the throat' is a large tumour of the colour of the body; it commonly occurs in women.	0.7500137
and it is of two kinds: natural, and accidental;	It is of two kinds, congenital and acquired.	0.7124466
in the natural one there is no trick/deceit.	As to the congenital, there is no treatment for it.	0.4570793

chapter-2-subchapter-45.txt
There are many kinds of lumps, of which I will describe all the appearances;	There are various kinds of cyst. We have already mentioned all their varieties in the proper place.	0.5668467
and now I must explain all the differences between a lump and an ulcer.	But we need here to set forth the difference between a cyst and an abscess, for it is complicated.	0.5770397
I say that an ulcer involves heat and persistent fever, until the boiling is over, and the suppuration is complete; then the fever and heat subside.	The abscess will be accompanied by heat and fever and fearsome pain, until the boiling-up of the superfluous matter settles down and the suppurating process is completed: then will the fever and intensity subside.	0.7726456
With a lump there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a syfac, which is its own sac and is the same color as the body, and begins like a bean and grows large;	But with a cyst there is neither heat nor fever nor pains, and a membranous capsule encloses it, its own particular covering.	0.62384963
and there are two types, either fatty or moist, and of many colors as I have said in the division.	The cyst is flesh-coloured, and it begins like a pea and becomes like a melon, more or less; and is of two kinds: either fatty or containing humidity; and the colours of the humidities are several, as we mentioned in the appropriate section.	0.6082221
It is necessary, when you come to treat the lump, that you first examine and probe it with the instrument called "probe", according to the form which will come in the chapter that follows.	When you come to treat the cyst, you should first sound it and examine it with the instrument called the explorer, which is figured in the next chapter.	0.7729472
And the way to examine the abscesses of the lumps is that you take the most moist place that you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little, until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, provided that it is according to the size of the abscess;	The way to examine all tumours and cysts is to take this instrument and press it in at the spot where the tumour is softest, and revolve it gently with your fingers till you know you have pierced the skin; then press it in proportionately to the size of the tumour.	0.712824
then withdraw the probe, and pay attention to what comes out.	Then remove the explorer and see what comes out after it.	0.7889093
If a thin, flowing moisture comes out, note what color it is, and smell it as I have said of other abscesses;	If a humidity should flow, whatever the colour, make a simple incision, as I said for the other tumours.	0.6555108
and if no moisture comes out after the probe, know that it is fatty, then cut it crosswise, and take it with forceps, and peel it gently from each side and watch the skin in which it lies so that you pull it out whole with the lump;	But if no humidity come out along the track of the explorer you know at once that it is fatty. Therefore make a cruciform incision upon it in this shape, as I have told you, and attach hooks and dissect away the skin gently from all sides. Be careful with the capsule; if you can, get it out whole, together with the cyst.	0.7265972
and if you cannot pull it out whole, then pull it out in pieces so that nothing remains.	But if the capsule is torn in the course of the operation, and you cannot get it out whole, which frequently happens, remove it bit by bit until there is none of it left.	0.5828304
For if anything remains, the lump will return many times;	For if a part of it is left behind, either great or small, the cyst will generally return.	0.58638334
and if a little remains, and the blood troubles you, then fill the wound with some sharp corrosive powders, and constrict the wound, and apply soothing things for a hot abscess, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed;	If it defeats you and some little piece of it remain, pack the wound, when you have done all you can, with some caustic powder and bandage it and put on it something to ease the inflamed tumour, and treat in the usual way until healed.	0.72401905
and if the lump is large, then sew the two lips of the wound, and treat it with that which generates flesh.	If the tumour be large, sew the edges of the incision together and treat with stimulants.	0.60672605
And if the pulsating vein or other [vessel] hinders you, then hurry and fill the area with crushed vitriol, and leave it there for two or three days, until the wound rots, and the boiling of the blood subsides; then return to cutting what remains of the lump.	If you should come across a blood-vessel, pulsating or not, and there be haemorrhage, hasten to pack it with pounded vitriol; and leave bandaged for two or three days until the wound becomes purulent and the boiling-up of the blood is allayed; then resume cutting open the rest of the cyst.	0.859479

chapter-2-subchapter-46.txt
Here are the forms of the intermediary instruments, and they are of three types:	There are three varieties of this instrument, large, medium, and small.	0.6221919
large and medium and small;	There are three kinds of this, too: large, medium, and small.	0.6337413
large, medium, and small, to probe the abscesses of a fistula;	Figure of the large probe. Figure of the medium probe. Figure of the small probe. They are suitable for exploring tumours, wounds, fistulas, and sinuses, to see what is inside them such as bones, etc.	0.5655907
and they are like the needles with which one sews wounds, and they are of yellow brass, or of iron, or of silver, and the yellow ones are worth more, and those made of black lead are better tested for probing the curvature of a fistula;	They are made round, polished, and smooth, like packing-needles, of Chinese copper or of white copper, or of brass, silver, or iron. The best are those made of white copper. Sometimes probes are made of black lead, for investigating fistulas whose deeper course is devious; so that by reason of their softness they can adapt themselves to the curves.	0.72691506
and they are of three types: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the width of the openings.	Of these, too, there are three varieties: the long, the medium, and the short, proportioned to the requirement of the depth of every fistula.	0.73383427
The shapes of the hooks are of many resemblances, as you see here:	Figures of hooks. There are many kinds of hook.	0.53908265
large, medium, and small;	For example, there are the simple hooks, that is, having only one prong; there are three kinds of this: large, medium, and small.	0.48431423
and there are hooks that have two curves of three types also;	And there are the hooks provided with two prongs, of which there are three kinds.	0.7595421
and there are hooks that have three curves, and they are also of three types;	And there are the bent hooks with two prongs, of which there are three kinds.	0.78271794
and there are hooks that have two curves, and hooks of only one curve, and they are of three types;	And there are the hooks provided with three prongs, of which there are three kinds.	0.6889646
and all of these are necessary in their place.	All of these kinds are necessary in their place.	0.7733014
The heads of these with which one cuts are sharp, and of such there are some that do not cut except on one side, with which one flays the sinews, so that one does not cut the vein or the nerve;	The cutting edges should be sharp, and the other ends blunt. The reason for making them like this is so that they can be utilized in dissecting away cysts where there is a fear of cutting a vein or nerve, and also that the patient may console himself thereby and find some small relief from the pain involved in the dissection of a tumour.	0.5770916
and of these inserters are the lancets placed in handles, so that the patients do not perceive them during the opening of abscesses;	Figures of the scalpels which are hidden between the fingers when tumours are to be opened, so that they are not noticed by the patient.	0.6718149
and they are of three types:	They are of three varieties: large, medium, and small.	0.6683436
large, small, and medium, as you see;	There are three kinds: large, medium, and small.	0.6350866
and they are used only in fleshy places, such as legs, and arms, and breasts, and the groin, and in similar places;	But they are not to be used for suppressing haemorrhage in all parts of the body, but only in the fleshy parts such as the calf and thigh muscles, the arm muscles, the breasts, belly, and groin, and other similar fleshy soft parts.	0.6602405
and sometimes another small instrument is made, resembling pistachio shells, according to this shape, with which blood is stanched:	Sometimes of this class small instruments, like nutshells, are made, like this.	0.5643478
and it is sometimes placed at the site that heals by severing veins, and arteries, and sometimes they are round according to this large form:	Haemorrhage from a venesection is stopped by these; or in the case of a cut artery or vein. Sometimes round ones are made, like this.	0.6638283

chapter-2-subchapter-47.txt
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, so much so that they resemble women's breasts;	The breasts of some males may swell on attaining puberty so as to resemble the female breast, and they remain permanently swollen and ugly.	0.70931154
and they remain unsightly and swollen, and whoever wants to treat them, must cauterize them according to this shape from this line b. down to g.: then scrape away the fat, and fill the wound with medicine generating flesh, then bring together the two lips of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healed;	If this is abhorrent, a semicircular incision should be made on the breast, like this figure, from b to g. Then dissect away all the fatty tissue and pack the wound with a cicatrizing compound and sew the lips together and dress until healed.	0.62343717
and if the breast droops down and is softened by its size as happens with women, then split it into two parts from above, with two similar incisions; of which one is connected to the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line b. down to line g.; then scrape the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, until it is healed;	But if the breast is pendulous and flabby on account of its size, as happens with women, you should make two semicircular incisions on the upper side, the ends joining one another, in such wise that the longer incision encircles the other like this, from b to g. Then dissect away the skin between the two incisions and remove the fat and sew up as we have described; and apply styptic powder and the necessary dressings until healed.	0.8353977
and if it is not healed, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or because of the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment; and leave it until it consumes the remainder and the fat, then treat it until it is healed.	But if you cannot make the incision as full and perfect as it ought to have been, because the patient is restless, or because haemorrhage arises, you should pack the wound with cotton wool soaked in corrosive ointment and leave till it eats away the remainder of the fat; then dress until healed.	0.87163097

chapter-2-subchapter-48.txt
These abscesses that come under the armpits are kinds of hard scrofula where there are ribs, and some contain moisture.	These tumours under the armpit are of the type of scrofulous tumours, hard, enclosed in a capsule. Some contain humidity.	0.7921073
Those then that contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line b. down to line g.: And when all the pus that is in the abscess is emptied, then fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with a suitable ointment until it is healed.	Those that contain humidity should be opened with a semicircular incision like this, from b to g. When you have removed all the pus that had been in the tumour, pack the wound with teased-out cotton wool and leave till another day. Then remove the cotton wool and dress with a suitable ointment until healed.	0.7717253
And if the abscess is similar to scrofula, then cut it as we have said in the cutting of scrofula, and if the wound produces pus, then administer a cautery as we have said before.	If the tumour be of the nodular scrofulous kind, cut directly down on it just as we prescribed for that kind. If the wound continue to discharge pus, apply the cautery to it as prescribed before.	0.72793245

chapter-2-subchapter-49.txt
When the artery is ruptured, and the skin over it is closed, an abscess often forms, and the same happens with a swollen and abscessed vein;	When an artery is injured and the overlying skin scars, a tumour very often arises from this; the same thing happens to a vein: a swelling and a tumour.	0.81152254
and it is recognized as being from the artery because the abscess is long and deep; and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel a tightness;	And these are the signs by which you may diagnose whether the swelling and tumour arise from an artery or a vein: if it be from an artery the tumour will be a deep and elongated mass; and when you press upon it with your finger there will be a feeling of pulsation.	0.68144405
and when it is from the vein, redness from the outside is apparent;	But if it arises from a vein the swelling will be circular and superficial.	0.471403
and it is foolish to cut open this abscess, especially when it is under the armpits, in the groin, or on the neck, and in many other places, and is very large. It is therefore necessary to avoid the iron cure, and the one at the head must also be avoided, and in the one that is a swelling of an artery, make an incision along the length above the skin;	It is dangerous to make an incision on tumours of this kind, specially in the axilla, the groin, the neck, and in many other parts of the body; it is indeed highly dangerous, so in these you must avoid treatment by the knife; also in those in the limbs and in the head it must be avoided.	0.7838292
then open the incision with hooks, and carefully separate the artery from the tissues until it is exposed;	But any such that arises from the inflation of the mouth of an artery, you may cut down in the skin over that with a longitudinal incision; then open up your incision with hooks and dissect away the artery, freeing it from the tissues till it is laid bare.	0.52831143
then place a needle under it, and make it pierce through to the other side, and tie off the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples;	Then run a needle beneath the artery to reach the other side, and tie the artery in two places with a double thread, as I showed you for the extraction of the temporal arteries.	0.7856021
then puncture the area between the two ties with a lancet so that the blood that is there comes out, and the abscess is drained;	Then with the scalpel prick the part between the two ligatures to let out all the blood and get the tumour down.	0.7722147
then administer the treatment that causes healing by suppuration, until the ligatures fall off; then treat it with a suitable ointment, until it is healed;	Then apply dressings to excite suppuration until the ligatures fall away; then dress with suitable ointments until healed.	0.8346311
and if the abscess is because of the cutting of the vein, then you must hold in your hand as much of the abscess as you can, along with the skin, then put the needle under the place that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce through, and have a double thread there, so that you pull it to the other side; then tie off the abscess, as I told you, with a ligature on one of the two sides with the two ends of the thread;	If the swelling be due to a vein that has been penetrated, you should gather up with your hand as much of the tumour as you can, together with the skin; then pass a needle beneath the place which you have grasped in your hand and run it through, threaded with a double thread, until it emerges at the other side; then with it tie a strong ligature round the swelling as I mentioned to you on ligaturing the swollen uvula, from either side, with the ends of the thread.	0.88259375
and if you are worried that the thread might come out, then put another needle with a thread under the whole abscess at the incision point of the first needle, and secure the threads in four places;	If you fear that the threads may come loose, pass a second needle and thread beneath the whole tumour to intersect with the passage of the first needle; and tie your threads in four places.	0.8113563
then cut the abscess so that the excess comes out, then cut the excess flesh and leave what is tied;	Then incise the tumour in the centre to extract the contents. Then cut away the superfluous skin and leave what has been ligatured.	0.6957167
then put on a cloth moistened with wine and oil, then administer treatments with tents and ointments until it is healed.	Then put on that a pad previously soaked in wine and oil; then apply the treatment with lint and ointments until healed.	0.91826934

chapter-2-subchapter-50.txt
Just as abscesses occur in the artery and in the vein, abscesses occur in the nerves when they are injured, or by excessive work, and similar things.	As a tumour arises on an artery or a vein, so may it also come in a tendon when it has been bruised; or it may arise from excessive fatigue, or such causes.	0.7796098
And this occurs more often in the shoulders and in the fingers and in all places where there are joints, and it is a serious abscess, and its color resembles the color of the body, and it is in several forms without pain;	This occurs mostly at the wrists, at the heel, and at all sites of articular movement.	0.5280211
and when it is pressed firmly, the patient feels pain, and it is not deep in the body, but under the skin;	It is a hard tumour of the same colour as the rest of the body, and is generally painless, and when strong pressure is put upon it the patient has a numb feeling in it. It is a tumour that does not form in the deeper tissues but is subcutaneous.	0.6093174
and moves easily in all directions, and goes neither forward nor backward, nor below nor above, and the one that is in the joints should not be cut with iron: by chance, contraction would occur there; and the one that is on the head or on the forehead, cut the skin with a spatula.	It is freely movable laterally, but will not go forward or backward. Those that are situated on joints should certainly not be tackled with the knife, for that often causes palsy.	0.61017877
and the one that is on the head or on the forehead, cut the skin with a spatula. If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers/forceps and cut it at its root;	Incise the skin of those occurring on the head or forehead, and if the tumour be small take hold of it with the forceps and cut it away by the root.	0.74404645
and if it is large, suspend it with a hook, and peel it, then remove it and bring the wound together with stitching, and treat it until it is healed.	But if it be large, catch it up with a hook and dissect it away and remove it; and sew up the incision and dress until healed.	0.8230282

chapter-2-subchapter-51.txt
Sometimes a thelul occurs in the belly and nowhere else, and it is a disease which is called "fungus" because of its resemblance to them, and its root is thin, and its head large;	Some people often get warts on the belly and on the rest of the body, called fungous warts, because of their resemblance to fungi.	0.6052642
and there are some small and some very large;	They have a slender pedicle and a broad head, the edges of which are sometimes inverted ; and some are small, whereas others of them grow very big.	0.6088499
and I saw a man who had two in his belly that looked more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and they had a slender root, and they had already split open, and moisture constantly flowed from them.	I myself once saw a man who had two warts on his belly that looked more like fungi than anything else; they were white and had thin pedicles. Their edges were inverted and had split open, and a humour flowed continually from them.	0.8347211
I cut them out and found in one eighteen ounces in weight, and in the other six and a half, and the procedure for the incision is that you consider if the patient is moist/phlegmatic, and the color of the growth is white and moist and with a thin root; then cut it with a wide spatula, and have the fire cauteries ready at hand.	I amputated them both and weighed them: one came to about eighteen ounces, and the other six ounces. This is the operation for amputating them: examine the patient carefully, and if he be of a humid temperament and the colour of the warts be white, and if they are soft, with a thin stalk, amputate them with a broad scalpel.	0.77519006
then cut it with a wide spatula, and have the fire cauteries ready at hand. For during the cutting, excessive bleeding often occurs, and if the blood overcomes you, then hurry to cauterize;	But you should also have at hand cauteries in a fire; for often in amputating them there is much haemorrhage. So, if the bleeding be a hindrance to you, be quick and cauterize them.	0.72918826
and if you see the patient frightened and afraid of the incision with the iron, then take a well-made lead wire, and tie off the growth as we have said, and leave it for two days;	On the other hand if you see that the patient is frightened and dreads the cutting of them with the scalpel, take a wire of stout lead, and ligature this type of wart and leave for two days.	0.6781812
and then tighten it, and do not stop tightening the lead wire until it cuts through the growth, and it falls off by itself without difficulty;	Then increase the stricture by the lead wire and go on doing this as it sinks into the wart, until the wart is cut through and spontaneously falls away with no trouble.	0.7011316
and if the roots are large, be careful when cutting, especially near the abdomen, but you can safely cut away half of it, then cauterize it so it does not grow back;	But if the warts have stout pedicles there is some risk and fear in the cutting of them, especially those that occur on the belly. Sometimes, however, you can cut away the half, or some part, and then cauterize to prevent recurrence.	0.63043404
then treat the wound, and be careful not to cut the swelling which has a pale color and little feeling and a milky appearance.	Then dress until the wound is healed. But beware of trying to cut away growths that are dark in colour, with little sensation and hideous in appearance, for they are cancerous tumours.	0.6774092
For this is a cancerous abscess, and I will come to the treatment of cancer later.	I shall soon be mentioning cancer.	0.4221906

chapter-2-subchapter-52.txt
when the intestine protrudes outside If the appearance of the intestine comes from a cauterized wound or a ruptured syfac (intestinal abscess/fistula), and it is on the abdomen and some of the intestines protrude, as it happens in other ruptures, or from blood flowing from veins or arteries depending on what is in front, or from flatulence;	On the treatment of protruding navel. The navel becomes prominent from many causes; either from a rupture of the peritoneum over the abdomen, so that omentum or intestine comes through it as in other ruptures; or from blood extravasation from an artery or vein, as we have mentioned; or else from wind trapped in it.	0.70377827
and if it is through the rupture of the syfac and through the exit of the intestine, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and it appears with various openings. And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then it is more varied, and when one presses it with their fingers, it withdraws, and then returns, and perhaps it is constricted, and greatly enlarges upon entering the bath and from strong exertion.	If it be due to ruptured peritoneum and protruding omentum, the colour of the tumour will be the same as the rest of the body; it will be soft and painless and will seem to change its position; But if it be due to an escape of bowel the change of position, compared with what we have described, will be greater, and it will disappear on digital pressure, and then will recur; and often there will be crepitus with it, and it will increase in size on entering the bath or on violent exertion.	0.7416496
And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and it is readily apparent when you press it with your hand, and it is not constricted;	If it be due to fluid, it will be soft and will not disappear on manual pressure, nor will it grow larger or smaller.	0.5209832
and if it is due to blood, the abscess appears by these signs: large and hard, and fixed in a certain area; and if it is due to flatulence, it is soft to the touch, and the task is to see if the appearance is due to blood from an artery, or a vein, or flatulence.	If it be due to blood, then in addition to these signs the tumour will appear blackish. If it arise from a fleshy overgrowth, the tumour will be solid and hard, remaining always constant in bulk. If it be due to wind, it will be soft to the touch.	0.67143816
and if it is due to flatulence, it is soft to the touch, and the task is to see if the appearance is due to blood from an artery, or a vein, or flatulence. Then you must abandon the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, concerning the artery and the vein.	If it be due to wind, it will be soft to the touch. The operation for these is to examine, and if the exomphalos be due to arterial or venous blood, or wind, you should withhold treatment since it is dangerous in these cases, with an uncertain outlook, as I taught you in the chapter on tumours arising from an artery or vein.	0.7725486
And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the bowel, then you must instruct the patient to hold their breath, and lie stretched out straight, then mark with ink all around the swelling; then have them lie face down between your hands, then go around the area you marked with the spatula, then spread half of the abscess above with the large hook; then tie it around with a strong thread, or a cord of strong silk firmly, and let the knot of the tie be loose;	But if it be due to bowel or omentum, bid the patient hold his breath and stand stiffly upright; then make an ink mark all round the umbilicus; then tell him to lie on his back before you; then with a broad scalpel cut all round the umbilicus along the line marked out; then draw up the middle of the tumour with a large hook; then ligature the site of the incision with a strong thread or silk cord, tying it securely with a slip-knot.	0.88836837
then open the half of the abscess spread over the tie, and put your index finger in it, and search for the intestine; if you find it caught in the tie, untie it, and push the intestine back inside the belly;	Then open the middle of the tied tumour above the ligature and insert your forefinger and search for the bowel; and if you find it caught in the ligature slacken the slip-knot and push the bowel back into the abdomen.	0.88926476
and if you find the swelling, take it with the hook, and cut off the excess;	But if you find omentum, stretch it with a hook and cut off what is superfluous.	0.6293253
and if the artery or vein gives you trouble, go around it carefully, then return to your work and take two needles, and thread two strong threads through them, and place the two needles around what you have done in a cross so that you make them pierce [the tissue];	And if you come across an artery or vein, tie it securely and go on with your work: take two needles and thread them with two strong threads and insert the two needles into the incision that you have made around the tumour, pushing them in so that they cross one another.	0.86667585
then tighten the abscess in four places over the needles, and if you wish, remove the needles, and leave the area until it rots, and the dead flesh falls off by itself; or you cut it when it is thinned and rotted, then treat it as appropriate, and shave the abscess as we have said;	Then ligature the tumour in four places over the needles. If you wish, you may remove the needles and let be until the ligatured tissue necroses and falls away of its own accord; or cut it away when it is thin and necrosing. Then dress with the needful ointments until healed.	0.8426048
or you cut it when it is thinned and rotted, then treat it as appropriate, and shave the abscess as we have said; and remove the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the area appropriately, and suture the area.	Then dress with the needful ointments until healed. But if the prominent navel be due to an overgrowth of flesh there or from humidity, you should slice the tumour as we have said and get out all the blood or humidity to be found there.	0.65993804

chapter-2-subchapter-53.txt
of the canker/ulcer We have spoken in the division about the appearances of a canker/ulcer, and how one should work on it with medicines, and how one should avoid treatment with iron/surgery;	On the treatment of cancer. We have spoken, in the relevant section, of the kinds of cancer and of the way in which medical treatment of them is to be attempted; with a warning against treatment by the knife lest they ulcerate. We also mentioned the cancer arising in the uterus and gave a warning against its treatment.	0.7558191
and we say the canker/ulcer degenerates into necrosis, and great caution is needed in the treatment, and the ancients said that when a canker/ulcer is in a place where it can be scraped, like a canker/ulcer that is in the breasts, and in the thigh, and in similar places, it should be completely removed when it is in the beginning;	We also mentioned the cancer arising in the uterus and gave a warning against its treatment. The Ancients said that when a cancer is in a site where total eradication is possible, such as a cancer of the breast or of the thigh, and in similar parts where complete removal is possible, and especially when in the early stage and small, (then surgery was to be tried).	0.7141006
nor has anyone ever healed one before me.	For I myself have never been able to cure any such, nor have I seen anyone else succeed before me.	0.653306
And the procedure, when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you sometimes purge the patient of black bile;	The procedure in a case amenable to treatment, as we have said, is first for the patient to be purged several times from black bile; then bleed him if his veins seem full.	0.69916487
then have them bled if there is manifest plethora, then prepare the patient in a good place to perform the procedure;	Then put the patient in the most convenient position for operating.	0.5511753
then cast your hooks or pincers, and pull it from all sides, and remove it completely without leaving anything behind;	Then attach to the tumour hooks suited to it; then make a circular incision all round to include the skin with the utmost thoroughness so that not the least root of it remains; let the blood flow and do not stanch it quickly; but put pressure upon the place and squeeze out all the thick blood, either by hand or with any instrument you can.	0.47308016
and let the blood flow freely, and press the area well with your hand or something else, and if the flow of blood prevents you from incising the artery or vein, cauterize it until the bleeding is stopped; then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.	If in operating you get a very severe haemorrhage from cutting an artery or vein, cauterize the vessel until the bleeding stops; then dress in the usual way until healed.	0.62993723

chapter-2-subchapter-54.txt
of dropsy We have already discussed in the division the different types of dropsy, and how the accumulation of water occurs, and the signs of each type, and the treatment that is done with medicines, and that which is treated with iron:	On the treatment of dropsy. We have mentioned in the section the kinds of hydrops, and the manner in which the fluid collects; the signs of each kind; and the medical treatment of them.	0.8489821
and one should not touch with iron in these two types: that is to say, tympanites and ascites, because it is a fatal thing;	But neither the kind called 'tympanites' nor general anasarca are to be treated by operation at all, for that would be fatal.	0.55776936
Therefore, when you treat this type of dropsy which is called "anasarca" with medicines, and the treatment is not effective, then see if the patient is weak, or if they have another illness besides dropsy, such as coughing and diarrhea and similar things; do not touch it with iron, because there is danger;	When you have been trying medical treatment for this kind, for ascites, and your treatment is ineffectual, then consider; and if the patient be in a low state or suffer from other disease beside the ascites, such as cough or diarrhoea or some such, then beware of attempting operative treatment since it will be of uncertain outcome.	0.74598646
and if you see the patient is of strong constitution, and they have no other illness than just dropsy, and they are not too young nor too old, then you should proceed as follows: Lift the patient upright with your hands, and an assistant should press the belly, pushing the water to the lowest part of the abdomen, then take the thorned spatula made in this way: And let it be sharp on both sides. with a point, and yet not so penetrating that it can reach the intestine when inserted, and not be able to wound it;	But if you see that the patient has plenty of strength and suffers under no other complaint beside the dropsy, and is of neither tender nor advanced age, then the operative procedure in this case is for you to place the patient, standing, before you, with an assistant behind him to apply manual pressure to his abdomen and push the fluid down into the pelvis. Then take a pointed scalpel of this shape, sharp along both sides, long, and very sharp at the end like a scalpel, but slightly stubby so that in operating you do not reach the intestines and damage them.	0.8052698
then see if the dropsy originates from near the intestines: then you must cut above the navel three fingers directly below, towards the pubic bone; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, let your incision be three fingers to the left of the navel;	Then consider; and if the dropsy arises from the region of the intestines then you should make an incision three fingers' breadth directly below the umbilicus, above the pubes. If the dropsy arises from disease of the liver, let your incision be three fingers to the left of the umbilicus.	0.91848576
and if it's because of the spleen, let it be on the right, and the patient should not lie on the incision so that the excess fluids don't flow to that weak spot;	If it arises from disease of the spleen, let the incision be three fingers to the right. Moreover, the incision must not be on the side which the patient wishes to lie on, so that the superfluities may not flow to the damaged part.	0.72881067
then pierce all the skin with the instrument, push it in, and lift your hand with the spatula between the skin and the superficial fascia as if skinning, about the size of a fingernail or thereabouts;	Then pierce the skin with the instrument, introduce the instrument into that incision, and bring the scalpel up between the skin and the membrane, as if excoriating, over an area about the size of a fingernail.	0.79192644
then pierce the superficial fascia until the spatula reaches the empty space, and that is the location of the fluid, then pull it out, and insert this instrument of which here is the form: And it is similar to a thin silver tube, and it is made of light brass or bronze, and has a small hole in the lower part; and on one side, three holes; and two on the other side, and one on the other;	Then pierce through the membrane till the scalpel reaches a cavity, which will be where the water is; then withdraw the scalpel and put into the opening the instrument shaped like this; it resembles a fine section of reed, made of silver, bronze or white copper; smooth and well polished, with a small opening at the lower end and three at the sides, two on one side and one on the other, as you see.	0.856156
and the head is cut like a pen, and this is the shape of the incision with which the scribe cuts the pen:	Its extremity may be cut to the shape of a writing reed like this; the upper end of it is supplied with a ring.	0.63245916
at the top is the wing, so that when the instrument comes to the point, it immediately descends onto the instrument;	When the instrument reaches the fluid, the fluid will at once pass down into it.	0.5828128
then empty half or a third, for if you empty more than is necessary at that time, perhaps the patient will die from the release of his spirit from the soul, or he will faint, or he will approach death;	Evacuate at one time only a moderate amount of fluid; for if you evacuate more than you should at a time, the patient may die through a dissolution of his animal spirits, or he will undergo a fainting that is next door to death.	0.6734175
but empty it according to the quantity of his strength, and according to what the dispositions of the patient's strength indicate, and his pulse;	But let out such quantity of fluid as is proportionate to his strength and as is indicated to you by the patient's condition: the strength of his pulse and the goodness of his colour.	0.7628572
then withdraw the instrument and hold the needle, and it is held immediately by the core that plugs the hole that is on the syfac, of which I have spoken, which you pierce in this way;	Then withdraw the instrument and keep (the rest of) the fluid in. For it will be immediately held back by the skin that closes the opening in the peritoneum, which, as I have told you, must be perforated in that manner.	0.6355
then start the instrument again the next day, if you see the patient tolerating it, and draw out a small amount of fluid;	Then repeat the use of the instrument another day if you see that the patient can tolerate it, and withdraw again a small quantity of fluid.	0.86125195
do this for a few days, and be careful not to drain so much that nothing remains but a small amount of fluid.	And do this daily, watchful and on guard against error, until there is only a trace of fluid left.	0.65663135
And if you are concerned about the patient, and you leave a lot of fluid, treat him with burial in warm sand, and with much sweating or baths and in the sun, and let him abstain from drinking; and treat him with drying medicines until he is healed, and cauterize over the stomach and over the liver and over the spleen after the extraction of the fluid, as I have said before.	But if you are afraid for the patient and leave a large amount of fluids treat him by burying him in hot sand, and by heavy sweating in the bath and in the sun, and letting him go thirsty; while you treat him with drying medicines, till he is well. He should also be cauterized on the abdomen and on the liver and spleen after the paracentesis, as I have previously described.	0.91532195

chapter-2-subchapter-55.txt
Sometimes children are born without an opening in the penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in the right place.	On the treatment of boys born with imperforate urinary meatus; or with the meatus small or not in the proper place. Sometimes a boy is born from his mother's womb with the glans penis not perforate.	0.72198844
So it is necessary to pierce it immediately with a very fine spatula according to this form/method:	So at the moment of his birth you should be quick and make a perforation with a fine scalpel figured thus.	0.6008791
Then put in the opening a fine nail of lead, and tie it and keep it thus for three or four days and when he needs to urinate, the nail should be removed, and let him urinate, and then replace it;	Then put in the opening a slender leaden sound, tie it and keep it in for three or four days. When he wishes to make water, it will be removed and he will do so; then put it back.	0.8030261
He whose opening is small, is treated with the lead nail, as we have said, so it will widen.	The case having too narrow a meatus should be treated with the leaden sound, as we have said, for many days until it is wide enough.	0.5326227
Those who do not have the opening in its proper place are injured, for some are born with the opening at the tip of the penis, so they cannot urinate forward unless they raise their penis up; and cannot procreate because the semen cannot reach the vagina, and this is a bad condition.	In those cases having a misplaced meatus—for example, there are some born with the opening at the edge of the glans so that they cannot make water forwards until the opening of the penis is lifted up by hand, nor can they beget, since the semen cannot reach directly to the uterus, a disorder which is very ugly.	0.7400069
And the method of the procedure is that the patient lies on his back, then you extend the tip of the penis and cut it like the width of a quill, so that the opening falls in the middle, as it should;	The manner of operating in this case is for the patient to lie back; then with your left hand draw out his glans firmly and cut the end of the glans at the place of the meatus with a broad knife or sharp scalpel, as if sharpening a pen, or as if you were whittling something, so that the middle of it protrudes like a glans penis and the opening falls in the middle as it should.	0.6666794
and beware of bleeding which often occurs there, and if it happens, staunch it with something that stops blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.	And beware, in your operating, of haemorrhage, which often happens; meet it with styptics and dress the wound until it heals.	0.7293519

chapter-2-subchapter-56.txt
of pustules of the penis Many times these sores appear on the penis, and it is an appearance of ugly flesh;	These pustules very frequently occur in the urinary meatus and are excrescences of foul tissue.	0.66496056
and some are malignant and some are not malignant; (or, and there are malignant ones and non-malignant ones)	Some are malignant and some are not.	0.63071895
so you should take them with a fine hook, and cut and clean them all, then apply cotton moistened with Egyptian ointment; then treat it with diafinicon ointment until it is healed.	The nonmalignant you should seize with a fine hook and pare away until they are altogether gone; then apply to the place cotton wool soaked in Egyptian ointment; then afterwards dress with Palm ointment until healed.	0.7592751
And if the sore is malignant, of a foul color and suppurating, then you must apply cautery to it.	But when the pustules are malignant, of a dirty colour, for these you should employ the cautery after cutting and scraping them.	0.69479644
When you have cut it, and if the ulcer is at the tip of the penis, and part of it is inside the skin and part outside, you must first remove the ulcer that is inside; and when it is stitched up, then treat the outside.	If the pustules be on the prepuce of an uncircumcized unbeliever and there are some inside the prepuce and some outside, those that are inside should be removed first; and when they are healed over, then treat those outside.	0.78646326
For when you treat it all together, the head of the penis is not protected from being pierced, and blackness and corruption comes into the penis and into the testicle;	For if you deal with both at the same time you are in danger of going through the prepuce. Sometimes there occurs a blackness and necrosis in the testicles and prepuce; then you should scrape away all the black part which looks ready to go necrotic or has already necrosed.	0.58491385
so it is necessary to remove everything that is black and corrupted, then apply a plaster of honey and flour made from pomegranate peel and vetches, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.	Then afterwards smear on the place honey with pounded and sifted pomegranate peel and bitter vetch. Then carry on with the usual treatment until healed.	0.63828254
And if bleeding occurs, apply the lunar cautery in this way:	If haemorrhage set in, cauterize with a lunate cautery figured thus.	0.6154889
The cautery helps with both conditions together: that is, the bleeding and the corruption;	For the cautery serves a twofold purpose, namely against haemorrhage and for a putrefying wound.	0.5497448
and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, you must insert a lead tube into the urethra, and the patient should urinate through it;	If at any time the penis mortifies and goes entirely, you should pass into the urethra a leaden cannula so that the patient can make water.	0.6915872
and when the skin is tight at the head of the penis, which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or it occurs due to a wound or an abscess, then you must peel it back with a pointed instrument, until the ligament is loosened, and the head of the penis is freed on all sides;	As to the adhesion of the glans to the prepuce (which occurs in him who has his prepuce intact, being under no obligation to be circumcized; sometimes too adhesion may occur by reason of a wound or an abscess) you should scrape it with a flat-nosed scalpel until the adhesion is divided and the glans penis is freed all round from the prepuce.	0.7112347
and if it is difficult to separate this, then you must peel it back with a spatula a little from the head of the penis and the skin;	But if the complete separation of the two be difficult then you should dissect away a little of the glans and of the prepuce; for the prepuce is thin, and consequently it is often pierced quickly.	0.5789155
then gently separate the two, and insert a thin linen cloth soaked in cold water, so that it doesn't tighten again.	Separate then between the glans and the prepuce with a piece of fine linen dipped in cold water to prevent further adhesions.	0.682889

chapter-2-subchapter-57.txt
Circumcision is not a separation of continuity like other wounds; however, when we perform this procedure by choice, specifically on children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the most conducive to healing.	Circumcision is nothing but a solution of continuity like other wounds: but as it is a result of our deliberate action, and as it is done particularly to boys, we should plan in this case the very best operation, and the easiest way that leads to safety.	0.80968034
I say that the ancients did not speak of the circumcision of their children, for it was not practiced in their law, and we have only what we have learned through experience.	Now the Ancients made no mention of circumcision in any of their books, since it was not practised in their religion; but it is something we have acquired by experience.	0.69643235
For I have seen the majority of masters and healers perform circumcision around the first day, forcefully, and with a razor;	I have myself seen the common run of practitioners and barbers carry it out with razor and with scissors; they use a spindle-whorl, a ligature of thread, and incision by means of the finger-nail.	0.56938004
thus the skin fled, for there are two layers, and by chance they would cut the upper one and leave the one below. Then it was necessary to cut it again, and the pain was doubled, and during the cleansing, which takes place on the eighth day, the tip of the member is not safe;	For circumcision carried out with the razor is often eluded by the skin; for the skin of the prepuce is of two layers; and often the outer skin is incised and the inner is left intact, so that a second incision is needed, and renewed pain; while when the circumcision is done with a spindle-whorl you are in danger of cutting the tip of the penis, since the tip often goes into the aperture of the whorl.	0.6658758
and during the cleansing of the nail, by chance the iron slips, and they ruin the work, and often they are born such that they do not need cleansing and I have seen it.	As for circumcision by the finger-nail, the nail will often slip off the skin and your operation be spoilt; or the boy's foreskin may be naturally short, for many are born thus, not needing circumcision. I have seen this myself.	0.62327385
Regarding the cleansing which is done forcefully with a linen thread, I have found the experiment to be good, for the threads cut evenly both above and below.	I have seen this myself. Experience has taught me the superiority of circumcision with the scissors and the thread ligature.	0.4570572
For when you squeeze your hand, you cut evenly in a single instant; but the thread must be tightly wrapped around the skin;	For scissors cut evenly, since the upper edge of the scissors is exactly the same as the lower edge; and so, as you compress your hand, thanks to the correspondence of the two blades you cut equally and simultaneously; and you make the girdle of the thread like a wall all round the skin of the tip of the penis: thus no error can occur.	0.6053945
and the way of the first procedure is that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are only tying the thread around the penis, and then you make him happy in all the ways you can;	The manner of operating is first to make the boy, especially if he is one who understands a little, imagine that all you are going to do is tie a ligature on the tip of the penis and leave it for another day.	0.6557673
then have him stand straight between your hands, and hide the threads between your hands or under your feet so that the child cannot see them, nor any of the instruments;	Then amuse him and cheer him as much as you can, according to his intelligence; then stand him upright before you, not sitting; and hide the scissors in your sleeve or under your foot and do not let the boy's eye chance upon that or any other instrument.	0.717719
then put your hand on the penis and blow in the opening, and pull it upwards until the glans of the penis is inside; then clean it well of the dirt that has accumulated there, then tie the marked place with a double thread, then tie it below, a little further down, with another tie;	Then with your hand take hold of the tip of the penis, blow into the foreskin, and draw it back till the glans penis is exposed; then cleanse from it all unclean matter that has collected.	0.7265777
then clean it well of the dirt that has accumulated there, then tie the marked place with a double thread, then tie it below, a little further down, with another tie; and hold it with two fingers by the second tie with the thumb and index finger, and cut between the two ties, then quickly lift the glans and pull the tip of the penis; then let the blood flow little by little, because that is the best; and put powder on it and over the powder a cloth soaked in a mixture of cooked egg yolk diluted with rose water, blended with good fresh rose oil, and leave it on until the next day, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.	Then ligate the indicated place with a double ligature, and a second right round beneath; then take hold at the site of the lower ligature with thumb and forefinger, very firmly, and cut between the ligatures; then quickly push back the skin and draw out the glans penis; then let a little blood flow, for that is all the better and prevents the swelling of the tip of the penis; then wipe it with a piece of soft cloth, then sprinkle on it ashes of dried gourds (this is the best of all that I have tried) or else fine white flour, which is also good; then apply on top of the powders a piece of linen with egg-yolk cooked in rosewater, beaten up with fresh oil of roses of good quality. Leave this on the wound until the following day; then dress it in the usual way till healed.	0.9181314
The two edges should be thin and sharp, and the edges should be as wide as the handle equally:	They should be fiat-nosed, sharp, with no bend in them, and with the pivot tempered ; and the length of the handles should be equal to that of the blades.	0.5578865
Then you must expand it with your fingernail, before the place forms an abscess;	So you should at the start draw it out with your finger-nail before the place swell; then make an even incision.	0.7538239
and cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, hold it with forceps, and then cut it.	And if you are unable to get a hold with your finger-nail then pick it up with a hook and make your incision.	0.6807165
And if it goes beyond three days, and what is under the penis is swollen, leave it until the hot abscess is subsided, and peel it lightly;	If after three days there still remains some inflation and swelling of the part below the tip of the penis, let it be until the effusion subsides, and then gently peel it away and cut it as best you may.	0.7294184
cut it as best you can, and be careful of the part of the penis, it will not harm it at all.	Be careful of the tip of the penis; though if any of the tip is cut away that will do no harm.	0.68425876
Then treat the area with wound-healing powders, as we have described in the section on powders, and if one cuts from the heart excessively, and it goes above, it will not cause harm;	And dress the wound with stimulating medicaments from among the powders that we described in the treatise on powders. Should more of the skin be cut away than necessary and the skin is wrinkled up, that will do no great harm either.	0.68339837
treat it then, as we have said, until it is healed.	Continue such treatment as we have mentioned, until healed.	0.8296206

chapter-2-subchapter-58.txt
of urinary retention	On the treatment of retention of urine.	0.5540809
Urinary retention is caused by a blockage from a stone, or congealed blood, or pus, or dead flesh, or similar things, as we have said in the classification;	Retention of the urine is caused by an obstruction, from a stone or a clot of blood or pus or a fleshy tumour, or similar cause.	0.7603605
and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to a stone which is located at the neck of the bladder, then the patient must be bent over his knees; and his feet should be placed on his back, and extend his belly from the top toward his back, and the patient should hold his breath as much as he can; and then the neck of the bladder is forced to expel the stone upwards, which allows the urine to be released;	When you have carried out treatment in the ways we have prescribed in their place and the urine is not released; and when you see that it is held back by a stone sticking in the neck of the bladder, then you should have the patient down on his knees, squatting; then mount a man on his back to press his abdomen against his back; and let the patient himself hold his breath as tightly as possible; for then pressure will be put on the neck of the bladder to force the stone back and liberate the urine.	0.8476868
and if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction with the instrument called "syringe," of which this is the form:	But if these measures do not free it and the matter is very urgent with the patient, then you should attempt to bring it out with the instrument called a catheter, of which this is the figure.	0.6028303
and it should be made of thin, light silver, shaped like a bird's feather; and the cannula should be a palm and a half long, and thin at the end.	It is made of silver, slender and smooth and hollow like the quill of a bird's feather; as slender as a probe; about a span and a half in length; and with a tiny funnel at the end.	0.8277058
And the way to release the urine is this: you take a double thread, and tie a small piece of wool or cotton to the end, and put the end of the thread inside the syringe;	This is the manner in which you draw off the urine through it: take a double thread and with a strong knot tie a little wool or cotton on the end, introduce the end of the thread into the lower end of the catheter, and trim off with scissors any superfluous wool, so that it will go into the tube and close it like a tassel.	0.78537244
and cut the excess wool and push it up to the end of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg white, and have the patient sit on a seat, and sprinkle the bladder and penis with warm oil and olive oil and lukewarm water;	Then smear the catheter with oil or butter or egg-white. Make the patient sit down; then anoint the bladder and the meatus of the penis with humid oils or with olive-oil and warm water.	0.76544726
then gently insert the syringe into the penis, until it reaches the base of the penis, then bend the penis over towards the buttocks;	Then gently introduce the catheter into the urethra until it reaches the root of the urethra. Then turn the end of the penis upward toward the umbilicus; then push the catheter inwards until the curve of the catheter ends, and push the catheter in until it reaches nearly to the seat.	0.78576124
then push the syringe forward to the bladder, and the patient will feel it reach the empty space, and this is not done according to this order except because the passage where it goes is twisted;	Then turn the penis down, with the catheter in it, and push until it reaches the bladder, and the patient now feels that it has entered a hollow. The reason why the operation is done in this manner is that the passage by which the urine is excreted is curved.	0.69409984
then pull the thread with the wool little by little, and the urine will follow the wool, then pull it out, and let the urine flow;	Then withdraw rather firmly the thread with the wool plug attached, for the urine follows the wool; then pull it right out and the urine will pour out.	0.79328144
and reinsert the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is relieved.	Apply the catheter again and again until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.	0.8056103

chapter-2-subchapter-59.txt
When excoriations or blood appear in the bladder, or pus has collected there, and you want to instill waters and medicines, then make the instrument that is called "clepsydra", and this is its form:	When there occurs an ulcer in the bladder, or there is a clot of blood or a deposit of pus in it, and you wish to instil into it lotions and medicaments, this is done with the help of an instrument called a syringe.	0.7524197
It is closed, and has three holes: Two on one side, and one on the other, as you see;	It is made of silver or ivory, hollow, with a long fine tube, fine as a probe; entirely hollow except for the end, which is solid with three holes in it: two on one side and one on the other, as you see.	0.63167
and the nozzle end through which the medicine flows should be such that it fits tightly into the penis without anything added, so that one can draw out the moisture, and inject when necessary;	The hollow part containing the plunger is exactly of a size to be closed by it, so that any liquid is drawn up with it when you pull it up; and when you press it down it is driven in a jet, as is done by the projector whereby naphtha is thrown in naval battles.	0.577126
and when you want to pour your medicines into the bladder, place the end of the catheter in the liquid, and draw on the suction device that is inside;	So when you wish to inject fluid into the bladder, dip the end of the syringe into the fluid and draw up the piston, for the fluid will be drawn up into the cavity of the syringe.	0.6728389
thus you will draw the moisture into the catheter, and then push the suction device back in firmly; so the liquid will enter and go directly to the bladder, so that the patient will feel it;	Then introduce the end into the urethra as we described for catheterization; then expel the fluid by means of the piston; the fluid will immediately flow into the bladder and the patient will have a sense of its entry.	0.77192605
and this is the form of the thin clyster with which one irrigates the bladder:	This is the illustration of a fine clyster also for irrigation of the bladder.	0.58806986
And it is made of silver or brass, and the head is higher up;	It is made of silver or white copper.	0.45123112
and underneath has a cavity where the liquid falls;	The upper part of it is like a small funnel and beneath it is a groove where falls the thread of the ligature.	0.5157803
then take a sheep's bladder and put in it the liquid with which you want to irrigate the bladder, then tie it firmly between the two cavities with a good double thread, and warm this liquid a little over the fire;	Then take a camel's bladder and fill it with whatever fluid you wish to wash the bladder out with, and tie it to the syringe with a strong ligature of double thread between the two ridges. Warm the fluid a little over the fire; then introduce the end of the siphon into the end of the urinary meatus.	0.8153846
then insert the tip of the clyster into the penis, then squeeze your hand on the bladder evenly with the liquid, until the patient feels that the liquid has reached the bladder;	Then apply strong pressure to the bladder containing the fluid until the patient can feel the fluid has entered his own bladder.	0.68172
and if you don't have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it, and pierce it all around; then thread a strong string through these holes, then gather the circle as one gathers a bag, and put inside what you want of oil and liquid and water, and tie it to the instrument;	But if you have not a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and cut out a circle; then make holes in the edge all round the circle; then pass a strong ligature through these holes all round and draw the circle in, as a bag is closed with a draw-string, first putting into it whatever fluid, oil, or water, you desire.	0.8809393
and do as you did with the bladder, squeezing with your hand until the liquid reaches the bladder.	Then tie it to the instrument and do with it as with the camel's bladder, squeezing until the fluid reaches the bladder of the patient.	0.69478834

chapter-2-subchapter-60.txt
of the stone	On the extraction of the stone.	0.4414664
We have already spoken, in the section on types of stones, and their extraction, along with medications;	We have already in the due place reviewed the different kinds of stone and the medical treatment of them.	0.6596977
and have explained the difference between the stone generated in the kidneys, and all the signs, and in which stone one should operate surgically; and in the bladder, and in the penis;	I mentioned too the difference between stones arising in the kidney and those arising in the bladder, and gave all the symptoms of them. I also mentioned the kind of stone to which manipulation and incision are appropriate.	0.7619125
and I will tell you plainly and briefly.	I shall now give a short description of this with a clear explanation and summary.	0.65906894
I say that the stone which is generated in the bladder occurs more often in children, and it is a sign that the liquid coming from the bladder resembles water in its clarity;	Now I say that a vesical calculus most frequently occurs in boys.	0.5207081
and sand appears in it, and the patient scratches his penis, and it hangs down often, and then hardens; and he has a lot of these discharges from the bladder;	Among the symptoms is that the urine passed out of the bladder is of a thin consistency like water, and sand appears in it; and the patient keeps on rubbing and playing with his penis; and often it hangs flaccid and then is erected; at the same time many of them get a prolapse of the rectum.	0.72637063
and the healing of children is easy until they are four years old, and is very difficult in old men, and is moderate in young men, for those who are between youth and old age;	The cure of boys under the age of fourteen years is easy; but the treatment of old people is difficult; and that of young men midway between the two.	0.80302006
and the cure is easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.	And the larger the stone the easier the cure; with a small stone the cure is otherwise.	0.78051394
And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient with an enema, to remove all the feces that are in the intestines. For it sometimes hinders the search for the stone.	When we undertake treatment the patient must first have an enema to empty his bowel completely; for sometimes the faeces prevent the calculus being found when it is looked for.	0.76954883
Then take the patient by the feet, and shake him and move him downward, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes jumps up from the high place;	Then the patient should be taken by the feet and jarred to and fro and shaken downwards to bring the calculus down into the neck of the bladder; or else let him jump down from a height a number of times.	0.79856014
then have him sit prepared between your hands, and his hands should be under his thighs, so that the bladder is completely inclined downwards;	Then have him sit down upright before you with his hands beneath his thighs, to make the whole bladder incline downwards.	0.80725086
then search for it and touch it inside;	Then examine him and palpate him externally.	0.6459404
if you feel the stone in the space, then hurry now to cut on the stone.	If you feel the stone in the empty place, immediately hasten and cut down upon it.	0.7880807
And if it does not fall at the touch at all, wet your index finger with oil, of the left hand, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger if the patient is a fully grown youth; and put it in his anus, and search for the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, guide it to the neck of the bladder;	But if there is not the slightest sign of it to the touch then you should anoint with oil the forefinger of your left hand if it be a boy, or the middle finger if it be a fully grown young man, and introduce it into the anus and search around for the calculus, until, when it comes under the finger, you can work it slowly towards the neck of the bladder.	0.80806714
then press down with your finger, and push it outside where you intend to cut.	Then press upon it with your finger and push it outwards toward the place where you wish to make your incision.	0.8621011
And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to lift the testicles upwards with his right hand, and with his left hand to pull back the skin which is beneath the testicles in the area where one makes the incision;	And bid an assistant squeeze the bladder with his hand; and bid another assistant raise the scrotum with his left hand and with the other hand stretch the skin under the testicles away from the place where the incision is going to be.	0.84663355
then place there the cutting spatula, of which this is the form: And cut between that which is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but to the side of the left buttock;	Then do you take a lancet like this and make your incision in the space between the anus and the testicles, not in the mid-line but on the side of the left buttock; and cut down upon the calculus itself, keeping your finger in the anus and pressing it outwards.	0.79084516
and be directly over the stone, and keep your fingers always in the anus, and make the incision transverse so that it is wide on the outside, and narrow within, according to the size of the stone, not too large;	The incision should be oblique, wide externally and narrowing inwards down to dimensions allowing the exit of the stone, not larger.	0.6797239
perhaps press it with the finger that is in the anus, so that it may leap out without difficulty;	Now you may press with the finger that is in the anus upon the stone as you make the incision, and it comes out without difficulty.	0.61723506
and know that there are some stones with angles and edges: thus it is difficult to extract;	You should know that sometimes there are stones which have angles and edges, on which account their extraction is difficult.	0.6747025
and there are some that are smooth, resembling an acorn, and round, whose extraction is easy.	Some are smooth like acorns and rounded, and these come out easily.	0.79724795
In the case of those that have angles and edges, make the incision larger;	But in those cases where the stone is rough and angular you should slightly increase the incision.	0.53417504
and if it does not jump out, you must then tighten the forceps that are like a file at the end, to firmly grasp the stone so that it does not escape; or you insert underneath it a subtle instrument curved at the end;	Then if it still will not come out you must then resort to a device— namely to catch hold of it with strong forceps having an extremity like a rasp, to get a tight hold of it so it shall not slip out; or else introduce beneath it a narrow instrument with a crooked end.	0.786304
and if you cannot manipulate it thus, widen the opening a little, and if the blood flows, staunch it with vitriol;	And if you then cannot get the stone out, widen the incision slightly; and if there is any bleeding stanch it with vitriol.	0.8222077
and if there is more than one stone, first push the largest to the neck of the bladder, then cut down on it, then pull it out, and the smaller ones afterward if there are several.	If there should be a number of stones first push the largest of them into the neck of the bladder, then cut down upon it; then push a smaller one down after it; and do the same if there be more than two.	0.87326264
And if it is very large, it must be sawn, and a larger incision made. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine constantly flows from there so the area cannot heal;	But if the stone be very large it is foolish to make a great incision down upon it; for the result is that the patient either dies or has a chronic urinary fistula because the place will not heal at all.	0.7065506
but nevertheless strive to pull it out, or break it up with forceps, until you remove it piece by piece;	Try rather to manipulate it so that it protrudes; or else attempt to break it up with the forceps so that you can extract it piecemeal.	0.73003256
and when you have completed your work, fill the wound with frankincense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it, and put over it a cloth moistened with oil and wine, or with oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then turn the patient onto his back, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.	And when you have completed the operation pack the wound with frankincense and aloes and dragon's blood, and bind it up and apply a pad soaked in olive oil and wine or oil of roses and cold water, to reduce the swelling. The patient should lie flat on his back and the bindings should not be undone before the third day; and when they are undone foment the place with plenty of oil and water.	0.9381057
And when you untie it, wash the area very well with oil and water, then treat it with diachylon ointment and basilicon ointment, until it is healed.	Then dress it with Palm ointment and basilicon ointment until it heals.	0.6256754
And if hot abscesses come in the wound and corrosion, and clotting of blood in the bladder, and because of this the urine is retained, which is recognized in such a way that blood comes with the urine: then put your finger in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains there, it will corrode the bladder, and rot it;	If an increasing and cankerous abscess occur in the wound, or anything similar such as clotting of blood within the bladder, with stoppage of the urine (which would be signified by the urine being accompanied by blood) pass your finger into the wound and remove the blood; for if it lies in it it will lead to sepsis and necrosis of the bladder.	0.74299884
then wash the wound with water and vinegar and salt, and help him in all the ways you know, until he is healed;	Then wash out the wound with vinegar and water and salt, and apply whatever treatment is suitable for the case until it heals.	0.77335715
and it is necessary that every time you treat him, that you tie his two thighs together, and apply the medicines on the area.	Also at all times during treatment his hips should be bound and kept together so that the medicaments applied to the place may not be disturbed.	0.6574886
And if the stone is small, and it is in the urethra, and stuck there, and the urine cannot come out; if you treat it with what I mentioned before, that you cut him many times, one is excused from cutting due to this treatment. I have already proven this.	Now if the calculus be small and be impacted in the opening of the urinary passage, preventing the exit of the urine, treat it with the means I am about to describe before you go on to make your incision, for often I have found this treatment suffice without incision; I have experience of this.	0.7533548
Take an iron drill of this shape and let it be three-sided, stuck in a firebrand:	You take a drill of the finest steel, of this shape. It should be triangular at the point and sharp, with a wooden handle.	0.5676063
then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone, so that it cannot go back into the bladder;	Then take a thread and with it bind the penis beneath the calculus to prevent the stone from returning to the bladder.	0.7916573
then insert the drill into the penis lightly, until it reaches the stone; and turn the drill with your hand into the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone on the other side;	Then introduce the iron of the drill gently into the meatus until the drill reaches the stone itself, and then very very gently revolve the drill upon the stone with your hand, and try to perforate it, till you pierce it through to the other side.	0.8796819
then the urine will come immediately, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the penis. It is immediately broken, and comes out with the urine, and the patient is healed;	Then the urine will at once be released. Then, with your hand outside the penis, squeeze the remains of the stone, and they will crumble and be washed out by the urine and the patient will be cured.	0.8264698
and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie one thread below the stone and another above, then cut the penis at the location of the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, and untie the thread, and clean the congealed blood that is in the wound; and treat it until it is healed.	But if this treatment is not possible for you on account of some impediment, then tie a thread beneath the stone and another above; then make an incision down upon the stone in the penis itself between the two ligatures, extract it, then undo the ligature and clean away the blood that has clotted in the wound.	0.89920366

chapter-2-subchapter-61.txt
of the stone of women	It is very uncommon for women to have stone.	0.5220665
It rarely happens that a stone is generated in women, and if it does happen sometimes, then the treatment is difficult, and is problematic for three reasons:	But if it should happen to a woman the treatment is indeed difficult and is hindered by a number of things.	0.5962366
the first is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;	One is that the woman may be a virgin.	0.75549847
and the second is that one cannot find a knowledgeable woman who will reveal herself to doctors, especially when she is chaste.	Another is that you will not find a woman who will expose herself to a (male) doctor if she be chaste or married.	0.6370205
And the third reason is that perhaps one cannot find a woman skilled in this manual art;	A third is that you will not find a woman competent in this art, particularly not in surgery.	0.7248553
and the fourth reason is that the woman's stone is deeper than the man's stone, which is why it requires a deeper cut, and there is great fear. And if necessity compels this, then you must take a very knowledgeable midwife, and they are hardly found, and if you don't find one, then seek a chaste and subtle physician;	Then a fourth is that the place for cutting upon the stone in a woman is a long way from where the stone lies, so the incision has to be deep, which is dangerous. If necessity compels you to this kind of case, you should take with you a competent woman doctor.	0.7220752
and present her a wise matron, experienced in the lives of women, or a woman who knows some of the art, and instruct her to do what you command regarding the examination of the stone; and look carefully to see if the woman is a virgin:	As these are very uncommon, if you are without one then seek a eunuch doctor as a colleague, or bring a midwife experienced in women's ailments or a woman to whom you may give some instruction in this art. Have her with you and bid her do all that you enjoin; first of all, in searching for the stone.	0.6208752
and look carefully to see if the woman is a virgin: then she must insert her finger into the rectum and search for the stone;	Have her with you and bid her do all that you enjoin; first of all, in searching for the stone. If she perceive that the woman is a virgin she should pass her finger into the anus and palpate for the stone.	0.6699743
and if she finds it, she should hold it under her finger, and instruct the patient to insert her finger into her vagina, and search and press firmly with her left hand on the bladder.	If she finds it and keeps her finger on it, then bid her cut down upon it. But if the patient be not a virgin bid the midwife pass her finger into the vulva and palpate for the stone, after she has placed her left hand upon the bladder and applied a good pressure.	0.76940954
If she finds it, she should move it little by little from the entrance of the bladder downwards, until it comes to the root of the thigh;	If she finds the stone she should gradually push it down from the outlet of the bladder as far as she can until it reaches the bottom of the pelvis.	0.7902218
then cut down on the stone at the root of the thigh opposite the middle of the vulva, where it is prepared and soft, and feel the stone in that area; and don't move her finger from above or below the stone, and let the incision at first be small;	Then she should cut down upon it from about the middle of the pudenda near the root of the hip on whichever side she can conveniently feel it; she must keep her finger on the stone, pressing from below.	0.7107973
and don't move her finger from above or below the stone, and let the incision at first be small; then insert the hook into the incision, if you feel the stone then enlarge the wound until the stone can come out, and know that there are many kinds of stones:	The incision should start by being small; then let her introduce a sound into the small incision, and when she finds the stone then she will enlarge the incision until she knows that it is big enough for the exit of the stone.	0.7239651
that is to say, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and those that have branches.	You should know that there are many kinds of calculus: some are large and some are small; smooth and rough; long, rounded, and pronged.	0.629811
so know the appearances in order to understand the outcome.	Learn to recognize these types and you will have an indication of what to do.	0.46407306
And if the blood overcomes you, apply ground vitriol to the place, and hold it for an hour until the blood is stanched;	If you are hindered by a haemorrhage, scatter powdered vitriol on the place and keep it there for a time until the haemorrhage has ceased, and then return to your operating until the stone is out.	0.7197551
then return to your work, until the stone is out, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of stones in men to help you in your work;	See also that you have ready the instruments mentioned for the extraction of stone from the male, to assist you in operating.	0.6104764
and if the blood overcomes you, and it is from the artery that is cut, put the powder on the place and bind it with tents and bandages, and do not start this again, and leave the stone and do not pull it out, because perhaps the patient would die; then treat the wound.	If you are hindered by a haemorrhage and you know, by the spurting of the blood, that it comes from an artery that has been cut, then put styptic powder on the place and bind up tightly with bandages and leave it and do not come back to it; let the stone be and do not extract it, for often that loses the patient; then dress the wound.	0.79741323
And when the heat of the blood is calmed, and the place festers, then return to your work, until the stone is out.	And after some days, when the acute haemorrhage has subsided and suppuration has set in, return to your operating until you get the stone out.	0.67484707

chapter-2-subchapter-62.txt
Aqueous hernia is nothing other than a collection of moisture or white syfac, which is below the shell of the testicles, that contains the testicle;	A watery hernia is a collection of fluid in the white membrane lying beneath the skin surrounding the testicle, which is called the scrotum.	0.71492445
and is called "syfac", and sometimes it is actually within the lining of the testicle, so that one thinks it is another testicle; and it is the skin of the scrotum between the white syfac that we have mentioned;	Sometimes it has a capsule of its own which nature has formed alongside the testis so that one would think it another testicle; it may also form between the skin of the scrotum and the white membrane which we mentioned; however, this occurs very rarely.	0.6477012
and this occurs infrequently. And the development of this hernia comes from weakness in the testicles, and this matter is spread.	This hernia arises from a weakness occurring in the testicles and this matter drains into it; sometimes it happens from a blow upon the testicles.	0.7440098
And sometimes it comes from a blow to the testicles, and this fluid has many colors: either a color tending towards jaundice, or it is blood red, or black, or watery white, and this occurs more often;	The fluid is of different colours, sometimes yellowish, sometimes blood-red, sometimes like lees, black, and sometimes the fluid is watery-pale; this actually is the commonest.	0.7263026
and these are the signs to recognize this gathering, for if it is in the white syfac (hydrocele) that we have mentioned, the abscess is round, a little long like the shape of an egg, and the testicle is not visible, because there is fluid all around it.	Now these are the signs whereby we know where the fluid is collecting: if it be in the tunica albugínea, as we have said, the tumour will be round and slightly elongated like the shape of an egg. The testis is not apparent since the fluid hems it in all round.	0.7063248
And if there is fluid in the tunic itself, the abscess is round with part of the testicle, and because of this, it is thought to be another testicle;	But if the fluid be contained in a capsule of its own the tumour will be round, to one side of the testicle; therefore one imagines that it is another testicle.	0.7473979
and if the fluid is between the skin of the testicles and the white tunic, it can be felt easily;	If the fluid be situated between the skin of the scrotum and the tunica albugínea it will be obvious to the touch.	0.6412715
then when you want to know the color of the fluid, examine it with the square intromissor, the shape of which is shown above. According to what comes out after the intromissor, judge what is inside.	If you wish to know the colour of the fluid, take a sample from the tumour by means of the four-sided exploring needle which has been figured previously; and by what comes out in the track of the explorer you may know the colour of the contained fluid.	0.677554
then have him lie on his back, on something slightly raised, and place many cloths under him;	Then let him lie on his back upon something a little raised, and have a heap of material placed beneath him.	0.837955
then sit on his left, and instruct the assistant to sit on the right, and extend the penis to one of the two testicles from the heart of the scrotum;	Then sit down on his left side, and bid an assistant sit on his right side and draw out his penis toward one side or other of the scrotum and toward the hypogastrium.	0.7411602
then take the milk-white spatula, and cut the skin of the scrotum lengthwise from the base to near the tip, and let your incision be perfectly straight, dividing the skin of the scrotum down to the white tunic, and peel it back subtly as much as possible;	Then take a broad scalpel and make a longitudinal incision in the scrotum, from the middle almost to the pubes. The incision should be straight, on a parallel with the median raphe of the scrotum, down to the tunica albuginea, and dissect away from it carefully lest you cut it. You should dissect chiefly on the side where the testicle is most adherent, and take your dissection as far as possible.	0.7434088
then pierce the tunic full of water with a large hole, and draw out all the water, then insert your hooks and stretch the tunic upwards;	Then open up the membrane containing the fluid with a wide perforation and draw off all the fluid.	0.5754117
and do not touch the testicle itself, only the tunic; cut it all or in pieces likewise the thickened part of it delicately, because if you do not cut it carefully, the water will return;	Then with hooks separate the two edges of the incision and draw the membrane upwards but do not touch the skin overlying the testes; then cut away the membrane in whatever way is possible, either as a whole or piecemeal, particularly the side piece; for unless you use the utmost diligence in cutting it away you cannot be certain that the fluid will not come back.	0.60210013
and if the testicle happens to be outside during your work, replace it when you have completed the work on the tunic;	If the testicle should protrude from its covering of skin while you are operating, return it when you have finished cutting the membrane; then bring together the two edges of your incision with a suture.	0.57503855
then bring together the two edges of the testicle with a suture, then treat it like other wounds, until it is healed.	Then dress with the usual dressings for wounds until healed.	0.54511774
And if you find the testicle corrupted by another disease, then you must tie the vessels that are suspensory, to prevent the flow of blood;	If you find the testicle corrupted by some other disease, you will have to tie off the vessels which are in the suspensor, for fear of haemorrhage.	0.7762989
then cut the testicle along with the suspensory ligament, and remove the testicle, and treat it as we have said.	Then cut the testicle from the suspensor and remove it and dress as we said above.	0.73844504
And if fluid is collected in two parts together, know that these are two branches; then cut the other part as you did the first one equally, then wipe the blood, and put in the wound wool soaked in rose oil;	If the accumulation of fluid be on both sides you may know it to be a double hydrocele; so make another incision on the other side as you did for the first. If it is convenient for you to make one operation of it, do so.	0.64705205
then cut the other part as you did the first one equally, then wipe the blood, and put in the wound wool soaked in rose oil; and above put other wool soaked in wine and oil, and place it on the two testicles, and put on top folded cloths, and tie it up with the bandage that is according to this form:	If it is convenient for you to make one operation of it, do so. Then wipe away the blood and apply to the incisions wool that has been soaked in olive-oil or oil of roses and on that again more wool that has been soaked in wine and oil, and spread that over the testicles and over the hypogastrium; and over that again folded pieces of linen forming pads and bind them down with a bandage having six heads.	0.7440377
Then take two cloths, and fill them with carded wool according to this likeness, and let them be joined by stitching at the opening of the pants, and one of the ends should go over the buttocks up to the back, and the other to the penis area;	Two pieces of cloth should be taken and sewn together and packed in between with carded wool to this pattern. The ends by means of which it is attached should be made of cotton or soft wool and should be drawn tight at the waist of the breeches.	0.6822962
and the other two ends over the two groins, and let all the bandage be gathered in the buckle of the pants;	One of the ends you take over the seat toward the back: the second end you take toward the pubes, the two ends round the thighs below, and the remaining two ends over the groin, and the whole is bound up tight with the belt of the breeches.	0.5800928
and sometimes this ramification is treated with cautery instead of cutting with iron, and you should take a thin, knife-like cautery, and cut the skin of the testicles, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white membrane that contains the water is exposed;	This rupture may also be treated by cautery instead of surgery. This will mean taking a knife-edged cautery and cutting with it the skin of the testicles; it should be hot, as we told you before, and used until the white membrane covering the hydrocele be exposed.	0.7112198
then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce this membrane with hooks, and peel it off with this thin, hot cautery:	Then take another cautery of this type, which resembles the Greek letter tau; and with it perforate that membrane. It should be hot so as to draw out all the humidity.	0.6044662
And cut it in all the ways that you can, until you extract it all;	It should be hot so as to draw out all the humidity. Then stretch the membrane with hooks, dissect away the capsule with the cautery and cut it away as best you are able until you have completely removed it.	0.42596817
and be careful that the fire does not touch the testicle;	But be careful that the heat do not touch the testicle.	0.62398756
and know that this method is safer; and with less risk of bleeding, and better than surgery;	You should know that this operation is safer, further removed from the danger of haemorrhage, and better, than operation by incision.	0.78664446
and if anything gives you trouble, like a hot abscess or bleeding or something else, treat that which troubles you, according to what has been said before.	If, while operating either with the knife or the cautery, you are hindered by an inflammatory swelling or haemorrhage or anything else, you should deal with all of them by suitable treatment in accordance with what has been said before.	0.68859166
And if the patient is afraid, and does not want to endure this procedure because of its dreadfulness, then perform a perforation, as I tell you, which is, when you are quite certain by the signs we have described that there is watery pus there, have the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess in the lower part with the spatula wide open, and position the perforation lengthwise along the body;	If the patient be timid and will not suffer this operation on account of its unpleasantness, then treat by perforation as I shall now describe. When by the signs we have mentioned you are certain that the hernia is watery, you should seat the patient on a high chair and pierce the tumour in its lower part with a broad scalpel.	0.8268909
and let the opening be wide, so that all the liquid runs out freely;	The perforation should run in the long axis of the body, and it should be an ample opening to let all the fluid run out.	0.648927
then put cotton on the area, and bind it, and leave it to drain the remaining liquid, then treat it until the wound is healed;	Then put cotton on the place and bind it on and leave it so as to soak up the rest of the fluid; then dress the wound until it heals.	0.9088925
and if the white cloth does not allow the liquid to flow from the opening of the wound, then you must insert a feather or the instrument used to draw liquid from dropsical patients, the form of which is shown above;	But if the fluid fail to flow out when the opening is made, which would be due to the tunica albuginea's obtruding into the opening and preventing the outlet of the fluid, you should then introduce into the wound a goose-quill or an instrument such as is used for ascites, already described; or else the opening should be widened a little.	0.6506411
and widen the wound a little, and know that the liquid will return, and accumulate again after six months or around then, and when it has accumulated as before, the patient will continue this way throughout his life.	But you should know that after six months or so the fluid may come back and collect again; when it does so, perforate him in exactly the same manner; so will the patient prolong his life.	0.7978561

chapter-2-subchapter-63.txt
Know that in the treatment of this branch (of medicine), there is fear in many situations, therefore it seems to me it is better to leave it alone;	You should know that cutting for this kind of hernia has an uncertain outcome and in most cases results in death; and therefore I think it better to let it be and to safeguard the patient.	0.5176061
and I will tell you the procedure and the characteristics of the abscess.	However, I shall mention the manner of operating for this and all kinds of tumour.	0.5860188
I say then that many abscesses occur in the body, and particularly in the testicles; and this is for many reasons.	Now I say that many tumours arise from the bodies composing the testicles; and this from several causes.	0.7690991
That is to say by an excess of sour and sharp (humor), which spreads to the testicles, or from a blow;	It may be from an acrid superfluity running down into the testicles, or from a blow.	0.47817189
and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body;	The colour of the tumour will be like that of the rest of the body and there is no water to it.	0.55802965
and sometimes there is a severe, pale, and stony abscess, and of a weak color, and sometimes it comes from damage to an artery, or from swelling of a vein.	The lump will be solid and often will be stony hard, of a dark colour, and without sensation. Sometimes also it arises from a knotting and inflation of the arteries, as has been mentioned, or from an inflation of the veins.	0.7162038
When it is from damage to an artery, it is known by the disposition of a warm abscess, when you press it with your fingers; and you should not touch it.	The sort arising from a swelling of the arteries may be recognized by a dispersal of the lump when you press upon it with your fingers; this should not be interfered with at all.	0.7844145
The one that is made from the swelling of a vein is known by its disposition to the pressure of the touch of the fingers, and one can well make the incision on this appearance, and on the other flesh; and you must cut the heart of the testicles, then stretch the egg upwards, and pull it away from the white membrane, and free the suspensory ligament from all parts of the egg.	The sort arising from a swelling of the vein will not disperse when you press upon it with your fingers. It is sometimes possible to cut down on this kind and also on the other fleshy tumours thus: make an incision in the skin of the testicles; then draw the testicle upward and out of the tunica albuginea, and free the suspensor from the vessels and tie the vessels, and cut the suspensor after you have freed it from all round the testicle.	0.791234
If the testicle is already adhered to this new flesh, then you must pull the testicle, and cut it;	Should it happen that the testicle is adherent to the fleshy growth, you will have to cut away the testicle itself and remove it.	0.5960916
and if there is air in the tunica vaginalis, or in that which is inside the vessels, then you must free all this membrane, and cut it roundly.	But should the adhesion have formed somewhere inside the membranes or in the space between the vessels, then you must free the adhesion as a whole and cut it away with a circular incision.	0.6211078
And if the growth of the flesh is in the back part, then you must cut it all, and extract the testicle, as we have said.	If the fleshy growth should be at the site of the junction which is behind, you will have to cut the whole thing away and remove the testicle as we have said.	0.83905506
And when your work is completed, then fill the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.	And when your operation is finished, pack the wound with wool moistened with oil of roses and wine; then dress in the usual manner until healed.	0.83594286

chapter-2-subchapter-64.txt
This is an abscess enveloped in a covering resembling a bud, with softening of the testicles, and the patient moves with difficulty when he walks;	A varix is a twisted tumour resembling a cluster of grapes, with relaxation of the testicles, which makes movement and exercise and walking difficult for the patient.	0.63871676
and the treatment of this illness is almost as dangerous as the one before, and yet we will tell you the procedure for it, according to what the ancients did.	The treatment of this condition is of uncertain outcome, akin to those conditions just spoken of. Nevertheless we must describe the operation for this condition as it was performed by the Ancients.	0.67166084
You must have the patient sit on a raised seat, then push the suspensory of the testicles down with your fingers, along with the vessels that are next to the penis, and have the assistant hold them, and stretch them firmly;	So I begin by saying that you must have the patient sitting upon a high seat; then push down the suspensor of the testicles and take hold of the skin of the testicles with your fingers together with the blood-vessels near the penis; then let your assistant take hold instead of you and draw out strongly.	0.8180047
then cut with a wide, transverse cutting spatula near the vessels, until they are exposed, and then dissect on each side, as we have described in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples;	Then with a broad sharp scalpel make an oblique incision in the direction of the vessels so that the vessels are laid bare. Then dissect on all sides in the same way as I told you for extracting the temporal vessels.	0.6951983
then insert a needle with a double thread, and tie it at the first place where the screw came, and tie it again at the other end; then cut them in the middle straight, along the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted fluids;	Then run through them a needle doubly threaded and tie at the spot where the varix begins and tie it again where the varix ends, then cut through the varix in the middle with an incision at right angles to the length of the body and draw out the turbid corrupt humidity that has gathered in it.	0.79421496
then treat the wound like the others where you generate pus, unless some vessel falls that nourishes one of the testicles;	Then dress the wound with the wound dressings usual where you wish to encourage suppuration, so that the vessels nourishing the one testicle may perish; there is no harm in that.	0.61420107
for no harm comes from this, and if a screw comes to all the vessels, then it is necessary to pull the testicles with all the vessels; so that the testicle does not lose its nourishment because of the incision of the vessels, and they dry up and cannot be helped.	But if all the vessels are varicose then you will have to remove one testicle with its vessels lest the testicle be deprived of nourishment through cutting into the vessels; for it will wither and be of no use.	0.6986924

chapter-2-subchapter-65.txt
The occurrence of this hernia is due to the tear that happens in the peritoneum/abdominal wall, or the stretching over the belly in the area of the groin, which causes the intestines to descend through this rupture to one of the testicles;	This hernia is due to a split occurring in the membrane stretched from the hypogastrium over the belly in the region of the groin.	0.65102243
and this rupture is either of the peritoneum/abdominal wall itself, or from its stretching, and these two types arise from many causes:	Through this opening the bowel descends upon one of the testes; this opening is due to the membrane's splitting or stretching.	0.58864534
from a blow, or a jump, or shouting, or lifting a heavy load, and similar things;	And these two kinds occur from a number of causes: from a blow or jumping or shouting, or lifting a heavy weight, or a similar cause.	0.6933522
and the signs, when it is from the stretching of the peritoneum/abdominal wall, are that it occurs little by little, over a long time, and does not happen suddenly; and the swelling is even down to the depths, because the peritoneum/abdominal wall presses upon the intestine.	The symptoms of it, when it arises from a stretching of the membrane, are that it is a slow and chronic development and does not happen on a sudden, and the swelling is even and deep down, because the membrane is pressing the bowel.	0.76468575
And the sign, when it is from a tear in the peritoneum/abdominal wall, is that it causes sudden pain at the onset, and the swelling appears uneven, close under the skin, and this is because of the protrusion of the intestine and body outside of the peritoneum/abdominal wall.	When it is due to a split in the membrane, the signs will be that it starts with a sudden severe pain, and the lump varies in consistency, appearing close under the skin; that is due to the emergence of the bowel and its passage outside the membrane. Sometimes also the omentum comes out with the bowel, and this hernia is called intestinal and omental; sometimes it contains wind.	0.73787636
And sometimes the omentum descends with the intestine, and is retained there, and causes the patient to suffer great pain, especially when it is pressed.	Sometimes also the excrement comes down with the bowel and gets held up there, and this involves the patient's death, for thence arises an intractable pain and borborygmi, specially when pressed upon.	0.77824247
And in these treatments, one is afraid of iron (cautery), so it should be avoided.	The treatment of the varieties of this disease with the knife is dangerous; so be cautious of rushing at it.	0.47886503
And the way to do this is to instruct the patient to put the intestine back inside the wound with his hand, if he can put it back in; then he should be supported on his neck between your hands, and lift his thighs;	The manner of operating is to bid the patient reduce the bowel back into the belly if it be disposed to return, then lie back before you and raise his legs.	0.72248334
then spread the scrotum above, and cut all the skin of the testicles lengthwise; then insert hooks into the lips of the incision as needed to open the wound, and they should be such that the egg can come out;	Then do you stretch upward the skin adjacent to the groin, and cut the whole length of the skin of the testicles; then attach to the edges of the incision as many hooks as are necessary to open the incision. The incision should be sufficiently large to allow the testicle to be drawn out.	0.8696257
then peel away the tunic which is under the skin of the testicles, until the hard white tunic is uncovered on all sides;	Then dissect away the tissues that lie beneath the skin of the scrotum so that the hard tunica albugínea be exposed all round.	0.76148254
then put your index finger into that which follows the testicle, into that which is between the white tunic which is under the skin of the egg, and between the second tunic, and separate that which is behind the egg, and between the second tunic;	Then introduce your forefinger in around the testis in the space between the white membrane beneath the skin of the testicle and the second membrane, and with your forefinger free the attachment at the back of the testicle.	0.7970009
and then move with your right hand inside the scrotum, and stretch the white tunic upwards with your left hand, and lift the testicle with all the tunic towards the incision; and instruct the assistant to stretch the testicle upwards, and untie that which is attached behind the ligature;	Then with your right hand explore within the scrotum and fold back the covering of the testicles, at the same time stretching the tunica albugínea upwards with the left hand, and bring the testis with the membrane up into the opening, and bid your assistant to stretch the testis upwards; and do you fully free it from the posterior attachment.	0.86106604
and search with your fingers if there is any of the intestine wrapped in the hard white tunic, and if you find any, push it back into the abdomen;	Feel with your finger that there be no part of the intestine that has got twisted within the tough white membrane; and should you find any push it back into the abdomen.	0.7823063
then cut in the part that is under the skin of the scrotum, until the blood and pus flow, as we have said before;	Then make a counter-incision in the lower part of the skin of the testicles, to let the blood and matter drain away as we bade you before.	0.7239139
then apply wool soaked in oil, and place it on the wounds, and apply the ligature that we have mentioned. And sometimes the white tunic that we have mentioned is cauterized, after the incision, for fear of bleeding. For this happens often, and leave the ligature until it falls off by itself;	Then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound, and the bandage that we prescribed (sometimes also the white membrane that we spoke about is cauterized after the incision to forestall haemorrhage, for that usually happens) and let the ligatures be until they fall away spontaneously.	0.81111115
and if it is slow to fall off, then it should be moistened with warm water, and apply what we have said, until it falls off;	If they are slow in coming away, then foment with hot water and apply something to sweat them off.	0.5493869
then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is completely healed.	Then dress the wound in the usual manner until it heals.	0.6531582

chapter-2-subchapter-66.txt
of fleshy hernia	On flatulent hernia.	0.451328
In this affliction, I have never seen anyone who dared to perform the treatment with a knife.	I have not seen anyone pluck up enough courage to attempt the operative treatment of this kind of rupture.	0.70487523
And the ancients said that it is done like the hernia that is together with the screw, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after cutting above them lightly underneath;	The Ancients indeed said it ought to be done in the same way as hernia with varicocele; namely, to ligate the blood-vessels after cutting down upon them, gently, and lower down.	0.7228623
then cut it in the middle, and treat the abscess with something that opens it, until the vessels fall off;	Then make an incision in the middle and apply to the tumour such things as will keep it open until the blood-vessels fall away.	0.73730206
and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.	And dress the wound in the manner we have already mentioned until it heals.	0.7513972

chapter-2-subchapter-67.txt
Sometimes rupture comes in the groin, as we have said, and the place opens;	Sometimes there occurs a rupture in the groin as we have said, and the part protrudes.	0.8033035
and none of the intestines descend into the testicles, and if some do descend, it is little, and returns all the time;	No portion of the intestine descends into the scrotum; or if anything it will be only a tiny portion and will reduce at any time.	0.7686118
and yet if it remains too long in this state, the wound or fistula grows, until the intestine descends;	But if it goes on for a long time the rupture in the membrane increases until the bowel and omentum descend into the scrotum.	0.6444838
and this happens because of the extension of the fistula that is in the groin, as we have said, for it is extended, then the place softens and swells and opens;	It arises from a stretching of the membrane in the groin, as we said; the membrane stretches and then relaxes and the place swells.	0.7845271
and the treatment is by cautery, as we have said before;	Its treatment by the cautery is as I have already described.	0.67015254
and sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner: and the patient lies supine between your hands, then cut the swollen place of the rupture widely, about the width of three fingers;	Sometimes also it is treated with the knife in this manner: With the patient lying back before you, make an incision three fingers wide, transversely across the swelling of the rupture which projects.	0.73553336
and then extract the fistula that is under the skin that follows it, then take the thread and put it on the visible place of the fistula;	Then perforate the subcutaneous tissues so as to expose the white membrane that lies under the skin alongside the rupture. Take a probe and place it upon the projecting part of the fascia and push it back into the depths of the abdomen.	0.60948193
and press it deep into the belly, then sew the two visible places of the fistula over the end of the thread, and sew both;	Take a probe and place it upon the projecting part of the fascia and push it back into the depths of the abdomen. Then sew together the two swollen portions of membrane over the end of the probe and suture the one to the other.	0.67942727
then pull the end of the thread, and do not cut the fistula or spread egg or anything else, as I have taught you in the treatment of intestinal hernia; then treat it by the treatment of wounds.	Then take out the probe. On no account make the incision into the fascia nor touch the testis nor anything else, as I taught you on the subject of treating the intestinal hernia.	0.80107796
then treat it by the treatment of wounds. And when you cut the threads, clean it and treat the wound until it is healed.	Then dress the wound, and when the stitches come apart remove them and bandage the wound again until it is healed over.	0.72656834

chapter-2-subchapter-68.txt
of the softening of the skin of the testicles	On the loosening of the skin of the scrotum.	0.6243681
Often the skin of the testicles is softened in some men, because the flesh inside is softened, and it is milky in appearance;	In some men there often occurs a loosening of the skin of the scrotum without any loosening of the organs within. This has a horrible appearance.	0.6049233
and it is necessary, when one wants to treat it, to make the patient lie on his back, and cut the skin that is softened down to the natural skin;	He who desires to treat this condition should make the patient lie on his back; and he should cut away all the loose skin that is over and above the normal.	0.678793
then join the two edges with a suture, and if you wish, first sew the excess of the softened skin with three or four sutures firmly;	Then he should bring together the two edges of the incision with a suture. Or, if you prefer, first suture the excess of loose skin together, with three or four stitches, and make the suture firm.	0.82703817
then cut between the sutures, and treat it like other wounds, until it is healed, and the threads fall out.	Then cut away what is taken up between the stitches. Then dress the wound with the usual dressings till it heals and the stitches come away.	0.7220014

chapter-2-subchapter-69.txt
of castration	On castration.	0.5506375
Know that castration is condemned in our law, and therefore I would prefer not to speak of it in this book;	Castration is forbidden in our law and I ought therefore to make no mention of it in my book.	0.7900043
and it is only necessary for two reasons:	But I must speak of it for two reasons.	0.6618708
one is that the physician should know how to answer when asked about it, and know the treatment;	One reason is that it should be part of the doctor's medical knowledge when asked about it, and that he should know how to treat anyone whom it befalls.	0.7073859
and the other, because we often need to castrate some animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other animals.	Another reason is that often we need to castrate certain animals for the sake of the benefits that accrue from them, such as rams, he-goats and cats, and such animals.	0.7950742
I say then that castration is done in two ways: either by pulling, or by cutting.	So I say that castration can be performed in two ways: either by contusion; or by opening up and cutting away.	0.8775524
In the one that we do by pulling, we make the animal sit in hot water, until the testicles are softened and hanging down; then take them in your hand, until they are drawn back and you no longer feel them.	The method by contusion is that we make the animal sit in warm water until his testes are relaxed and become soft and pendent; then rub them with your hand until they are so loosened that they are no longer palpable.	0.8450318
On castration by cutting: you must restrain the animal, and press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the spermatic cord, and cut each testicle with one cut, once you have skinned them well;	As to castration by open operation and excision, the animal should be held and pressure put upon the scrotum with the left hand. Then tie the spermatic cord and with one incision cut down upon both testicles so that both are brought up out of the scrotum.	0.738036
and leave there some of the thick and thin membranes which are on the vessels;	After dissecting them away cut them off; do not leave any of the coverings upon them except the thin membrane covering the vessels.	0.4849573
and this method of castration is better than that which is done by pulling, because with pulling, some part of the testicles might remain, by which the animal still desires lust;	This manner of castration is better than the contusion method, for contusion often leaves something of the testicles, and the animal desires to couple.	0.7588968
then treat the wound until it is healed.	Then dress the wound until healed.	0.8592088

chapter-2-subchapter-70.txt
of hermaphrodites	On the treatment of the hermaphrodite.	0.44413206
Hermaphroditism exists in two ways in humans: one is that between the two testicles appears something like the form of a woman's nature, where there is hair, and sometimes urine flows there.	There are two kinds of male hermaphrodite: one has the appearance as of female pudenda with hair in the region of the perineum; the other has the same in the skin of the scrotum between the testes. Sometimes also urine is excreted through that which is in the skin of the scrotum.	0.7917815
And the other type is in women, and they have above the pubis something like a penis and two testicles.	There is also one kind among women, in which there is, above the female pudenda, on the pubes, what resembles the male organs.	0.7132319
And the treatment for the man and the woman is that you cut away all the added flesh and treat them like other wounds;	This is the treatment of all three kinds, that is, two male and one female: the superfluous growths must be cut away so that every trace is destroyed; then the usual treatment for wounds should be applied until they are healed.	0.58313
in the second type, for men whose urine spurts through the skin of the testicles, there is no cure.	As to the second kind, in man, where the opening is in the scrotum and the urine runs out of it, there is no operation for this, and no cure.	0.7484868

chapter-2-subchapter-71.txt
Tentigo is an extra growth of flesh on the genitals, so much so that it is very ugly to see; and some women have it as big as a hand, and this is the treatment.	The clitoris may grow in size above the order of nature so that it gets a horrible deformed appearance; in some women it becomes erect like the male organ and attains to coitus.	0.57294214
You must grasp the excess of the tentigo in your hand or with hooks, and cut it lightly;	You must grasp the growth with your hand or a hook and cut it off.	0.6371043
and do not go too deep, so that bleeding does not occur, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed;	Do not cut too deeply, especially at the root of the growth, lest haemorrhage occur. Then apply the usual dressing for wounds until it is healed.	0.6802104
and there is another growth that arises at the opening of the vagina, and fills it, and sometimes protrudes, and has the appearance of a tail, and therefore the ancients called it "tailed malady". So you must cut it, as we have described for the tentigo, and treat it until it is healed.	As to the fleshy growth, that is, flesh growing in the cervix and filling it, and also often protruding like a tail (on which account some of the Ancients called it 'caudate disease'); this too you should cut away as you do for the clitoris, and dress until healed.	0.70450634

chapter-2-subchapter-72.txt
Erysipelas occurs when a woman's nature is not pierced, or the opening is small; and it is natural by birth, or accidental through illness that has come there;	This condition is when a woman's pudenda have no opening or have only a tiny opening; it may be either congenital or acquired.	0.6904416
and it is natural by birth, or accidental through illness that has come there; or it is because of added flesh, or from thin or thick syphac, and is made deep within the womb, or on the sides, or below, or wherever it may be;	The acquired sort is due to some preceding disease; either to a fleshy growth or to a membrane, thick or thin.	0.562068
and it prevents conception, and childbirth, and perhaps having menses;	It may be in the fundus of the uterus or in its walls or in the upper part or in the lower part; and it prevents intercourse, conception, and delivery; it often also hinders the menses.	0.6545757
and the diagnosis of this is by examination of the vulva.	This is recognized by inspection by the midwife, if the obstruction be obvious and low.	0.4239402
If the blockage is clearly apparent, search for it with your fingers or with a probe.	But if it be not visible she should palpate with her fingers or with a probe.	0.6655936
put your two index fingers together, and let the woman be on her back, with her legs spread;	This is done by applying some sort of pad to the labia; then put both thumbs upon it.	0.43796718
then spread the two lips firmly, until the thin syphac is round, and the blockage is opened;	The woman should be upon her back with her legs spread wide apart; then the labia are to be stretched strongly till the thin membrane is ruptured and the obstruction is laid open.	0.57776666
then take wool, and soak it in oil, and put it on the place, and let the woman lie at home each day, so that it cannot close up.	Then take wool soaked in oil and apply to the place, and let the woman engage in coitus every day lest the place close over.	0.82582515
And if the syphac is hard and thick, you must cut it with a myrtle-leaf shaped spatula.	If the membrane be thick and strong you should incise it with a broad myrtle-leaf scalpel.	0.776602
If the blockage is of newborn flesh, then lift it with a hook and cut it;	But if the obstruction be due to a growth you should catch hold of it with two hooks and cut it away.	0.44697142
and have blood-stopping medicines, such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, mixed with egg white;	And have at hand remedies for allaying haemorrhage without pain, such as acacia and dragon's blood and olibanum, all mixed with egg-white.	0.6971623
then insert a large lead tube so the wound cannot close;	Then use a cannula of lead to prevent the wound healing up too quickly.	0.6007753
and leave it there for a long time, and insert a dry linen tent;	She should keep it in position for some days and employ a bandage of dry linen.	0.60855556
then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.	Then treat with the usual healing dressings until it heals.	0.7257873
And when proud flesh grows in the marrow, it should be cut in this manner, unless it is a cancerous abscess. For a cancerous abscess that is in the marrow, one should not touch it with iron (a surgical instrument).	Sometimes other growths of flesh arise in the uterus itself; you should cut away in this manner all except cancerous tumours; for a cancerous tumour arising in the uterus is under no circumstance to be treated with the knife.	0.6128629

chapter-2-subchapter-73.txt
of hemorrhoids Hemorrhoids are openings of veins from which blood flows habitually, and when hemorrhoids are old they become bluish/livid;	Haemorrhoids are an inflation of the heads of the blood-vessels leading to abundant and constant bleeding. When haemorrhoids are chronic they turn into warts.	0.6758661
and we have already discussed in the division their characteristics and symptoms, and I will discuss here those that can be treated.	I have already mentioned in their place the kinds of wart and their symptoms. Now here I shall say which kinds permit of treatment and which do not.	0.71834624
I say that hemorrhoids and livid swellings, when they are deep in the marrow, and they are not perceptible to the touch, should not be treated with iron (a surgical instrument).	I begin by stating that haemorrhoids and warts in the depths of the uterus that are not palpable are not able to be treated operatively.	0.65407205
Those that are at the mouth of the anus, that can be felt, are the ones that can be treated.	Those at the orifice that are palpable you can treat.	0.70244753
You must then place the woman in a cold room, then grasp the hemorrhoid with tongs, and cut it at its roots, then sprinkle on medicines to stop the bleeding, such as acacia and dragon's blood and frankincense, and similar things;	So you should get the woman into a cool place and then draw on the warts with forceps or catch hold with pieces of rough cloth, and cut them away from the roots. Then if that cause a flow of blood sprinkle with one or other of the powders that stop bleeding but are not corrosive, such as acacia or dragon's blood or olibanum or the like.	0.6990273
then have her put her feet against the wall for an hour, then put her in cold water;	Then raise her legs up against the wall for a while and then bring them down into cold water.	0.7740888
and if bleeding occurs, have her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peel and galls and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a poultice of it on her back.	And if the haemorrhage persist for a long time make her sit in an infusion of sumac and pomegranate rind and oak-galls and the like. Then take barley flour and beat it up with honey and vinegar, and apply to the back a plaster made of this.	0.8586663
And if it stops, that's good. If not, apply cupping glasses to her back and breasts without scarification;	And if the bleeding cease, good; but if not, apply to the loins and breasts cupping-vessels without scarifying.	0.77459574
then take wool, and soak it in plantain juice or wild rose juice with old wine, and apply it to the area.	Then take wool and dip it in the juice of red cynomorium or plantain or wild eglantine, together with syrup of oak galls, and apply to the place.	0.74718916
And when the abscess subsides, treat the area with ointment until it is healed;	And when the swelling has subsided treat the place with ointment until it heals.	0.8611543

chapter-2-subchapter-74.txt
Many kinds of abscesses occur in the marrow, such as canker and stony abscess and herpes and estiomene and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, and several other diseases that I mentioned in the division.	From time to time there occur in the womb various kinds of tumour, such as cancer and the stony tumour and ulcer and abscess and gangrene and fistulae and varicosities and cracks and warts and inflamed tumours; all these diseases I have mentioned, with their varieties and their symptoms, in the appropriate section.	0.74539316
It is therefore necessary that I discuss in this treatise the hot abscess that occurs in the marrow, which is not among the abscesses that collect pus;	But now in this treatise we must mention an inflamed tumour of the kind where there is a collection of pus, and the manner of its opening with the knife.	0.56502306
and if you want to know the work of iron (cautery), see if the abscess is acute at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red if you can see it. Then do not rush to pierce it, but let it mature until the pain subsides;	You should inspect it, and if the pain of the tumour is acute from the outset, with pulsation and inflammation and fever, and, if it is visible, you see that it is red, then do not be in a hurry to open, but treat it with applications helpful for suppuration till these symptoms have subsided.	0.6924678
and then have the patient sit on a seat, and have two small seats where they lean, and support their back and bring their feet together towards the lower part of the leg;	Then you should get the patient to sit in a chair having a double seat, lying back.	0.62693
and let their thighs be spread, and place their arms under their knees, and tie them well with a good bandage;	She should put her feet together upon her abdomen, with the thighs apart and the arms joined under the knees and bound together in a suitable manner.	0.68152845
then suck from him towards the right side, and use the instrument with which one opens the mouth of the bladder (urethra), the form of which comes later;	Then the midwife should sit on the right side and employ the instrument for opening the orifice of the womb, which will be described later.	0.61468804
and it is necessary that when you use this instrument, you first insert the probe to know the depth of the bladder, so that what enters with the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not injure the patient; and if the instrument is too large, you must cover the depth of the bladder with cloths, so that the instrument does not hurt them;	When you are going to use this instrument, you should measure with a probe the depth of the womb so that the instrument be not introduced beyond this measure lest the patient be harmed; if the instrument be longer, pads should be put over the rim of the cervix to prevent the passage of its whole length.	0.78552926
and he must put the funnel of the instrument on top, and hold the instrument.	You must put the screw that runs in the instrument, in from the top and hold the instrument while your assistant turns the screw until the entrance of the uterus is opened.	0.46637696
And when the abscess opens, and it is made soft by hand, it should be cut at the top, with a milk spatula;	When the abscess is exposed, and on manual palpation is found to be thin and soft, you should make an incision at its head with a broad scalpel.	0.6065463
and when the boil is emptied, you must put in the wound tents soaked in rose oil, or in dried green oil;	And when all the matter is evacuated you should place on the wound a soft wick soaked in oil of roses or green oil with some styptic quality, and let it come outside from the incision into the cervix uteri.	0.53311276
and put the tent away from the wound in the depth of the bladder, and put outside, on the bladder and on the scalpel, clean wool soaked in water where mallows have been boiled;	Over the area of the uterus and pubes there should be clean wool soaked in an infusion of mallows.	0.41399837
then treat it after two days with a suitable ointment, until it is healed;	Then after two days dress with a suitable ointment until healed.	0.82879424
and sometimes the bladder and the wound are cleaned with a clyster of water and honey, and then with water in which roots of lily and long birthwort have been boiled; then return to the ointment.	Sometimes also both the wound and the uterus are washed out with a douche of honey and water, then of a decoction of liquorice root or long aristolochy; then go back to the ointment.	0.809219
And if the wound is returned to the bladder, you must avoid cauterizing with iron, but treat it as we have described in the section.	But if the lesion be hidden in the depths of the womb then you will have to abstain from operative treatment but carry out treatment as spoken of in its place.	0.60757756

chapter-2-subchapter-75.txt
on childbirth The midwife must first understand the process of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman pushing downwards, and desires to smell aromatic scents:	On the training of midwives in how to treat living foetuses when not brought forth in the natural manner. To begin with, the midwife must know the manner of normal labour. Among the signs of it are these.	0.6103566
then the child hurries to come out; then know that this birth is according to the natural process, and the exit is under its head, and the afterbirth with it;	If you see the woman strain her abdomen and desire to breathe more air, and the pangs come easily to her and she hastens to deliver the child, by this you may know that the labour will follow a natural course and that the presentation will be vertex with the afterbirth, either together with the child or hanging by the umbilical cord.	0.58950007
and when you see these signs, you should press lightly on her belly, so that the child comes out quickly;	And when you observe these signs it will be necessary to put pressure upon the abdomen to bring forth the foetus quickly.	0.7742795
for when it descends headfirst, the afterbirth comes out with it, and the womb is cleansed of its excess fluids by a good cleansing;	For when it presents the vertex the afterbirth comes down with it and she is thoroughly cleansed of those superfluities.	0.7504868
and the one that comes differently does not come naturally.	But a delivery that is contrary to this is unnatural and wrong.	0.5029041
For it sometimes comes feet first, and the body or the head comes out first, and the hands, or it comes out on its stomach, or sideways, and is sometimes turned on its neck, and in other bad positions;	Sometimes the infant is delivered by its feet; or by its hands before either head or feet; or a single hand or foot; or the head comes out together with a foot. Or it comes out all twisted, often with the nape of the neck first; or in other wrong positions.	0.82433856
so it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skilled in these things, and to beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the positions and how one should help.	So the midwife must have wisdom and dexterity and be skilled in all these cases and beware of failures and mistakes. I shall explain the technique in these modes of delivery so that she may be instructed and may be acquainted with them all.	0.8458678
If the child comes headfirst in a natural way, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and her strength is weak, have her sit on a chair, where the women will hold her;	When the foetus comes out by the vertex in the normal manner and yet the delivery is with great difficulty for the woman and you see that her strength is getting exhausted, then make her sit on a seat and have her held firmly, and foment her womb in a decoction of fenugreek and in bland oils.	0.66414
and stimulate her nature with oil or cooked fenugreek, and then the midwife should put between her fingers the small spatula of which here is the form: and tear the afterbirth, and cut with her fingernail until the moisture that is inside runs out;	Then the midwife should take between two fingers a little scalpel and make an incision in the foetal membrane or open it with the finger nail, to allow the contained waters to flow out; and put pressure upon the woman's abdomen until the foetus comes down.	0.68199
and press the woman's belly so that the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to give the woman an enema of fenugreek mucilage with sesame oil;	But if it will not come down then the woman should have an enema of mucilage of fenugreek with oil of sesame.	0.64640087
then make her sneeze using condiments, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: the child will come out immediately.	Then bid her bear down after the enema, and with ptarmica stimulate her to sneeze; and close her mouth and nose for a while and the foetus will quickly come out.	0.64986616
And if both hands come out, you must gently push them back in little by little; and if they cannot enter, place the woman on a seat and raise her feet up high; then suddenly drop the seat to the ground, and someone should hold the woman so she doesn't fall during the drop;	If the hands of the foetus present, you should slowly and gently push them back; and if they will not go back then place the woman upon a seat, have her feet raised and meanwhile shake the seat; but the woman should be held lest the shaking cause her to fall off.	0.86160433
and if the hands cannot enter and the child dies, cut off the hands with the knife previously mentioned, and extract the child, and reposition it properly.	But if the two hands will not go back and the foetus is dead cut them off and draw out the remains. Or tie tapes to the hands and pull on them evenly and it will come out.	0.63702875
of the delivery of the child on its feet When the child comes feet first, you must push it upwards; and then turn it little by little, until it is straight;	Foot presentation: when the foetus presents feet first you should raise them both; then you should very gently turn the foetus so as to straighten it.	0.7667035
then take one of the feet and extend it little by little.	Then take one of its feet and stretch it gently.	0.8629719
When he jumps up to the thighs, instruct her to take them, and make her sneeze with pepper; then he will jump out, God willing.	When they come down as far as the hips, bid her bear down, make her sneeze with ptarmica, and it will come out.	0.7063247
And if it doesn't come out as we have said, then turn it little by little until it is in accordance with its natural form. For then it comes out easily.	But if it will not come out with these means we have described, you should return the foetus gently until you have placed it in the natural position; then it will come out easily.	0.7299981
And if it does not come out as we have said, then take marshmallow mucilage, and sesame oil, and dissolved gum, and grind everything in a mortar; and apply it to the woman's genitals inside and outside with this ointment, then have her sit in warm water up to below the ribs;	But if it defies all that we have described, take mucilage of marsh mallow and fenugreek and oil of sesame and dissolved gum, and pound them all well together in the mortar and anoint the woman's pudenda and lower abdomen; then make her sit down in warm water reaching to the costal margin.	0.8489574
and when she is softened below, make her a pessary of myrrh, and place it inside her, and leave it for an hour; then have her sit on a seat, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and press lightly on her belly, for the child will jump out immediately.	And when you see the lower parts are softened, make a suppository of myrrh and let her introduce it; and when she has had the suppository in for a while make her sneeze, stopping her nose and mouth; and press gently upon the abdomen; then will the foetus immediately emerge.	0.8180341
One must skillfully work to bring the hand back: if one cannot bring it back, then have the woman stand up and walk;	Presentation by the side with one hand hanging down: attempt to manœuvre the hand back again; but if you cannot reduce it then make the woman stand up and walk.	0.7516811
if she cannot walk, then have her lie down on a bed, and raise her legs firmly;	But if she cannot walk then have her lie on a couch, and agitate her feet violently.	0.80665815
then administer the lubricating preparation that I have described;	Then employ the ointment which I described among the mucilages.	0.6236906
and if she does not give birth, have her sit on a seat, then work on bringing the hand back; and deliver the child according to its natural position, and make her sneeze, and tell her to push until the child comes out.	If parturition begins, make her sit upon a seat and attempt the reduction of the hand and version of the foetus to the natural position, and make the woman sneeze and bear down until the child is born.	0.741083
with the child coming out onto its neck, and its hands spread out, and its face turned towards its mother's back It is necessary that the midwife hold her hand, then turn it little by little, and deliver it gently;	Presentation on the back, with hands outstretched and face towards the mother's back: the midwife should take the infant's hand and then turn him very slowly, and gently rectify his position.	0.7693572
And when it is even, apply a mixture of marshmallow root and oil to the area, as we have said, then tell her to move little by little;	Then when he is in the correct position apply to the maternal passage the oil and mucilage prescribed.	0.49370226
And when you have done this, have her sit on a chair, and tell her to push; and make her sneeze. In this same way with the entire afterbirth.	Then bid the woman move gently and when she has done so make her sit down upon a seat and bid her lean over to her right side; then bid her bear down, and with ptarmica make her sneeze ; then the foetus will come forth.	0.6594585
In this same way with the entire afterbirth. When it comes out in this way with the entire afterbirth, cut the afterbirth with your fingernail, until the moisture is drained;	The foetus presenting laterally, doubled up : when it presents at the os in this manner together with the membrane, open the membrane with your finger nail and let out the waters.	0.5453141
And if the child hangs by its face and neck, cut it from the navel so that it is not held back and the child dies;	And if it adhere over the infant's face and neck, cut it away from the umbilicus lest he be strangled and die.	0.84902716
Then push the child inside, until you have positioned it as it should be, and tell the woman to bear down sometimes:	Then push the foetus back till it is in the proper position, and bid the woman bear down a few times until the foetus comes forth.	0.6940022
of the delivery of twins Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four are born; and this is not a strange thing, and it happens rarely. Two are a strange thing, and do not usually live, except rarely;	The birth of twin or multiple foetuses: you should know that it is a common occurrence for twins to be born alive, and sometimes three or four infants, but this is a rarity; while five after this manner is altogether unnatural and they never live.	0.84760034
Two are a strange thing, and do not usually live, except rarely; I know this, that they are multiplied, and are separated by the membrane that divides them, which is attached to the uterus;	Although they may be more than one, they are enveloped in a single membrane but separated one from the other by a dividing membrane joined to the umbilicus of each one.	0.5140672
and sometimes they emerge as naturally as a single child, as we have said.	And when they are born they may come in the natural easy manner of a single foetus; or by any abnormal presentation such as we have described.	0.62305284
And if they come out with difficulty, treat them as we have said, and let the midwife be skilled, and do what she does quickly and lightly; and act in such a way as is best for their well-being. of multiple children	And if one of them be born with difficulty, presenting in some unnatural manner as described, the treatment is also as described. Let the midwife be delicate and do whatever she does gently and calmly, adopting in each case whatever technique it demands that will conduce to a safe result.	0.6801306
Sometimes one or two or three or four or five or six or seven are formed in the womb, or more, up to fifteen, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measure of the glorious wise [God?], and the midwife must know all this, for perhaps such a thing will happen to her; so let her act accordingly.	Sometimes in the womb there may form one or two or three or four or five or six or seven or more than ten. And I can vouch that one woman had an abortion of seven foetuses and another woman of fifteen, all of them formed. This is by the decree of the Almighty, the Wise. And all this should be part of the midwife's knowledge, for one day she may meet such a case and she must deal with it in the proper way.	0.8063092

chapter-2-subchapter-76.txt
of the dead child	On the extraction of the dead foetus.	0.43124452
When you treat a woman with a dead child in the womb, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are compelled to work by hand; you must know if the woman is of sound health, and has no condition where she is afraid of death;	When you have dealt with a dead foetus by those methods mentioned in their chapter, and it does not come out, and you are compelled to operate, you should examine to see if the woman be in a healthy state and not having any disease on account of which you might entertain a fear for her life.	0.76219296
the woman should be lying on her back, with her head inclined downwards and her legs raised;	The woman should lie on her back on a couch, her head tilted back and her legs raised.	0.8660668
and the assistant should hold her from both sides, or she should be tied to the bed so that she is not pulled down with the descent of the child;	An assistant on either side should hold her down firmly or she should be bound down to the couch, lest the body be drawn out of position in extracting the foetus.	0.7555823
then rub the vulva of the mother with moist oils with mucilage of marshmallow and fenugreek and linseed, then have the midwife anoint her hands with these oils and mucilages;	Then the opening should be anointed with moistening oils and with mucilage of marsh mallow and fenugreek and with linseed.	0.7373002
then insert them gently into the vulva, then find a place where she inserts the hooks that are suitable for this, and take care if the child is positioned to descend head first;	Then the midwife should anoint her hand with these oils and mucilages and gently introduce it into the vagina and with it locate a place in the foetus to fix hooks in.	0.55624586
insert the hooks into its eyes or its neck or its mouth or its palate or under the chin or in the fontanelle or near the temples, and if the descent is feet first, insert them in the heel and in the middle of the sides;	The suitable places for that: consider, and if the foetus present the vertex then she should fix the hooks in its eyes or in the neck or in the mouth or palate or beneath the chin, or the collarbone, or about the ribs, or beneath the false ribs. But if it present the feet let the hooks be fixed in the pubic region or middle ribs.	0.713207
and he should hold the hook in his right hand, and place the curvature between the fingers of his left hand, and insert it with his whole hand gently, and insert the hook in any of these places that we have mentioned, until it comes to the empty space;	She should hold the hook in the right hand and put the curved part between the fingers of the left hand, and introduce the hand gently and fix a hook in one of the places before mentioned, driving it in until it comes to a hollow.	0.79538256
then insert another hook opposite it, or a third if you need it, so that the extraction is even;	Then opposite it let her fix another or a third if need be, so as to give even traction, not pulling to one side.	0.7406498
and then pull it evenly, moving from one side to the other, to cause it to come out, and the hook should be toothed to hold it, as is the shape here:	Then she should pull evenly, not just in a straight line but with the foetus moved from side to side so that its exit may be eased, as is done in extracting a tooth.	0.6487629
And if a part of it remains, then let the surgeon anoint some of his fingers with oil, and insert them into that part, and pull out the other part;	From time to time the tension must be relaxed, and if any part of it be held up the midwife must oil some of her fingers and introduce them to one side to manipulate the retained part.	0.61312246
and if any of it still remains, then place this hook in a higher place, and do this until it all comes out.	And if a part only of the foetus come away she should shift the hooks to other parts a little higher up, and so on, until the whole of the foetus has come out.	0.6353184
And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot pull it back due to the tightness, then you must wrap a cloth around it, until it comes all the way out; then cut it at the joint of the sole or at the heel, and so you must do with the other hand, and with both feet.	If the hand should come out before any other part and it is impossible to reduce it on account of the pressure, then a tape should be wound round it and she should pull on it until it is all out; then it should be cut off at either the carpal or the elbow joint. In the same manner should the other hand be dealt with, and the feet.	0.85218275
And if the child's head is large and the birth canal is narrow, or if there is a pointed gathering on the head, you must place the pointed spatula between your fingers, and split the head and extract the fluid; or you break it with the instrument called "almidach", whose form comes with the instruments in the chapter which is after this one;	If the foetal head be large and it is tightly squeezed in exit, or if there be a collection of fluid in the head, you should introduce between your fingers a spike-shaped scalpel and split the head to let the water out; or you should smash it with the instrument called cephalotribe which will be illustrated, together with figures of the other instruments, in the chapter following.	0.7819849
and do the same if the child has a naturally large head;	In the same manner you act if the foetus have a naturally large head: either you should cut the skull open or smash it with the cephalotribe as we said; then you should draw out the bones with forceps.	0.56149673
and then pull out the bones with the forceps, and if the head jumps out and is caught in the vulva, let it be split, so that the fluid that is in the worst place comes out;	If the head comes out and the foetus is held up at the collar bones, an incision should be made to let out the humidity in the thorax, for the thorax will then shrink.	0.5843567
and if it cannot come out, cut it in pieces as best you can;	But if the thorax does not shrink and is not disposed to emerge then you should cut off pieces in any manner possible.	0.5557935
and if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then you must pierce it so that the fluid flows.	If the lower belly be swollen or dropsical then you should make an opening to draw out all the fluid.	0.71048665
And if the child is on its feet, the extraction is easy, and the straightening at the opening of the womb is easy.	If the foetus present the feet then the extraction will be easy and it will be a simple matter to guide it to the maternal opening.	0.73096526
And if it is narrow in the belly or the chest, you must extract it with a cloth wrapped around your hand; and cut the belly or the chest so the fluid within can flow out;	If it be stuck about the abdomen or thorax then pull on it with a cloth wound around your hand and cut an opening in the abdomen or thorax to allow the contents to flow out.	0.8045645
And if the other limbs are removed, and the head remains, then the midwife should put her hand deep into the womb and pull it down to the opening of the womb; then insert one or two hooks, and pull it out forcefully;	If all the limbs are removed but the head is turned backwards and is jammed, the midwife should introduce her left hand and, if the mouth of the womb is open, should put the hand into the cervix of the womb and investigate the head and, with her fingers, draw it down toward the opening and fix a hook or two in it, and extract it with these.	0.77767533
And if the opening of the womb is constricted because of a hot abscess that has developed there, do not work on it, but rather administer moist and oily things; and apply poultices, and sitz baths with softening and moistening water.	If it should be that the mouth of the womb is closed on account of an abscess, then one must not be rough with it but should use in this case instillations of moistening greasy substances; plasters also should be applied; and the woman should sit in a bath of softening and moistening waters.	0.76135087
And if the child is on its side, and you can straighten it, apply what we have said for a live child;	If the foetus present laterally and it is possible to reposition it, there should be applied the things mentioned for a living child.	0.69778025
and if one cannot, then pull it out piece by piece, and leave nothing of the afterbirth.	But if this be not possible then it should be cut away piecemeal and extracted. It is necessary that not a scrap of the afterbirth be left behind in the womb.	0.6704879
And when you have done this, apply what we have said for hot abscesses that occur in the womb;	When you have completed your treatment then also apply those treatments we have mentioned for abscesses occurring in the uterus.	0.6519971
and if bleeding occurs, she should be placed in astringent water, and administer other treatments.	If haemorrhage occurs, the woman should be put into styptic fluids and the usual treatment applied.	0.676927
And I saw a woman in whose womb a child had died, then another was conceived over that one, and the second also died. After a long time, she developed an abscess in the buttock, and it swelled until it opened, and began to suppurate heavily.	Now I myself once saw a woman who had become pregnant and the foetus had then died in utero; then again she conceived and the second foetus also died; and after a long while she got a swelling in the umbilicus which grew and eventually it opened and began to produce pus.	0.9051666
I was called for the treatment, and I considered it for a long time, and the wound would not heal.	I was called in to attend her, and I treated her for a long while but the wound did not heal up.	0.8228801
I applied a plaster of strong attraction, and a bone came out, and after a few days another one. I was very surprised, because there are no bones in the belly.	So I applied to it certain very strongly drawing ointments, and then a bone came away from the place; then a few days passed and another bone came out; and I was mightily astonished at this, seeing that the abdomen is a place where there are no bones.	0.8231857
So I thought that they were the bones of a dead child.	I formed the opinion that these were bones from a dead foetus.	0.75761455
I searched the wound, and drew out many bones, until the woman was in better condition; and the woman lived a long time like this, and a little bit of pus always came out of the place;	I continued this procedure and got a great number of bones out of her, the woman being in the best of health; indeed she lived for quite a while like that, with a little pus being exuded from that place.	0.8493861
and I would not have recalled this chapter except for the fact that, when the physician encounters a strange case, he should know how to provide help.	I bring forward this uncommon occurrence here since it gives knowledge and help about the sort of treatment that the doctor who practises surgery may contrive.	0.50960904

chapter-2-subchapter-77.txt
Here follows the shape of the press, with which one squeezes books;	This is the type of instrument with which books are pressed.	0.6360792
and with two turns at the two ends of the two cords. However, the horn should be more slender than the restrictor, and be made of ebony or boxwood;	It has two screws at either end of two pieces of wood; but this instrument should be more slender than a book press, and should be made of ebony or boxwood.	0.8051286
and the mouth of the wood should be one finger wide, and the edge of the boards one finger, and the length a palm and a half; and in the middle of the two planks should be two additions of this same wood, which should be attached to each, half a palm long or a little more;	The width of each piece of wood should be about two fingers' breadth and the thickness about one, and the length a span and a half; and in the middle of both pieces of wood, firmly attached, should be two projections made of the same kind of wood, each half a span long or a little more, and two fingers wide or a little more.	0.91635764
and these two additions are placed at the mouth of the hammer to open it when one turns the two cords.	It is these two projections that are to be introduced into the vagina so that it is thereby opened when you turn the screws.	0.6818957
Another form, resembling it but more slender and lighter, is made of ebony or boxwood, like tongs; and it has at the two ends two additions, as you see, of a palm long, and two fingers wide;	Another instrument, for the same purpose, but smaller and lighter. It is made of ebony or boxwood in the shape of forceps, but at the end it has two projections as you can see; and the length of each is about a span and the breadth two fingers.	0.8953569
and when you want to open the hammer with the whole instrument, have the woman sit on a bed, feet hanging and legs open, then put the two additions joined together into the hammer, and hold the head of the instrument underneath between her thighs; then open your hand with the whole instrument, as you did with the tongs evenly, according to how much you want to open the mouth of the hammer, until the midwife does what she wants.	When you wish to open the womb with this, make the woman sit on a couch with her legs hanging down, parted; then introduce the two projections pressed together into the orifice of the womb while you hold the end of the instrument lower down between her thighs; then open your hand in the same way as you would do with forceps, to the extent to which you wish to open the womb, so as to allow the midwife to do what she desires.	0.88969123
These instruments are all surmounted, and their forms are multiplied; and when the physician has prepared them, the work is more rapid, and better for men because of their quantity.	The more types of these instruments the practitioner has ready by him, the more rapidly he operates, and the greater his reputation among men.	0.71275645
So do not despise the instrument so that you don't have it prepared, because their necessity is not excusable.	So do not neglect to have ready by you a single one of these instruments, for you will certainly need it.	0.6895985

chapter-2-subchapter-78.txt
When the afterbirth is retained at childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath, then make her sneeze with pepper, and hold your hands over her mouth and nose; and if it comes out because of this, it is good.	When in a confinement the afterbirth is left behind, you should bid the woman hold her breath then make her sneeze with ptarmica, with your hand holding her mouth and nose; and if it come away thus, good.	0.87516165
If not, then take a pot, and make a hole in the lid, and put in herbs that can open the womb's opening, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, birthwort and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked in a pot in water over the fire;	But if not, then take a pot, pierce a hole in the lid, and put in it herbs that will open the womb, such as pennyroyal, rue, anise, chamomile, artemisia, cassia, and centaury, some or all of these remedies, submerge them in water, and place on the fire.	0.8437549
then put one end of a tube in the hole of the pot, and the other end in the opening of the womb, and hold it there so that the steam enters the womb;	Then fix a silver tube to the hole in the cover and bring the other end into the orifice of the womb and hold it in position so that the vapours may reach the body of the uterus.	0.7659985
then make her sneeze, as we have said. The afterbirth will come out quickly.	Then let her sneeze, as we said, and the afterbirth will quickly come away.	0.90852284
And if it remains after this treatment, and does not come out, then instruct the midwife to wet her left hand in sesame oil or in marshmallow mucilage, and then put it in the vagina, and search for the afterbirth; and when she has found it, she should take it and pull it little by little, straight out, so that the womb does not fall out during the extraction;	But if, after this treatment, it still remains and does not come out, then tell the midwife to dip her hand in oil of sesame or mucilage of marshmallow and introduce it into the vulva and search for the afterbirth, and when she has found it, to take hold of it and very gently draw it until she bring it out.	0.85474175
but she should move it gently to the right and to the left, and then pull; thus it will come and be detached.	But if it be adherent to the depths of the uterus, then let her pass her hand in as we described until she find the afterbirth; then let her draw very slowly and gently lest by violent pulling she cause a prolapse; and she should slowly move it from side to side, left and right; then let her increase the traction, for then it gives way to the pull and is freed from its adhesions.	0.60370916
And if the opening of the womb is already narrowed, we have described the treatment of sneezing, and of fumigation with herbs;	If the uterine opening be narrowed, we have earlier mentioned the treatment by induced sneezing and that of the pot and herbs.	0.7531895
and if it does not come out with all that we have said, be careful not to be foolish in pulling;	But if it does not come away by all the means we have described, beware of treating her roughly with repeated traction.	0.54213023
but what is at the opening of the womb, you must tie it to the woman's thigh, then administer an enema of tetrapharmacum ointment; thus it will rot and soften, and come out;	Whatever of it comes out of the opening should be tied to the woman's thigh, and then syringe her with Tetrapharmacon ointment; for that will cause putrefaction in a few days and it will loosen and come out.	0.7672645
however, when it rots, a bad odor comes to the stomach and head, and harms the patient. So then suitable fumigations are necessary for this:	However, when it necroses foul odours arise from it that ascend to the stomach and head and these cause harm to the patient; so she should have suffumigations appropriate for this.	0.87404543
some of the ancients tried fumigation of watercress and dried figs.	One of the Ancients tried suffumigation with nasturtium and dried figs.	0.76918346
The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman for the retention of the flowers and the afterbirth is this:	The form of instrument for suffumigating a woman for retention of the menses and of the afterbirth and the like.	0.73901844
And it is made of glass, similar to a cane, and one puts the narrow end in the genitals, and the wide end over the fire;	It is made of lead, resembling a funnel, or it may be made of bronze. Its narrow extremity is introduced into the pudenda and the wide end is put over the fire, and the suffumigation is produced on the hot coals.	0.61443245
and let the fumigation be over the coals, and let it burn until it is used up, and start another one.	Keep it there until all the fumes are gone, and repeat once.	0.45358837

chapter-2-subchapter-79.txt
Many children are born who do not have a pierced anus, but it is blocked by a thin membrane: therefore the midwife must pierce this membrane with her finger, and not pierce it with a sharp spatula, and take care that she does not touch the band (frenulum);	Infants are quite often born with the anus imperforate, closed by a fine membrane; then the midwife should perforate the membrane with her finger or pierce it with a sharp scalpel, being careful not to touch the muscle.	0.73068774
then apply wool soaked in wine and oil, then treat it with ointment until it is healed.	Then wool dipped in oil and wine should be applied, and treat it with ointments until healed.	0.9179824
And if you are worried that it will close up again, put a lead tube in the hole, and leave it for several days, and remove it when the child needs to go to the toilet.	If you are afraid it may close up, put into the opening a leaden tube for many days, which will be removed when the child wants to evacuate the bowel.	0.78894186
And sometimes this blockage comes from the healing of a wound or an abscess; so it is necessary to cut this adhesion: then it should be treated, as we have said, with the lead tube.	Sometimes also the anus is closed by the scarring of a wound or an abscess; then the scarring should be incised, and then dressed by those methods we have mentioned, including the leaden tube.	0.75808096

chapter-2-subchapter-80.txt
Fistulas that come from below the anus are swellings, and growths that come near the outside of the anus, or in the space between the two parts, and it can be a single fistula or several;	Fistulae in the lower parts are a knotting and thickening of the tissues occurring externally near the anus or in the perineum to one side. A fistula may be single or multiple.	0.79095656
and when this swelling is old, it opens and emits moist white pus or thin excrement, and sometimes these fistulas are perforating;	When a thickening of this kind has become chronic it opens and there flows out a white watery humidity or thin pus. These fistulae may be perforating into the rectum or bowel, or non-perforating.	0.73633945
and they are recognized because there comes out either excrement or flatulence when the patient defecates, and sometimes a worm comes out.	The former may be known by faeces or flatus coming out of them when the patient opens the bowel. Often also worms come out of them.	0.74897695
And there are fistulas that penetrate up to the bladder, and up to the middle of the penis; and extend up to the hip joint, and up to the base of the spine.	Often also worms come out of them. Sometimes also there are fistulae occurring in the perineum which penetrate to the urinary bladder and to the urethra; and some also penetrate to the hip-joint and to the coccyx.	0.69989693
And thus one recognizes the fistula penetrating the anus, and the non-penetrating one: and you put your index finger in the anus, and insert a thin needle of brass or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.	A fistula penetrating to the anus may also be distinguished from one not so penetrating by introducing the finger into the anus and a fine probe into the fistula, made of either bronze or iron, if there be no bend in the course of the fistula.	0.77009016
And if there is tortuosity, then insert a thin lead probe, or a horsehair, until you feel the probe or the hair with your finger;	But if the course of the fistula be tortuous, then introduce a thin leaden probe or a horse-hair, until you feel the probe or horse-hair come on to your finger.	0.7743542
and if you don't feel it, and no discharge or flatulence or worms come from the opening, as we have said: know that it does not penetrate; so hurry to treat it.	But if you do not feel it at all and if no faeces nor flatus nor worm come out of the opening, as we said, you may know it is not perforating; so hurry on with treatment.	0.8385799
And when the fistula penetrates to the bladder or to the urethra, urine will leak out, and it cannot be healed with medicines.	When the fistula penetrates to the bladder or the urinary passages it is signified by the passage of urine and by the fact that medical remedies cannot cure it.	0.80309236
If it is pierced to the hip joint, then the probe reaches that place; if there is no tortuosity and the source of the pain is around it, then pus constantly comes out, and neither medicine nor healing ointment is effective;	But if it penetrate to the hip-joint or coccyx, this will be signified by the probe's passing right through to there if it be a straight passage to the bone; and by the pain felt in that part; and by the chronic purulent discharge; and the fact that medical treatment does no good and ointment does not heal it.	0.7049217
and in these penetrating fistulas there is no cure but work, and the vanity of foolish physicians who meddle with them.	There is in these perforating sinuses no cure whatever; and their treatment is labour in vain for all the ignorant doctors who pretend that they understand them.	0.7151273
In one that is not penetrating and is not old, there is hope of healing by surgery, as I have experienced, and the patient should lie on their back in your hands;	But there is hope in operative treatment for those that are not perforating and chronic, as I know from experience and shall now describe.	0.6162071
and lift their legs up to their thighs, and have their thighs bent towards their belly; then insert a probe of brass, or of lead if there is tortuosity, until you know where the probe reaches.	Thus: have the patient lying on his back before you and let both his legs be raised with the thighs flexed back upon his belly; then introduce a probe of bronze, or of lead if the course be tortuous, until you determine where the probe reaches.	0.75071037
If the patient feels it around the anus, then you should insert your index finger there, then feel if the probe has pierced it;	Then, if the patient feel the probe somewhere in the region of the anus, put your forefinger into the anus.	0.7398759
and if it is uncovered where you feel between your finger the abdominal wall or the flesh, then you know that it is penetrating; so do not work on it because it cannot be healed.	If you feel the probe itself with your finger, coming through bare, and you do not feel anything interposing between your finger and the probe, either membrane or flesh, then you may know for certain that it is a perforating fistula; do not spend your energy over it, for, as we have said, there is no cure.	0.730731
It is said, however, that some can be healed, but this happens rarely;	Yet some have said that it may be cured in certain cases, but rarely.	0.7831669
and the help that is given is to heat the thin cautery according to the width of the fistula, as was said before; and insert it, very hot, into the fistula, until it reaches near the rectum; and do this two or three times, until you know that these decayed tissues are burned, which resemble a bird's feather;	The treatment from which some relief may be hoped is to heat a fine cautery corresponding to the width of the fistula, as we have said before, and pass this, hot, through the fistula to the anus; then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those compact tags of superfluous flesh, which resemble quills, are burnt away.	0.84283406
and then treat it with tents soaked in butter, until this tissue comes out, then treat it with ointment that generates flesh and heals.	Then dress with a pad soaked in oil until the burnt tissue comes away.	0.5786526
If it is thus healed, that is good.	Then treat with healing ointments and, if it heals, well and good.	0.5565312
If not, it cannot be healed otherwise;	If not, it will never heal with any other treatment.	0.7196386
and if the probe enters, and does not reach down to the finger that is in the rectum, and between your finger and the probe there is a thick covering of flesh or tissue, and you see the fistula below that which follows the covering of the heart; then cut it from the beginning of the fistula, and push the probe further in, and then the cautery after it, until it reaches the end of the probe; and the probe will be released, and will fall out;	If you introduce the probe and it does not come through to your finger in the anus, and there be between your finger and the probe something firm interposing, either tissue or lining, and you see the fistula to be close under the skin, then cut open the skin at the origin of the fistula and continue your incision, with the probe in the fistula, until you come to the place where the tip of the probe has reached and the probe is freed and falls out.	0.87035227
then clean the damaged tissues that resemble a bird's feather, leaving nothing behind.	Then clean out all the solid quill-like pieces of tissue and let none remain.	0.7321828
And if the blood overcomes you, and flows between you and the work, cauterize it with fire or a sharp medicine.	If the haemorrhage be too much for you and interferes with your operating when cutting away the tissues, then the best and most speedily efficacious thing you can do is to cauterize, either with fire or with caustics.	0.5972759
For the fire cautery combines two good things: that is to say, the burning of this excess flesh, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture;	For cauterizing with fire unites two good characteristics, the burning away of those superfluous tissues, and the stanching of the bleeding, as well as the drying-up of humidity.	0.77085173
then treat it with tents soaked in butter or in crushed things, until the place produces pus, and the burnt flesh comes out with the pus;	Then treat with a dressing soaked in butter, or sulphur pounded with oil, until the place putrefies and the burnt tissue comes away in the pus.	0.78180015
then treat the wound with generating, drying ointments that produce hard flesh, and these are dry medicines.	Then treat the wound with salves to encourage healing and the growth of firm flesh, these remedies having also a styptic and drying quality.	0.6709321
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.	Then when the wound is healed over it is cured for good and there is no fear of a recurrence.	0.52148736
And if a fistula reaches deep into the anus, and is far from the body, put your finger into the anus and examine it.	If the fistula reaches deep into the anus and is far from the surface of the body, then put your finger into the anus and palpate.	0.8515713
If you feel the tent, and between the two is the cloth or the syfac or flesh, or it is close to piercing through, then there is nothing but a path of confidence and hope, by the application of one of the three methods:	If you feel a barrier of flesh or membrane interposed between the probe and your finger, and it be nearly through, then there is nothing to be done except to try a remote hope. There are three methods that you may employ.	0.7393534
either you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it all the way to the bottom, or if you can, you insert tents and treat it as before;	The first is to cauterize it, as we have said.	0.4055188
and do not go too deep, so that you do not cut the tissue that holds the anus, and the excrement comes out involuntarily; then treat it as we have said;	Or you may cut it open until you reach the termination so as to be able to insert a dressing and bring the medicament into contact with it, but do not extend your incision too far lest you cut into the sphincter muscle and the patient become incontinent of faeces; then dress in the manner we have said and perhaps it may heal.	0.5790925
then treat it as we have said; perhaps it will be healed, or you remove that covering and clean it after it has been cut near the anus, either with a tent or another suitable instrument; then clean the damaged flesh that is in the wound, as much as you can; then work to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula in the area outside the anus:	Or you may perforate the barrier and pierce it through, after incising to the vicinity of the anus, as we have said, either with the probe or with some other sharp-pointed instrument; then clear away the fleshy granulations in the incision as far as you are able; then attempt the repair of the whole wound with the incision and the upper opening, until it heals.	0.8314647
then work to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula in the area outside the anus: thus it will be easier for the patient.	Let the inner end of the fistula remain open, for this will ease the patient.	0.67243326
And sometimes there are fistulas in this way: and it is when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is in the side of the anus near the skin above, then take a tent pierced at the end in this way: And put a twisted thread doubled, and put the tent with the thread into the fistula until it is at the end.	Sometimes also a fistula is cut out in this way: namely, you pass a probe into the fistula; it should be near the circle of the junction of the outer skin with the anal mucosa; then take a probe with an eyed point like a shoemaker's needle; put into it a thread twisted of about five threads, and insert into the fistula until it reaches the end.	0.7523587
If it pierces the edge of the anus inside, then pull the thread out of that hole, so that you put your finger in the anus;	If it has perforated through at the anal margin within, nearby, draw the thread out of that perforation by introducing your finger into the anus.	0.7899587
and pull the end of the thread, and bring the two ends together, and tie one to the other, and leave it for a day or two;	Draw out the end of the thread and tie the two ends together and leave for one or two days.	0.73428786
and tighten it sometimes, until the thread cuts the flesh that is between the two, and they fall off;	As the thread cuts into the tissues, tighten it up well until those tissues enclosed in the thread are cut through and fall away.	0.49731702
then treat the wound until it is closed and healed.	Then dress the wound until it be healed and sound.	0.80739367
If the fistula does not pierce, make it pierce in any way you can, if it is not too deep. For it is not necessary to cut too deeply for the ligature, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.	If the mouth of the fistula is not perforated, perforate it as best you can, unless the depth is too great; in which case you must not do so lest you cut the muscle. Then treat as we have said until it heals.	0.8796338
The shape of the pointed scalpel with which one cuts the fistula is very sharp on one side and cutting; and not on the other, so that one does not cut what one should not cut, as you see here:	Figure of the sharp-pointed scalpel for cutting open fistulae; the curved edge should be exceedingly sharp and the other blunt, lest you cut what should not be cut, as you see.	0.8159514

chapter-2-subchapter-81.txt
Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: either they are inside the anus, like a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and blood constantly flows from them, and there is one or more, and they are outside the anus and at the end of the anus;	Haemorrhoids are of two kinds: either internal, resembling red bubbles or grape-seeds, small or large, with blood perpetually flowing, and they may be single or multiple; or they may be external, round about the anus.	0.8602787
but those that are outside have little moisture, and constantly leak a little yellow water or a little blood, and have the color of the body;	External ones are for the most part fairly dry; a little yellowish fluid or blood constantly oozes from them, and they are of the colour of the body.	0.7575661
and the treatment for those who have them inside the anus is that you instruct the patient to strain while going to the toilet, so that the anus protrudes, and the threads appear; then hurry, and grasp it with forceps, or hold it with your fingernail, then cut it at its roots;	The treatment of internal piles: bid the patient open his bowel and bear down until the anus opens out and the swellings are disclosed to you; then quickly take hold of them with hooks or with your finger-nail and cut them off near the roots.	0.7176832
and if the hooks cannot hold them because of their moisture, grasp them with a cloth, or with cotton, or with a piece of chamois; and pull them out with your fingers, then cut them, and powder over them some hot powders that act as a cautery; or you cauterize them as described in the chapter on cautery, then treat them with other treatments until healed;	If the hook does not retain its hold on them because of their humidity and softness, then cut them with a piece of rough material or a rag of goat-hair, or draw them out with your fingers and cut them off; and after excision sprinkle some caustic powder on to act instead of the cautery; or cauterize them as previously described in the book on cauterization; then dress in the usual way until healed.	0.88369524
and if the rectum cannot protrude, give the patient a biting and harsh enema to cleanse what is in the rectum, so that it can come out clearly; When the patient strains, and if the threads are far from the anus, then the treatment is easy;	But if the anus will not open out for you then give a slightly corrosive enema so as to wash out what is within, and then, the anus will open out quickly when the patient bears down.	0.6893542
When the patient strains, and if the threads are far from the anus, then the treatment is easy; and you take them with your fingernail or with tweezers, and cut them, then treat them as we have said, until healed, and so they avoid the incision by iron. You must administer the suture in this manner:	Now the treatment of external piles is easy and simple: take hold of them with your finger-nails or catch them up with a hook and cut them away; and treat as before mentioned until cured.	0.6828939
You must administer the suture in this manner: take a twisted thread, and put it in a needle, and then pull the thread over and make the needle pierce the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle, and it should be wide;	But with the patient who refuses excision with the knife, this manner of removal should be practised: thread a twisted thread into a needle, then draw the piles upward and run the needle through the root of each, from one side to the other, and wind the ends of the thread round beneath the needle as it lies crosswise, and bind the pile firmly; then knot the thread and remove the needle.	0.7034638
and tighten the thread firmly, then knot the thread, and pull out the needle, and do this with all the others, and leave one to drain the excess blood;	Do this with each pile, but leave one not destroyed so that the superfluous blood may flow from it.	0.45877042
then put on the wound a cloth moistened with rose oil or cerate, and put it on the wound, and tell the patient to rest;	Then apply to the anus a piece of material soaked in oil of roses or wax; apply it and bid the patient lie quiet; then leave him until the piles fall away.	0.7391676
and then leave it until they fall off, and when they have fallen off, then treat them with ointment and other treatments, until they are healed.	When they fall away, dress with ointments and the usual dressings until healed.	0.5480294
So you must scrape the bark from the surface with the tip of a spatula or your fingernail, which prevents it from moistening; then treat it until it is consolidated as it should be;	If they become chronic, and medical treatment is unavailing, you should scrape them with the edge of a scalpel or with your finger-nail until they become soft and the upper layer, that prevents healing, is removed; then dress until they mend as they should.	0.61849725
and if it cannot consolidate, then repeat the scraping more forcefully than before, until it heals well, and is excoriated/raw; then treat it until it is healed.	But if they do not heal, repeat the scraping more strongly than at first until they bleed freely and become raw; then apply dressings and they will heal.	0.72957516

chapter-2-subchapter-82.txt
of ash tree Formice is a small, misshapen/irregular appearance around the body, and it goes very deep;	A pimple is also a little compact thick prominence on the skin surface, going deep; when it gets cold there is a feeling as of an ant's sting in it.	0.5548792
and sometimes the cold finds it, and it feels as if numb with cold, and it occurs all over the body, and more in the hands than elsewhere.	It is found all over the body but mostly on the hands.	0.47380063
And the treatment is that you take a quill from a goose feather, or a strong vulture feather, and place this quill upon the formice, so that the circle encompasses the formice all around; then turn your hand with the quill until you cut all around the formice, and put it in deep, and pull out the formice by its roots.	The treatment is to take the quill of a strong feather of the goose or the vulture, and place the quill over the pimple so as to encircle it with the circumference of the tube; then revolve the quill with your hand so as to cut all round the pimple, and go deep into the flesh, and then the pimple may be drawn out by the roots.	0.90633607
And if you wish, do this with a quill made of brass or iron according to this shape, and it should be thin underneath and sharp on top: not sharp enough to pierce, so that it can be held by the finger, and also pressed.	If you wish you may extract it with a tube of bronze or of iron, of this form. The upper closed part of the tube should be fine, solid, and twisted, to give easy purchase for the fingers in holding and revolving it.	0.6525501
And if you wish, cauterize the formice, as described earlier in the chapter on cautery.	If you wish you may cauterize the pimple as described earlier on the cauterization of warts in the book on the cautery.	0.7403823

chapter-2-subchapter-83.txt
Sometimes a clyster is made of silver, or tin, or cast or hammered brass;	A clyster may be made of silver or of Chinese alloy or of cast or hammered bronze.	0.7672893
and sometimes these instruments are made small and large, depending on to whom they are administered. Those then which are administered in the treatment of children, and who are weak and suffering, are small.	Large and small varieties of this instrument are made, to suit those on whom they are to be used; those for the treatment of children will be small.	0.6753621
Those then which are administered in the treatment of children, and who are weak and suffering, are small. The form of the clyster, small and large, is wider at the top, where the belly is tied, in this way:	Patients with stricture of the anus, or pain, will have very slender clysters. Figure of a large clyster.	0.495399
and there should be a separation where the belly is tied, as you see, and the bottom should be pierced;	The upper end of the funnel to which the membrane is bound should be broad like this; it should have a rim where the membrane may be bound down, as you see.	0.6099981
and it has two holes on one side, and one on the other;	The lower extremity, which is introduced into the anus, should be closed and smooth, and on one side of it should be two holes, and on the other, one; the width of the holes should be about that of a probe or a little wider.	0.5663229
and the belly, where the medicines are put, should be made of an animal bladder or parchment, and pierced all around with small holes, and there should be a finger's width between each hole, then put a strong thread of raw flax, twisted tenfold or around it into these holes, and gather the belly like a goat's udder; and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument at the front with a strong thread, then administer the clyster;	The membrane to hold the medicament is made out of an animal's bladder or of parchment, made up in the form of a small bag, a span in diameter. It should be pierced with a number of holes in a circle a finger's breadth apart; and into these holes pass a strong thread of yarn, twisted of ten or so threads, and with this gather up the skin like a bag; and when the medicament is placed in it tie it down firmly between the two rims on the upper end of the clyster; and then give the enema.	0.86201495
and this is the shape of the circle:	This is the figure of the circle of skin with the holes.	0.47819507
And the medicine should be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the tip of the clyster with oil or egg white, or something similar, then insert it gently;	Then anoint the tip of the clyster with oil or egg-white or mucilage of fenugreek or the like; then gently pass it into the anus; then let an assistant take the membrane in both hands and together firmly squeeze it until all the contents are squirted into the bowel.	0.67815876
then the practitioner squeezes it with both hands together, until it is completely empty, then withdraws the clyster, and the patient raises their legs against the wall, and if the medicine wants to come out, they hold it in as long as they can;	Then the clyster should be removed and the patient should raise his legs against the wall.	0.5813112
and if they sleep a whole night with it, it is even more helpful.	If the enema stimulates him to evacuate, let him hold it as long as he can; if he delay all night long, it will be all the more efficacious.	0.4965934
And if you give a clyster for diarrhea, and the medicine comes out quickly, repeat it until they are healed.	If the enema be given in a case of diarrhoea and he has to evacuate hastily, then the use of the enema should be repeated until he is cured.	0.6811246
And if there are hemorrhoids in the anus, or an abscess, the clyster should be as thin as for a child;	If there be haemorrhoids or painful tumours in the anus, the clyster should be exceedingly slender and smooth, of the sort employed for children.	0.7274121
and this is the form of the thin clyster for when the leather is tight:	Here is a figure of a fine clyster with its skin tied on.	0.5368582

chapter-2-subchapter-84.txt
We have already spoken in the division about the treatment of wounds;	I have already mentioned in the appropriate section the treatment of such wounds as are suitable for cauterization.	0.58194065
now we will tell you the treatments by hand and by medicine, according to completion.	Here I shall describe the operative and medical treatment in full.	0.63452226
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and from what they are made.	So I begin by saying that wounds differ according to that which causes them and according to the site.	0.7351786
The things by which wounds are made are by throwing stones, and cutting with a sword and knife, or with a lance or wood or arrow, or similar things;	Those things that cause wounds are many: a knock from a stone, a cut from a sword or a knife, a blow by a spear, stick, or arrow; and many such things.	0.8151204
or that they are made according to the places of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the chest, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;	To consider wounds according to their site on the body, they are such as a wound occurring in the head, or neck, or chest, or belly, or liver, and so on.	0.783871
and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and will begin with the simple wounds of the head, for the complex one will come in its chapter.	I shall begin particularly with the simple wounds of the head; for mention of the compound wounds will be made at the beginning of the third book.	0.70881367
I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head, and the bone is not broken, take note if it is from a thrown stone or similar things, and the skin is nevertheless broken and the wound is large, and you suspect the development of a hot abscess: then immediately have them bleed from the cephalic vein, especially if little blood comes from the wound, and let the bleeding be on the opposite side of the injured part;	I say then, that when there occurs a simple wound of the head, with no accompanying bone-fracture, you should look; and if it be caused by a knock from a stone or the like, and has only broken the skin, but it is a big wound and you fear lest there occur an abscess, then bleed the cephalic vein at once without delay; draw off from him blood in proportion to his vigour if there is no contra-indication to venesection; and particularly if the haemorrhage from the wound be slight.	0.8478029
and the patient should avoid excess of wine and rich foods.	The venesection should be on the opposite side to the wound; and caution the patient against gluttony and wine and rich food.	0.6720023
And if they do not want to be bled, then let their food be light, and let them not drink wine, nor eat meat;	But if from any cause venesection is prevented, he should be on a light diet and avoid meat and wines.	0.47797596
and put on the wound, if a hot abscess develops there, cotton soaked only in rose oil, or in styptic wine;	And apply to the wound, if there be any inflammation, cotton wool soaked in oil of roses, either alone or with a somewhat astringent wine.	0.7382263
and if there is no hot abscess, then put on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood and has not been exposed to the air, a powder, which I will describe a little later;	And if you are sure there is no inflammatory swelling, then apply directly to the wound, if its blood is fresh and it is unaltered by the air, the powder that I shall describe to you a little later.	0.801475
and if the burn has altered it, then apply some ointments until it is healed.	But if the air has already changed the wound, apply to it one of the ointments to cause it to discharge the pus; then dress until healed.	0.6636202
And if the wound is large, like from a sword cut or similar, and the edges cannot be brought together by tents, then join them by stitching, as I will describe for wounds of the belly, concerning stitching.	Now if it be a great wound, being caused by a sword-cut or the like, and dressings will not bring the edges of the wound together, you should suture them together in the manner I shall describe in dealing with the suture of abdominal wounds.	0.85810196
If the wound exposes bone and hangs, attached only slightly, cut it off; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat rich foods, such as head cheese and cooked wheat, also like chicken, and similar things.	But if the skin has actually disclosed the bone, and is attached by a small strip only, then cut it away and dress the wound with medicaments that will produce firm flesh to replace the skin, and bid the patient go on a diet of solid food such as brawn and gruels and the like.	0.81285983
And if you find rot in the skin, and it does not reach the bone, cut away all the rot, and throw it away, then treat it;	And if decomposition arise in the skin and it will not adhere to the bone, then excise all the diseased part and discard it and then dress.	0.74442273
And if there is an artery or vein in the wound from which blood flows, and it cannot be stopped with medicines, then search for the artery, and if you find it displaced, tie it with a thread; and if that doesn't work, cauterize it.	If in these wounds there be an artery or vein shedding blood, and medicinal applications do not stanch it, then examine the artery, and if you find it not quite severed then cut it through with a scalpel and ligature it; and if you are compelled, our directions being unavailing, then cauterize until the haemorrhage stops.	0.8542192
And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is easy: and put in this powder which heals before the burn changes it.	If these be small and simple wounds their treatment will be a light and easy matter; it is sufficient to sprinkle some of this powder on while they are still bleeding, before the atmosphere causes a change.	0.7526028
And the composition of the powder is: take one part incense; two parts dragon's blood; three parts quicklime, and powder it finely, and fill the wound, and bind it tightly, until it heals well and joins with all its blood;	Description of the powder: let one part of olibanum and two parts of dragon's blood be taken, and three parts of quick or slaked lime, all beaten up together and passed through the sieve; and let the wound be packed with this and bound up tightly so that the powder sticks in position and coagulates with the blood.	0.80122006
and then tie it well, and leave it unbound unless it swells; for the medicine is not removed until it is healed.	Then bind pads above and let it be, not undoing it so long as it remains without swelling; for the dressing will not come away of itself until it is healed.	0.8115932
And sometimes this is done with lime alone, when one does not have the incense or the dragon's blood, but the burn must not have changed the wound.	Lime alone can do this if you have no olibanum and dragon's blood at hand. It has exactly the same effect too on most large wounds, when the application and bandaging are properly done, and when the haemorrhage is recent, so long as the air has not changed them.	0.6222984
And if the burn has changed the wound, especially in summer, then this powder is not applied;	If, however, the air has brought about some change, especially if it be in the summer season, then there is no point in the application of this powder.	0.6773554
but apply some digestive ointments, or a poultice of barley flour made with water and honey, until it suppurates; then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.	Treat it then as we have said, by applying one or other of the suppurative ointments; or by applying a gruel of barleymeal with water and honey, so that the pus flows; then treat by all the usual methods until cured.	0.76047826
And if a bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine forceps;	If, with the wound, there be also fracture of a bone, if it be slight, you should extract it with forceps.	0.7244483
and I will tell you later about fractures of the head.	I mention the treatment of fractures of the head later on.	0.7321125
of the wound of the neck	On wounds in the neck:	0.6417227
If a wound occurs in the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.	If a wound occur in the neck the treatment of it does not differ from that of a head wound, if it be simple.	0.7397954
If it is the nerve, there is no other method than to leave it to heal, and not put anything restrictive on it, because it harms the nerves and makes them retract; and do not put anything cold on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and their connection is with the brain, which is the highest member;	But if a nerve or artery in the neck happens to be cut: if it be a nerve, there is no device that will serve except to avoid treatment of it by strong styptic remedies such as verdigris and vitriol and the like; for these injure the nerve and cause spasm; and under no circumstance let anything cold be applied to the wound, for the substance of the nerve is cold and it is continuous with the brain, which is the most noble among the organs.	0.7207074
but the medicine should be soft, such as warm water washed in fresh water, and mixed with rose oil, and cuckoo pint also washed in fresh water, and other mineral stones in this manner, and moist ointments.	But let your remedy for it be mild, such as lime slaked in sweet water many times and moistened with olive-oil or oil of roses; and with tutty, likewise washed in sweet water; and other minerals according to this prescription, and with bland ointments.	0.80159485
And if the wound is large, then sew it and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.	If the wound be large, use stitches or draw the edges of the wound together with pads; then dress until cured.	0.716461
And if the wounds are deep and it is filled with pus and mud, then pierce it in the lowest place;	But if there be depth to the wound and a sinus appears at the bottom of it, in which pus has collected, then make an opening at the site of greatest depth.	0.6114646
And if the artery is cut, and bleeding occurs, then uncover it, and wash it, and cauterize it if necessary;	Now if an artery has been cut in the wound and you are in time to find it still bleeding, divide it or ligature it; or cauterize it if you are compelled to.	0.7251524
And if the windpipe of the throat is cut, or the heart, and the tube is preserved, through which the food passes, then sew the heart over the tube of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back according to its natural shape; And then bind it conveniently, and leave it for some days, then treat it with drying ointments until it is healed;	If it be such a wound that some of the cartilages of the trachea are laid open, or the whole trachea, the jugular veins being safe and sound, then join the skin edges together with a suture over the windpipe, and do not touch the windpipe, but straighten it and restore to its natural form; then tie firmly and leave for some days; then treat with salves having some styptic and astringent quality, until healed.	0.74096256
And if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then scrape it; And if there are pieces of bone, then pull them all out if you can, and those that you cannot get, leave them until the wound festers, and is opened and the passage cleared;	If the wound has affected bone, examine it, and if there be fragments of bone in it get them all out, or all you can. Those you cannot get hold of, leave until the wound suppurates and heals, and it will be easy to extract them.	0.8717523
And if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle on the powder that I have mentioned. And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.	If it be a fresh wound, sprinkle on the powder I have described ; and if any bone corrupt in the wound and it becomes a fistula, treat it by those means we shall mention in their place.	0.8644934
If it is a blow from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, then see if air escapes from the wound when the patient breathes: know then that the wound is mortal;	If it be a piercing wound by a spear or a knife, and you see that it is deep, examine if there be a passage of air out of it when the patient breathes; whence you may know that the injury is mortal.	0.87704515
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put the powder in it at the first hour, nor bind it because of the blood so that it does not remain deep inside and return to the heart, and kill the patient; but put on a drawing ointment, and bind it twice a day;	But if it is not deep and the haemorrhage is fresh, then do not straight away apply powder or bandage lest it keep the blood in the depths, so that it be returned to the heart and kill the patient; but apply to it a drawing ointment, and uncover it twice daily.	0.81493306
and if you have no ointment, put old cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more; thus no spasm will come, nor trembling sickness of the heart, nor shortness of breath; and when you see good signs, know that the wound is safe. Then treat it with tents and other treatments until it is healed;	If you have no ointment, apply carded cotton to the opening of the wound to soak up the humidities issuing from it. And make the patient sleep on the (side of the) wound so that what collects therein may flow out. And if three or four days pass by after the wound, and the patient have no spasm or harmful palpitation of the heart nor obstruction to drawing breath, and you see that in other respects he is doing well, you may know that the wound is not dangerous; so treat it with pads and the usual dressings until it heals.	0.88019764
and if it cannot heal, and festers, then know that there is a fistula;	But if it will not heal and it permanently discharges pus, you may know that it has become a fistula; look for the treatment of this in the proper place.	0.6923148
so treat it as one should. And if the wound is from a sword cut or knife, and it is simple, whether on the chest or the back, treat it as described previously; if it is large, with sutures;	If the wound be from a cut with a sword or knife, a straightforward surface wound in the breast or back, then treat it as described before; that is, by suture if it be a great wound or by powder if it be a small one.	0.8761455
and if it is small, with powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has broken off pieces, then explore the wound, and draw them out if they are detached; and if they are not detached, let the wound fester, so the extraction will be easier;	But if there has also been injury to the bone, cutting out fragments from it, you should explore the wound and hasten to draw out the fragments if they are detached from the bone; but if they are not detached then let be until the wound suppurates, when the removal of the fragments will be easy.	0.7606169
and the judgment for other wounds in other limbs is as we have said.	Then with regard to other wounds occurring in other parts of the body, the same class of treatment should be used for them as for those already mentioned.	0.5883893

chapter-2-subchapter-85.txt
of the rupture of the belly/abdomen	On wounds of the abdomen, and protrusion of the intestine; and on suturing them.	0.43031657
The rupture of the belly/abdomen is large and medium and small;	The tear that occurs in the abdomen may be great or small or it may be middle-sized.	0.64957476
from the large wound sometimes the intestine, or the sinews of the intestines, protrude, making their insertion difficult;	From a large tear one or more segments of gut may protrude. The reduction of this and the suture of the wound is an exceedingly hard and difficult matter.	0.59791833
and the stitching is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the large one, because it is more difficult to put the intestines back in unless one replaces them promptly;	The reduction of this and the suture of the wound is an exceedingly hard and difficult matter. Small openings may also be difficult in another way, for they are bound to be harder to reduce, and if you do not hurry to return the gut to its place at once it will swell up and enlarge, thus rendering reduction difficult.	0.67212534
because the intestines swell as soon as they feel the cold, thus making them more difficult to replace, and therefore the medium wound is better, because the intestine is more easily returned to its place than in the other two.	So the best tear is the medium-sized, for in this case the reduction of the intestine will not be as difficult as in the two other cases.	0.607039
And know that the rupture of the abdomen/belly occurs in four ways:	Then you should know that suturing the abdomen may be carried out in four ways.	0.6405334
the two common sutures occur in the suturing of the abdomen/belly, and the suturing of other wounds of the body and two other specific sutures are common to other wounds;	Two of them are general; suitable both for suture of the abdomen and for other wounds of the body. The other two sutures are special; they may be used for other wounds, but are more suitable for abdominal wounds.	0.73274064
and yet they are more specific with the suturing of the abdomen/belly, and I will describe and explain each one.	The other two sutures are special; they may be used for other wounds, but are more suitable for abdominal wounds. I shall describe each one to you separately, with comments and explanation.	0.53748465
I say that when the wound is small, and some part of the intestine comes out, and it is difficult to put back, this is because of one of the two ways: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen from the cold.	I begin then by saying that when the wound is small, and a piece of intestine protrudes from it, rendering the reduction of it difficult, the difficulty will be due to one of two causes: either on account of the smallness of the fissure, as we said; or because the gut has become inflated on account of the coldness of the air.	0.86123735
And when it is cold, warm it in this way: wet a sponge or a soft cloth in lukewarm water only, or in which you cook squinant, cypress, and spikenard in water, and sprinkle the intestine until the swelling is gone;	If the latter case obtains, the gut must be warmed by fomenting with a sponge or piece of cloth bathed with warm water or water in which have been boiled rushes and cyperus and hyacinth, bathing the gut until the inflation is gone down.	0.6748806
and sometimes make this wine astringent, and it is better than plain water for reducing swelling.	Wine that is somewhat astringent may do; in bringing down the swelling it is better than plain water.	0.7529932
And when you see the swelling subside, then moisten the intestine with water in which marshmallow and mallow have been cooked, for by this the opening is soothed a little;	When you see that the swelling has come down, bathe the gut with water in which have been infused althea and mallows; for with this the reduction of the bowel becomes easy, using the lightest effort.	0.756089
and if it cannot enter, then cut the wound a little with the instrument with which one cuts hemorrhoids;	But if after this treatment the reduction is still difficult, open up the wound a little with the instrument for opening up haemorrhoids.	0.53771806
and the first treatment is better than cutting, for no one should cut there unless there is great necessity;	The first method, if possible, is better than incision, but one may be compelled to incise when other means have failed.	0.5702573
and this is the instrument for cutting it:	This is the form of the instrument.	0.46489698
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine protrudes, put it back according to its natural form in its proper place, if you are able, for that is much better.	When the wound is opened up a little with the instrument and the bowel is reduced, it is important to return it to its natural shape and proper position, if you can, for that is better.	0.77391577
When the wound is large, and it is in the lower part of the belly, you must make the patient lie on his back, and place his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the lower part of the belly, put the head and chest higher than the lower parts, and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, take care that the injured part is higher than the other;	When the wound is large and in the lower abdomen the patient should lie on his back and have his legs higher than his head; but if it be in the upper abdomen his head and chest should be placed higher than his lower parts. And in the same way if the opening be on one side of the abdomen you should always make it your object to put the wounded side higher than the other.	0.90970993
and thus one must manage what I say for large and medium wounds.	So must you proceed in large or middling wounds.	0.6730968
In small wounds, apply what is prepared for you, then have at hand a compassionate assistant who holds the entire rupture in his hand, and brings the edges together;	But in small wounds put the patient in a position convenient to yourself. Then have an assistant under your direction to enclose within his hands the whole of the wound and bring the edges together, and then uncover it bit by bit for the one who is putting in the stitches.	0.7228487
and this is the common method of stitching, and it is that you take a needle or several, depending on the width of the wound, then leave a finger's width of space from the top of the wound, and insert a needle there with a good strong thread; and pierce both edges of the skin along with both edges of the siphac, which is under the skin inside, until you make it pierce through to the other side, and bring the two edges of the siphac, all four together;	Now this is the description of one general suture, namely: one or more needles are taken, depending on the size of the wound; then, leaving about the width of the little finger from the end of the opening, pass an unthreaded needle from within through both edges of the skin together with both edges of the peritoneum which lies beneath the skin, piercing from one side to the other; thus you will have brought together both skin edges and both peritoneal edges, making four layers.	0.82180846
then tie it with a double thread around the needle on both sides, then bring the two edges of the wound together neatly, then leave a finger's width of space, and insert another needle there;	Then wind a double thread several times round the needle, and tighten up from both sides so as to bring the two edges of the wound perfectly together.	0.72990966
then tie it with the thread as you did the first needle, and continue doing this according to how many needles you need, until the entire wound is closed;	Then again leave about a finger's breadth and put in another needle and fasten it with thread as you did in the first instance; and go on doing this with as many needles as you need until you have finished mending the whole wound.	0.835454
and the needles should be medium, between fine and thick, because fine needles cut through all the flesh, and those that are too thick cannot enter well: therefore they must be medium-sized;	The needles should be of medium fineness; for the very fine needles soon cut into the flesh; while thick needles, on the other hand, are difficult to pass through the skin; so they should be medium between fineness and thickness.	0.84624034
and the needles should not be placed too deep in the flesh and skin, so that they don't cut and open the wound before it heals;	You should not introduce the needle too near the edge of the skin lest the tissues be soon cut through and the wound gape before it has joined. Nor should there be too great an interval between the stitches, lest the wound be prevented from scarring up.	0.73184526
and then cut off the heads of the needles, so they do not injure the patient while sleeping, and place tents or cloths at the ends of the needles to hold them still, and leave them until the wound is healed;	Then cut off the ends of the needles lest they hurt the patient during sleep; and make for him pads of linen scraps to cover the needle ends on both sides; and let them be until you know the wound is healed up.	0.8163887
and this method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because one or two needles are sufficient.	This method of suture with needles is most suitable in small wounds, for one or two needles or thereabouts will probably be enough for such.	0.8331855
The second stitch is common, and is that you bring the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the muscle together with a needle threaded with a strong, medium-sized thread;	Now the second kind of general suture is to bring together all four edges, the two skin edges and the two peritoneal edges, at one and the same time, with a needle furnished with a twisted thread of medium thickness.	0.67913747
and when you have pierced all four of these edges together, bring the needle back to the side where you began, in the way that cloth is sewn;	Then when the needle has pierced these four edges bring it back precisely to where you began, so that the thread may lie knitted over the wound to make a stitch in the manner of sewing up the bags in which goods are packed.	0.6894458
and leave a space between each stitch the width of a little finger;	The distance between stitches should be a little finger's breadth.	0.6138569
this stitch is common knowledge, and I sewed a wound that a man had in his belly, who was wounded with a knife, and the wound was more than a handspan long, and his intestines were protruding a good two handspans, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.	Everybody is familiar with this stitch. With this stitch I once sewed up a wound that a man got in the belly. He had been wounded with a knife; and the opening of the wound was more than a span long; and by that time there protruded some two spans' length of his mid-gut.	0.83668065
I put his intestines back in after they had been out for twenty-four hours, and the wound was stitched up within fifteen days, and I treated him, and he was healed.	The opening was in the middle of his belly; and I reduced it after the bowel had been outside the wound for twenty-four hours. The wound healed in about a fortnight, and I treated him until he was better; and he lived for many years after this, carrying on as usual.	0.74666333
And the physicians had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;	The verdict of the doctors was that he could not be healed.	0.5200056
and I did not treat him with ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicines; and I simply put old cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he was healed.	The remarkable thing is that I did not treat him with any ointment, for I was in a place where there was no sort of medicine; so twice a day I applied teased-out cotton wool to the wound, and carefully washed it with honey-water until he was healed.	0.8412796
Now I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching:	I shall now describe one of the two kinds of special suture according to the text of Galen.	0.5035661
take the needle, and push it from the outside part to the inside;	You begin at the skin, running the needle from without inwards.	0.5436858
when it has pierced the center straight through, then take the end of the thread or suture where you pushed the needle, and make it pierce on the other side from inside to outside;	When you pass it through the skin and the muscle that runs the length of the belly, leave the edge of the peritoneum on that side where the needle was introduced; and pierce the other edge of the peritoneum from within outwards through the other edge of the abdominal wall. When you have done this, pierce the same edge of the abdominal wall from the outside inwards, leaving the edge of the peritoneum which is on that side, and pierce the other side from within outwards.	0.6416205
and the meaning of this stitch is that you sew as leatherworkers do hides, and that you leave the thread once on one side, and take it again on the other, until the stitching is complete.	Do this once again and repeat until you have sewn up the whole wound after this fashion. In short, this way of suturing is to sew with the stitch used by furriers in sewing skins; thus you stitch the peritoneum once one way with the skin edge and leave it once the other way, until you have done.	0.699362
The second way of stitching, which Galen specifically describes, is like some do, who bring the two parts together naturally, and join one end of the thread to the other end, in this manner:	Now the manner of the second type of special stitch which Galen mentioned is this (these are his own words): that you suture it in the same way as many practitioners. That is, they suture each part to the part that corresponds naturally to it; so they join one peritoneal margin to the other and one skin margin to the other, in the manner I shall describe.	0.8023106
insert a needle at the end of the wound nearby, and make it pierce only that spot, and leave the two ends of the thread; then turn the needle and make it pierce from the outside to the inside, at the two ends of the thread;	You should put the needle from without inwards, in that edge of the abdominal wall that is nearest to you, and make it pass inward through that alone, leaving out the peritoneal edges; then turn the needle round and run it from without inwards through both peritoneal edges.	0.7663939
then make it pierce both from the outside to the inside, at two other ends of the wound that are on the other side;	Then turn it round again and make it pierce, from within outwards, the other edge of the abdominal wall, on the opposite side.	0.65703773
and this is the best way of stitching and the most common.	This type of suture is better than the easy general suture that has been mentioned.	0.44518238
Galen said these words, and some testify to it, that one should sew the belly with two needles, where there is thread in each one;	These are Galen's very words. Some have said that the suture of the abdomen may be performed with two needles, thus: you thread one thread into both and begin by introducing the needle into that part near you and carrying it through to the other side.	0.76112187
and one should push one needle from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew leather straps;	Then you insert the other needle on the far side and bring it through to the near side, after the manner of the shoemaker's stitch.	0.49114996
and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, then the stitching is more difficult than in other places of the belly.	You must understand that when the fissure is in the middle of the abdomen the sewing of it is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.	0.8274842
The treatment of the wound is like the treatment of other wounds:	But the medical treatment of the wound comes under just the same heading as that of other wounds.	0.7087083
and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, before the air has changed it, so replace the intestine, and sew it;	When you find a wound with its blood quite fresh, before the atmosphere has altered it, and you have reduced the intestine and have sewn it up and closed it firmly, apply to it powder to encourage fresh growth.	0.5725673
then put on the powder generating flesh, and if the air has changed it, then put on some ointment that is available, until the wound swells; and one hundred threads, and the superficial tissues should be joined, and the peritoneum; then treat the wound like the others, until it is healed;	But if the air has altered it, then apply to it some of the available ointments until it suppurates and the threads come away and the peritoneum and abdominal wall heal; then dress it as you would any other wound, until it is better.	0.7395929
and if you have no medicines, so put on, as soon as it begins to swell, old cotton, and change it twice a day until it is healed.	If you have no medicaments to hand, apply cotton wool as soon as suppuration begins, and change it twice daily, as I have taught you, until it heals.	0.8107951
For you do not need other medicine in most cases when the wounds are simple;	You will need no other treatment in the majority of cases when the wounds are simple.	0.82388675
and if you are worried that the wound will spread to the principal members, then you must soak light wool in oil of moderate heat, or in rose oil, and place it around the groin, and under the armpits;	But if you fear that the important organs may share the hurt of the wound, then you should dip some soft wool in moderately warm olive-oil or oil of roses and bind it round the various sites between the groin and the axillae.	0.7310566
and if he feels pain or pus in the bowels, and it often happens, then give enemas of lukewarm dark wine, especially if the pus comes down to the intestine;	If pain or gangrene be felt in the bowels—and that frequently happens—then clyster him with tepid astringent black wine, particularly if the gangrene has already set in in the bowel and has become a wound penetrating to the abdominal cavity.	0.7652307
and it pierces within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.	You should know that if the injured bowel be the large intestine it will heal the more easily, while if it be the small its healing is more difficult.	0.610605
The intestine which is called "jejunum" cannot heal when it is wounded, and this is because of the arrangement of the veins that are there, and because of the delicateness of the whole body, and the closeness of its nature to the nerves.	But the part of the bowel called the jejunum is not likely to recover from an injury to it at all; and that is due to the number and size of arteries in it and to the thinness of its structure and to its nearly approaching a nerve in its character.	0.70455337
And if the omentum protrudes from the wound, put it back in just like the intestine, while it is fresh;	If what protrudes from the wound be omentum, and you find it freshly protruding, then reduce it as you do intestine.	0.69760555
and if it is old and has become green or black, you must tie off the place that is black, so that bleeding does not occur there, because there are veins and arteries;	But if some time has lapsed and it has turned green or black, you should ligate it above the site where it has gone black lest there be a haemorrhage; for the omentum contains veins and arteries.	0.7861519
then cut what is between the two ligatures, and let the two ends hang from the part below the wound down outside to ease the extraction when the omentum falls off, and the wound closes.	Then cut off what is below the ligature and leave the ends of the thread hanging out from the lower part of the wound, so that it will be easy for you to draw upon it and extract it as the omentum falls away and the wound suppurates.	0.8234397
When the intestine is round, and the wound is small, it can be repaired in some men, because I saw that a man was wounded in the belly by a lance;	When a break occurs in the intestine and it is a small one, it is possible, in some men, that it may mend. For I myself saw a man who had been wounded by a spear-thrust in the abdomen.	0.84236145
and the wound was to the right of the stomach, and it festered and became a fistula, and the excrement and gas came out of it;	The wound was to the right of the stomach, and, being chronic, became a fistula whence issued faeces and flatus.	0.697572
I treated it as best I could, and did not stop refining the treatment until he was healed, and the place closed.	I set about treating him, though I had no hope of his recovery, and I continued to attend him, and eventually he recovered and the place healed over.	0.6126328
And when I saw it closed, I feared that the patient would have pain in his belly; and he had no pain, but remained in better condition, eating and drinking;	And when I saw that the place had healed over I was afraid for the patient lest some harm should occur in the abdominal cavity; but absolutely no harm arose from it, and he remained perfectly well and healthy, eating and drinking and engaging in coitus and going to the bath and carrying out the duties of his office.	0.7729603
and some experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, that it must be tied up in this manner: Take wheat grains with large heads, then bring the lips of the wound together, and when the wheat grain has opened its mouth, place it on the two lips so that it tightens its mouth over them;	Some men of experience have said that when a wound occurs in the intestine and it is small, it should be sutured in this manner, namely: ants with large heads are taken; then the edges of the wound are brought together and one of these ants is applied by its open jaws to the two edges of the wound, and when it seizes it and closes its jaws then the head is cut off, and it will stick and will not loosen.	0.83807576
and then cut off the head, and it holds so that it cannot come undone, then put another wheat grain next to it in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely enclosed; and sew the wound.	Then another ant is applied near the first; and you proceed after this manner with a number of ants according to the size of the wound. Then reduce the intestine and sew up the wound; for the heads will remain sticking to the intestine until it is healed up; and no harm will come to the patient.	0.6864441
These heads then dry up in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient, and one can tie the intestine with a fine thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal, in this manner:	The intestine may also be sewn up with the fine suture which is extracted from an animal's gut and sticks to it after being threaded in a needle.	0.5311498
take the end of this intestinal thread that is very thin, and then tie a thin twisted linen thread to the end of this thread, then put the thread in the needle, and sew the intestine with it, and bring it back into the rupture;	The method is that the end is taken of this suture made of gut, well scraped; and to this end is fixed a fine linen thread, twisted, and then that thread is passed through the needle affixed to the suture of animal's gut, with which the intestine is sewn and then replaced in the abdominal cavity.	0.7561575
and this method of stitching with wheat grains is only according to the way of trust and hope;	These kinds of suture, with the ants and with the gut, are by way of a remote hope.	0.41153008
and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the small intestines, there is no remedy or healing, except subtlety.	But if the opening be great and wide, and especially if it be in one of the small intestines, there is no technique to deal with it, nor any cure.	0.8127785

chapter-2-subchapter-86.txt
of a fistula wherever it may be Know that any wound or abscess, when it becomes chronic, is universally called a "fistula", and especially when it is deep and produces pus.	You should know that any wound or tumour, when it becomes old and chronic, and turns into an ulcer, and does not heal over, but discharges pus chronically and constantly, is generally called a fistula, in whatever part of the body it may be; but we call it a defluxion.	0.75914836
And a fistula, in truth, is a false, hard, white knot, where there is no feeling of pain, and is as deep as the feather of a bird;	The fistula proper is a compact hard white painless induration with a central hollow like a bird's quill; on which account some call it a quill.	0.64180505
and sometimes it discharges clear pus, and other times thick; sometimes little, and other times a lot;	At certain times it may be moist, constantly discharging pus; and again at certain times the moisture may cease; and the discharge may be greater or less; and it may be thick or thin.	0.76991796
and I have already spoken of it in the division of wounds, that any wound that is not healed, and where there is no flesh, is only due to one of nine causes: namely, because of lack of blood or bodily strength; or because of its malignancy; or because there is hard flesh inside, and on the edges, which prevents new flesh from growing;	I said previously in the appropriate section, when I was discussing abscesses, that any ulcer that would not heal nor show growth of tissue was due to one of nine causes. One is lack, or poorness, of blood in the body; or it may be because the hardness of the tissues, internally and at the edges of the opening, prevents the growth of sound tissue; or it may be because of the abundance of foul and evil matter; or it may be because the ulcer is necrotic in itself and the matter that it discharges is of bad quality; as also it may be because the remedy used in treating it is not suitable; or again it may be because of corruption arising at that locality, of the nature of pestilence; or it may be due to something special and peculiar in the locality—as happens in the city of Saragossa, where diseases tend to linger and tumours are naturally slow to heal; or it may be due to one or more bones in it.	0.8129709
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the medical treatments in the division.	I have indeed already, in their proper place, explained all these causes and their symptoms and their medical treatments.	0.74946547
Now I must inform you about the treatment of a fistula that is made by hand. (surgically created)	Now here I must explain to you the operative treatment of fistula and defluxion.	0.63398314
Know that a fistula can occur in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that occur in the large veins, and in the arteries, and in the nerves, or in the peritoneum, or in the intestine, or in the bladder, or in some of the ribs, or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet; and there are some that occur in the principal member itself, and in similar places.	You should know that a fistula may happen in any part of the body; and some fistulae reach as far as some great vein or artery or nerve or membrane or intestine or the urinary bladder, or one of the ribs or dorsal vertebrae, or some highly complex joint such as the hand or foot, while some terminate quite near some major organ, and so on.	0.88759655
And all fistulas of this kind are difficult to heal, and there is nothing but work and ignorance (involved in treating them);	Fistulae of this kind are among the diseases from which recovery is difficult; they are not amenable to treatment and to occupy oneself with them is labour in vain.	0.65995383
and if there is a fistula that does not reach the place that I have mentioned, and you are confident in the treatment, and you want to examine it, then take a probe of brass or iron, if the fistula is straight, and explore it;	But if there are any fistulae which do not reach in depth the places we have mentioned, and you have some hope and expectation of curing them, and you wish to attain to recognizing these, then you take a probe of bronze or iron, if the fistula run in a straight line, and investigate it with that.	0.7676883
and if the fistula is crooked, then search it with a thin lead probe, for lead bends easily around the crookedness;	But if the fistula be tortuous then investigate it with a thin leaden probe; for lead is soft, so as to flex on entry and follow the curves of the fistula.	0.7748445
and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot probe it well, then irrigate it through one of the openings, for the moisture will run from one opening to another and cleanse it;	But if the fistula have multiple openings so that you cannot explore it with the probe, then make an injection into one of the openings. The fluid you inject into that one will run to the other openings and flow out from them.	0.7711413
then explore it carefully as best you can, so that you know if there is bone or nerve involved, and its depth, and ask the patient carefully about the pain he feels from the pressure of your hand, and the place where he feels it;	Then make a complete exploration by whatever means you can, to find out whether there be at that place a bone or nerve, and whether the fistula be deep or superficial, and whether the fistula be one with multiple openings. Inform yourself of all these points, exerting yourself to inquire of the patient whether he feels pain while you are compressing with the hand, and seeking other indications and causes of tumour that may arise.	0.767151
and when you truly know the location where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut it according to what I have told you, and remove entirely the corrupted matter and flesh that are within;	When you have made quite certain of all these points, then proceed confidently with the treatment, namely: see if the fístula be obvious and accessible, or in a harmless situation far removed from a joint or vein or artery or tendon or any of the other places I have mentioned to you. Then lay open the fístula by the method I have described and fetch out of it all the granulations and diseased and superfluous tissue and whatever tissue or growth be arising in its opening, and dress until healed.	0.68260646
and then treat it until it is healed, and if the fistula is very deep in a straight line, then you must cut deeply, as much as you can, then put in tents soaked in a sharp medicine, and push them right to the end of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom;	If the termination of the fistula lies deep and its course be straight, you should cut it open as far in as you can and then clean out of it all diseased tissue; then use swabs soaked in corrosive, and push them to the bottom of the fistula, which is as far as you can reach with the probe. Do this repeatedly until the caustic has destroyed all the superfluous matter remaining at the bottom of the fistula.	0.7143181
and then put in ointments that generate healthy flesh, until it is healed;	Then dress it with ointments that make the flesh grow sound, until it heals.	0.75776696
and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it.	But if it does not heal thus, then cauterize it in the prescribed way.	0.4973185
If a vein or nerve does not hinder you in the principal members, as we have said;	If a bone be the cause of the fistula, and you are sure of that, then examine the fistula and open it up in the way I have told you, if there be nothing in the way like a blood-vessel or nerve or important organ, as we said.	0.45642
and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, then scrape it until the corruption is all removed, then treat it with things that generate flesh until it is healed;	And if the bone is laid bare to you and there be in it some corruption and blackening, then scrape it until all the corruption be removed; then put on dressings that will encourage granulation, until it be healed.	0.823104
and if it is not healed, and returns to pus as before, know that you have not gone deep enough:	If it does not heal but discharges pus in the way it did before, then you may know that you have not yet managed to extirpate the corruption completely.	0.52828026
so uncover and search until you are at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the place;	Therefore you must expose it again and with the utmost diligence carry out the scraping and cleaning of it.	0.49914598
and if it is thus healed, that is good. If not, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot reach it; so there is no other solution than to leave it to nature;	Then dress it; and if it heals, good; if not, then you may know that this corruption is very deep-seated in the body and out of reach, and there is nothing you can do for it but leave it to nature.	0.7877945
and if there is a small corrupted bone, and you can pull it with forceps, extract it with a suitable instrument, and if there are many bones, pull them all out, do not leave a single one;	If the diseased bone be a small one, and it be possible for you to extract it, then do so with a pair of fine forceps suited to the purpose. And if there be a number of bones then you must accurately carry out the extraction of all of them, and spare no effort to ensure that none is left.	0.797187
and if the moisture hinders you, and there is no error or fear, cut both moisture and flesh, and free the bones.	If any ligaments lie in your way and there be no danger in incising them, then make an incision into the ligaments and whatever tissues are there, and free the bones.	0.5636233
And if you cannot remove them at once, apply something generating rot to the wound, and leave it until the place is rotted around the bones, and then they will come out more easily;	If it is not possible for you to extract the bone immediately, apply over the wound something to induce suppuration, and leave it for some days until suppuration has set in in the tissues and ligaments around the bones.	0.7011839
and if it is a large bone, like from the leg or thigh, only remove the corruption until all the blackness is gone, then restore the wound;	If it be one large bone such as the tibia or the femur or the like, and the diseased part be only the surface, then scrape it thoroughly until all the blackness and corruption is gone, then close the wound.	0.7364459
and if a large part of it is corrupted, and it reaches the marrow of the bone; it must be scraped and cut all the way to the corruption, and then treated until it is healed;	If the corrupt portion be very extensive and reach to the marrow of the bone, you will not be able to avoid sawing it off and cutting it all away to the point where the corruption ends; then dress until healed.	0.7775811
and I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in a man's leg, so that you may take example and assistance in your work.	Now I shall tell you of a defluxion that once occurred in a man's leg, as an example and a help to you in your treatment.	0.79734576
There was a young man around 30 years old, who had a pain in his leg from a cause that originated within the body, so that the matter went to the leg, and it swelled with a large abscess, and there was no reason to use cautery to open it;	This man was young, about thirty years of age. He once got a pain in the leg from something internal, which so worked that eventually matter came into the leg and caused it to swell greatly, there being no external cause.	0.7651038
but the physicians, through their foolishness, worked on it so much that the abscess opened, and much matter flowed from it, and it became a fistula, and many holes appeared there that all released pus and fluid from the body;	And time passed by, to the accompaniment of error on the part of the doctors, until the tumour opened and much discharge came away; and the treatment was so mismanaged that fistulae formed in the leg and many sinuses opened up, all of which discharged pus and body humours.	0.7364572
and many physicians applied treatment to it for about two years, and none were skilled in the art of surgery, until I was called there, and saw his leg and the medicines with which it was being treated, and what flowed from the holes in large quantity; and the young man's body became red, and he had a jaundiced complexion.	A whole host of doctors had been treating it for a matter of two years, not one of whom had any skill in the surgical art. Eventually he sought me. I saw his leg, with matter coming away from the orifices in large quantities; and the man's body was wasted and jaundiced.	0.83986884
I inserted a tent into one of these holes, and then probed all the holes, and found that they all connected to each other from all parts of the leg.	So I introduced a probe into one of the openings and the probe touched bone. Then I investigated all the openings and found them all communicating with one another in all parts of the leg.	0.8328327
I hastened then, and cut into one of the holes until I uncovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and perforated, and the corruption went down to the bone inside;	So I quickly cut down upon one of these openings until a part of the bone was laid bare, and I found it diseased, by now eaten away, and black and foul and full of holes, down to the marrow.	0.80100775
I scraped away what appeared to me of the corrupted bone, and thought there was no other corruption besides what I removed;	So I sawed off as much of the diseased bone as I had exposed and could get at. In fact I thought that there was no more disease in the bone beyond what I had cut and sawn away, and that I had completely eradicated it.	0.6551368
and I began to treat the wound with cleansing medicines for a long time, and it would not heal;	Then I tried for a very long time to heal the wound with medicines encouraging growth of flesh, but it would not heal.	0.64372265
and then I began again, and uncovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continuing in the bone, and I scraped it, and then removed it, and I tried to heal the place; but I could not until I cut around a handspan of bone, and pulled it out completely bare, then treated it with medicines;	So again I sawed away as much of the corruption as I could see; then I tried to heal it, but it would not heal nor unite. Then I opened it up once more and went on cutting away the bone piecemeal and trying to heal it, and it would not heal until I had cut away about a span of bone with the marrow; then I treated it medicinally and it quickly healed over and was cured.	0.8632449
and it was quickly healed and closed, and there was no need to begin the work again except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure it, and for the fear of death I had for him.	But it would not have been necessary to repeat the operation and the incision thus, were it not for the patient's weakness and inability to tolerate much at a time, and because of my fears for his life, since an evil faint was constantly seizing him on account of the heavy drain.	0.5668051
For because of the bloodletting he often sobbed, but he was completely healed, and in place of the bone grew hard flesh, and it was of good quality and he had no harm or discomfort whatsoever, neither in going nor in coming.	But he was completely cured, and in place of the bone there grew up firm tissue; his bodily state was sound and his strength was restored. He went about his business, and no hurt whatsoever came to him from walking.	0.67450666
And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated in this manner: Take a linen cloth and tie it to the end of the exposed bone, and instruct someone to pull it upwards; and put another woolen tie, thicker than the first, and tie it over the flesh that is above the bone, and pull on the end, so that you draw the damaged flesh underneath, and uncover the flesh on the area where you want to treat, so that the silk does not injure the flesh;	Now in the case of a prominent bone that has been broken in any part of the body, it should be sawn off in this manner: you take a ligature and tie it to the extremity of the prominent bone and bid someone keep it stretched upward; then you put on another ligature of wool thicker than the first, tying it to the tissue that is beneath the bone, and pull on the end so that the flesh is drawn down and you lay bare of flesh the spot where you intend to saw, so that the saw does not injure the flesh.	0.92229664
and put a firebrand or a board under the bone so that you can easily cut the damaged flesh;	You should place a block of wood or a board firmly beneath the bone; which done, there is no hindrance to the saw's cutting through the diseased bone.	0.66434205
And if the bone is infected, and it is not visible, and the infection is in the middle or in one part, then uncover all the flesh;	If the bone be diseased without any swelling, but it all seems the same from one part to another, and the disease be in the middle or in one segment of it, then expose it on all sides; put the block beneath, and saw it from the first side, where the disease is.	0.71404505
then place a firebrand underneath, and then treat with silk from one side of the infection to the other, and the silk should be a bit longer than the infection, as we have said;	When you have finished this, saw it from the other side. The saw-cut should be at a little distance from the diseased part, as we have already said.	0.4936102
and if the infection is in the joint, then cut the infected joint, and treat the bone where it connects to the other part;	If the disease be in one of the phalanges, amputate the diseased phalanx and saw through the bone where it is continuous on the other (healthy) side.	0.6060947
and if the infection is in the connection of the two joints, then there is no other solution than to cut;	If the disease be in the joint between two members, then there is nothing to be done but scraping.	0.6108062
and if the infection is in the wrist of the hand, or in the ankle of the foot, then this is very difficult, but nevertheless you must investigate this corrosion, as it appears to you; and clean it in all the ways that you can, but so that the veins or the nerves do not cause you difficulty;	If the disease be in the carpus or tarsus it is a very difficult matter treating them; you must peel off the disease in whatever way seems possible, and scrape it away and clean up the part in whatever way you can and by whatever technique is convenient for you, so long as there is no vein or nerve in your way.	0.7356224
and know that the cutting instruments and the saws for cutting these bones are many, depending on the position of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and thinness, and their size, and their hardness; and therefore it is necessary to prepare a suitable instrument for each type of work;	Now you should know that there are a great number of cutting instruments and saws for cutting these bones, varying according to the different sites and arrangements of the bones; their thickness or thinness; their greatness or smallness; their hardness or sponginess; so you should have ready for every sort of operation an instrument suitable for that operation.	0.871316
and know that the work itself will show you the instrument you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the evidence of the types of illnesses; so consider the instrument you need according to what is required.	You should know too that when you have long experience and knowledge of the branches of this art the operations themselves may well indicate the kind of instrument needed; for the man who is skilled in the art and has seen various kinds of disease may think out for himself which instrument is suitable for each disease.	0.7453395

chapter-2-subchapter-87.txt
The head can rot either from an internal cause, or from an external cause;	Sometimes the extremities become gangrenous, either from an external or an internal cause.	0.60885787
and when you have treated this decay with medicinal remedies, and they are not effective, then it is necessary to cut off the limb up to the place where the decay reaches, so that the patient escapes death thereby, or by the greater misfortune, the loss of the limb;	Now when you have treated this disease by medical means, ineffectively, and you see that the disease is spreading over the limb and nothing will stop it, you must cut off that limb as far as the disease has spread, so that the patient may escape death or great affliction, greater than the loss of the limb.	0.7401484
and the sign is that the limb becomes black, so that it seems to be burnt by fire, and rots after the blackness, then this decay spreads from limb to limb, and takes over the whole body;	Now the sign of the victim of this state is that the limb goes black, so that you might think it were burnt with fire, or, after the blackening, it putrefies, and the putrefaction spreads to parts adjacent to that limb and begins to attack the whole body; cut it away as soon as you can.	0.78520894
so hasten to cut it off, and if it is from the bite of some venomous beast, like a sea scorpion, viper, or similar, if the decay is at the tip of the finger, cut it off, and do not give it space to reach the hand.	So must you do if the disease is caused by the bite of some dangerous reptile such as the marine scorpion, viper, or venomous spider, and so on. If the disease or bite be at the tip of the finger, cut off the finger, giving the disease no opportunity to spread to the rest of the hand.	0.7905674
And if it reaches the hand, cut it off at the joint, so that the decay does not reach the arm;	Similarly, if it attacks the hand, cut if off at the wrist, giving the disease no opportunity to spread and attack the two bones of the forearm.	0.5737084
and if it reaches the arm, cut it off at the elbow;	Similarly, if it attacks the forearm, cut it off at the elbow through the joint itself.	0.546684
and if it passes the elbow, it is fatal, and no treatment is effective except the extent of its power; (referring to the poison's power)	If the disease passes onward and you perceive that it has reached the region of the shoulder, by no means cut the shoulder, for that will be the death of the patient; use any treatment but that, as best you may.	0.5478678
and do the same when the decay occurs in the foot: if it reaches the first joint, cut it off after the next joint;	In the same manner act in regard to the foot when the disease attacks a toe; namely, amputate the toe through one of the interphalangeal joints.	0.64175266
and if it reaches the foot, cut off the whole foot; and if it rises into the leg, amputate at the knee joint;	If the disease attacks the tarsus then amputate the whole foot; and if it ascends toward the knee, amputate the leg at the knee-joint.	0.8342395
and if it goes above the knee, there is no other option but to leave the patient to die;	If it be that the disease has passed on above the knee, there is nothing of any avail in this case but to leave it, and for the patient to resign himself to death.	0.7299135
and the way to cut or saw the limb is that you tie it above and below, and one assistant stretches one of the ties downwards, and another assistant the other tie upwards, and you separate the flesh which is between the two ties with a spatula's width, until the bone is exposed;	Now the way to amputate or saw off a limb is to bind a ligature round below the site and another above; an assistant draws the one downward and another assistant draws the upper ligature upward; while you dissect away the tissues between the two ligatures with a broad scalpel until it is laid bare of flesh; then it should be cut or sawn.	0.8545575
then cut or saw it, and place a linen cloth on each side, so that the saw does not touch the healthy part, and cause the patient further injury and a hot abscess.	You must place linen dressings on every side lest the saw touch a part that is sound and thus cause the patient additional pain and inflammation.	0.7277697
And if bleeding occurs when you operate, cauterize the area quickly, or apply some astringent powders;	If a haemorrhage occurs while you are operating, cauterize the place as quickly as possible, or apply to it one or other of the styptic powders; then continue until finished.	0.6766346
then return to your treatment until it is completed, then tie the wounded limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed;	Then bind up the mutilated limb with a suitable bandage and dress until healed.	0.71823436
and I will tell you what happened to a man in his foot:	Now I shall relate to you an example; what I am going to tell you is exactly what happened to a certain man's foot.	0.7280121
he developed a blackness that looked like a burn, and this corrosion started in his toe, until it took over the whole foot;	He had a blackening of the foot, with a burning like that of fire. The disease, to begin with, was in one toe, but it went on to involve the whole foot.	0.70256746
and when the man saw the corrosion, he hurried to cut off the foot, and was healed;	When the man saw the disease spreading in the limb and felt the violent pain and burning, he hastened of his own accord to amputate it at the joint, and he got better.	0.61091805
and a long time later the corrosion returned in a finger of his hand, and he came to me, and I applied repelling medications after cleansing the body, and the corrosion could not be stopped;	After a long time had passed the very same kind of disease arose in the forefinger of his hand. He came to me, and I attempted to suppress the superfluity with remedies that I applied to the hand, after purging his body; but the superfluity was not to be suppressed and began to spread to the second finger, and eventually the whole hand was involved in the disease.	0.7046976
and he wanted me to cut off his hand, and I refused, because I had hope of driving back the matter; and I also feared that if I cut off his hand, he would die, because the man's constitution was weak;	He urged me to cut off his hand, but I did not wish to do this, hoping I should be able to overcome the superfluity, and also fearing he would die at the amputation of his hand, for the man's strength was on the decline.	0.8054849
and he despaired completely, and returned to his land, and hastened to cut off his hand, and was healed;	When he despaired of me he went back to his own country, and I then heard that he had gone and cut off his whole hand, and got well.	0.62558717
and I have only related this so that one may do the same, if there is need.	I narrate this story as help against this kind of malady when it occurs; and as guidance for you to take and act upon.	0.45227432

chapter-2-subchapter-88.txt
Sometimes an abscess arises in a fleshy place, and remains so long that it creates a large collection of pus; and then it breaks and bursts, and the pus spurts out, and the place remains empty, like a vessel; and the skin that is over it is as thin as a delicate cloth, and it does not run down to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such a condition is called a "sinus," and it is not called a "fistula";	When an abscess occurs in any of the fleshy parts and becomes chronic and eventually collects pus, and then it breaks open or is perforated, and all the contained matter comes out and the site is left hollow, like a vessel, and the overlying skin thinned like a rag, but the suppuration has not gone so far as to involve bone or tendon or ligament—and hence it merits the name of 'sinus' and is not called a fistula.	0.84028304
but if it is so elongated that it reaches down to the bone deeply, it is called a "fistula";	But if it goes on until the disease involves any of these parts it is then called a fistula or defluxion.	0.641425
and the treatment is that you cut this skin all around, especially when it is thin, like a cloth; and it will not heal because of its corruption.	The treatment of it will be to cut away all that skin with a circular incision; specially if it be thinned and has become like a rag, and you are sure that it will not adhere to the place, because of its corruption.	0.7943202
And if you are confident that the skin will heal, and the corruption is not deep, and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it with an enema like this:	But if you are in hope of its adhering, and the corruption has not reached that point, and there is in the skin some thickness of flesh, then treat it by irrigation.	0.6102079
observe if the breast is large, and the pus that comes out has a foul odor, then administer an Egyptian medicine enema which is made like this: take vinegar, and oil, and litharge, in equal parts, and put them to cook in a vessel over fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;	The procedure is that you examine the sinus, and if it be large and the purulent discharge from it smell bad, then irrigate it with Egyptian medicine, which is vinegar, oil, honey and verdigris, equal parts of each, mixed in a vessel and heated on the fire until the compound thickens and assumes the consistency of honey.	0.7037879
and then take some of this according to your need, and mix it with water and honey, and inject it into the breast with an enema, and constrict the opening; and leave the medicine inside for two hours, then extract it by squeezing;	Then take as much as you need and dilute it with water and honey, and with this irrigate the sinus and bind up the opening, leaving the compound inside for two hours. Then get it out by pressure.	0.79338884
do this many times, until the breast is cleansed, and the pus is removed;	Do this for several days until the sinus is clean and the smell disappears.	0.5927144
and sometimes it is cleansed with ash water, when this medicine is not available, and you should take ashes from vine wood, and pour water over them, then strain it, and inject it with an enema, until you know that the breast is well cleansed;	It may be irrigated with water of ashes if the medicine is not at hand. For that, you take ashes of vine or of oak, and put water upon them; then clarify the liquor and with it irrigate the sinus until you are sure it is thoroughly clean.	0.7332993
and if the patient cannot tolerate it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the ash water, then cleanse it with water and honey in which a little litharge has been ground; or you cleanse it with mixed honey and wine, because honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and the wine helps dry the breast;	But if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then irrigate him with water and honey with which a little pounded verdigris has been mixed; or irrigate with honey and wine mingled; the value of the honey lies in its cleansing and washing, while the wine closes up the sinus, specially if it be a wine which has some dryness and astringency.	0.8975315
and when you have done this, and you are confident that the breast is well cleansed, then cleanse it with that which generates flesh in it, and you should take diachylon plaster, and make it with rose oil and wine;	When you have done this several times and you are sure that the sinus is clean of diseased matter, then irrigate it with those compounds that will encourage granulation in it.	0.40249568
or you cleanse it with some medicines and ointments, whose properties I have described in the treatise on ointments;	For example, you may take a little Palm ointment and dissolve it in oil of roses and some astringent wine; or irrigate it with some of the other ointments and medicines whose prescriptions we have recorded in the treatise on ointments.	0.563956
and if the opening of the breast is small, and the tube of the syringe cannot enter, then widen it a little with an iron instrument, and insert a tent of the Egyptian ointment, or basilicon ointment, until it is widened;	If the opening of the sinus be too narrow for the nozzle of the syringe, open it up slightly with the knife, or put in it a pad steeped in Egyptian ointment or vermilion ointment, until it is dilated.	0.7136854
and if the wound is too large, then sew it up and leave only one place where the syringe can enter, and if the opening that drains pus is at the top, make it in the lowest place.	On the other hand, if the opening be wide, bring the edges together with a suture, and leave of it sufficient width that the syringe may be only just introduced.	0.6364493
and if you cannot cut the breast from below as you wish, then arrange it in such a way that the pus runs to the lowest place, for when the pus is deep, it does not allow flesh to regenerate, and if you cannot cut the breast from below as you wish, arrange it in this way: so that the pus flows easily downwards, and do not leave any of the pus there;	In the same way, if the opening from which the discharge flows be raised up, then incise it at its lowest part so that the discharge may flow downward out of it; for when the discharge collects at the bottom of the sinus it prevents the formation of flesh in it.	0.6768342
so that the pus flows easily downwards, and do not leave any of the pus there; and take consolidative medicines to put on the breast, and spread over it a linen cloth that covers the entire breast; then cut forcefully around the opening of the breast a little larger than the first, then spread a soothing ointment on another cloth according to the size of the opening, and place it over the opening of the breast to draw out the pus, and do not remove the large cloth except after many days, once;	If you cannot open it up as you wish at the lower point, then try to set the part in whatever position you conveniently can to facilitate the discharge of pus, and try to ensure that no pus is held up in it. As for the consolidating medicaments that are applied externally to the sinus, and the manner of their application: you take one of the ointments suited to your purpose, and spread it on a piece of lint of sufficient size to cover the whole sinus; then with scissors cut a hole in the lint over the mouth of the sinus and a little wider than the sinus opening; then spread on another piece of lint a quantity of softening ointment proportionate to the opening and put the one on the other so that it stands away from the opening of the sinus, in order to ease the discharge of pus from it; and do not remove the larger dressing until after many days.	0.8515792
and the one that is over the opening of the breast, remove often to remove the pus, and know what flows from the pus, whether it is venom or little or much, or digested, or undigested;	But the dressing over the sinus opening you may constantly remove, so that the pus collected behind it may come out and so that you may know whether there be much or little ichor, and whether digested or not.	0.66837573
and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been spread in this way and you see the nature that jumps/pushes on the opening of the breast, then know that the breast is healing, and health is approaching;	And at the same time investigate the site of the sinus itself to see whether the patient feels any pain in it or no pain, and whether there be any swelling in it or not. Then when your treatment has reached such a point that you see that there is only a little superficial matter coming out round the mouth of the sinus, you may know that the sinus has closed up or is near to closing up.	0.6604239
and then unbind it in the morning, or the third day, and when you unbind the wound, change to another cloth, and renew the ointment.	Then you may unbandage it the next day or the third day, and when the wound is unbandaged make a change of dressing and ointment.	0.82162666
And if thin venom flows after a long time, do not despair of healing, for health is approaching.	But if, after a long while, the sinus discharges a thin ichor, do not despair of its closing up, for its healing is near.	0.70735395
For there are people whose flesh is slow to regenerate in their wounds, and others who do the opposite;	For there are some men whose wounds are slow in healing, and some are the opposite.	0.825868
and if undigested pus comes out of the breast after many days, know that the breast will not heal;	If, after many days, undigested pus is discharged you may know that the sinus has not closed.	0.6548579
and if the breast is slow to heal, and it is prolonged, add medicines that are moist in substance and dry in virtue, like diachylon ointment, for it contains a large amount of vitriol, and that is the last medicine;	If the closing of the sinus be delayed and it be a long affair, make the medicines dryer; let them be medicines that have some humidity in their substance but dryness in their potency, such as Palm ointment with the addition of excess of rock-alum.	0.63651216
take diachylon ointment, and make it with rose oil, and sprinkle it with old wine equal in substance;	A most efficacious treatment is to take Palm ointment and dissolve it in oil of roses and sprinkle over it old wine of even consistency.	0.5511631
then preserve it and use it;	Then knead together, and use that.	0.6740126
and this same thing does better cooked thickened, when diachylon ointment is not available, or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and powder it over the honey when it is on the fire;	The same sort of thing may be done with honey if you have no Palm ointment at hand; if you heat the honey to a thick consistency and use that; or take myrrh and aloes and incense of juniper and beat them all up together and sprinkle on the honey while it is heating on the fire, spread on lint and bind over the sinus; or spread on it honey heated to a thickness, and over that sprinkle powdered aromatic roots, and over these place a dressing that you bandage on.	0.70256615
and then spread it on a cloth, and spread it over the breast, and sometimes administer long birthwort, and roots of celestial lily, which is like vetch flour and centaury; and use it simple or compound: grind them, and make a powder, and put it on the honey I mentioned, and use it;	Sometimes also in a case of this sort long birthwort and the root of the blue iris and vetch flour and centaury are usable, either separately or mixed, beaten up together, sifted and scattered into honey as I described; use them thus.	0.7023653
and if the treatment is prolonged, and is not cured by this treatment, then know that the corruption is deep, and makes an impression on the bone, or on the hard members, or on the ligaments; then treat it for a fistula, as we have said before.	But if the sinus be chronic, and it does not heal with this treatment, then you may know that there is corruption at the bottom of it, which has affected the bones or motor nerves or ligaments; the treatment then is that of fistula as already given.	0.74017334

chapter-2-subchapter-89.txt
A panaritium is an abscess that arises under the nail of the thumb, or of the foot, or perhaps arises in other fingers;	Paronychia is a growth of flesh under the nail of the thumb or big toe; it may also occur in the other fingers and toes.	0.7843593
and when it is old, and one does not take care of it, a hot abscess arises there, and runs and throws off pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and sometimes runs through it all;	When it is chronic and the treatment of it is neglected, it comes up as an abscess, or corrupts and generates pus until it eats away the root of the nail.	0.60623205
and the corrosion reaches the bone, so that there is a foul-smelling pain, and the end of the finger is swollen, and the color is dark.	Often it rots it entirely, and often the disease reaches the bone and gives rise to foetor and broadens the tip of the finger and makes it livid in colour.	0.5716593
When you treat it as we have described in the section, and the treatment is not effective, then you must cut away with a knife all the excess that remains of the nail, then cauterize the wound afterward. Cauterization is a great help if the bone is healthy and the nail is healthy;	When you have treated it with those means mentioned in their place, and your treatment is ineffective, you must excise all the superfluous growth from the nail and then cauterize the wound, for in this case cauterization is a great help.	0.79587847
and if the nail presses into the flesh, and begins to prick and wound it, then you must place a thread under the nail that pricks the flesh, and lift it up, and cut that flesh subtly and lightly, and apply burning and corrosive medicines on the remaining flesh to remove it all; then treat it with ointments until it is healed.	But if the bone be healthy and the nail also healthy, and the in-turned angle of the nail has pressed the flesh inwards and begun to stab it and injure it, you should pass a thin probe beneath the corner of the nail that presses into the flesh, and raise it up and carefully cut away that flesh and apply caustic to the remainder, until it is all gone; then dress with ointments until cured.	0.840515
And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cut it and extract it out, for as long as the corrupted bone remains, it cannot heal;	But if it should be that the disease has already begun to involve bone, that bone should be excised and removed; for it will never heal while there remains any diseased bone.	0.7405472
and if you see the finger becoming corrupted, then cut it at one of the joints as described previously, then treat it until it is healed;	And if you see the corrosion and corruption spreading in the finger, amputate it at one of the joints, as has been previously mentioned; then dress it until it is healed.	0.83157116
And if it is struck and bruised and there is great pain, then you must first bleed it;	If a laceration or bruising happen to the nail, with violent pain, you should first bleed the patient and then cut away the nail with a sharp scalpel, a swerving cut from top to bottom.	0.50481594
then cut the nail with a sharp spatula, cutting across the top, and be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain;	But be careful not to cut into the nail-bed, for you will give the patient violent pain and it will cause a growth of superfluous flesh at the place.	0.6040122
and if it happens, then apply something soothing.	Then dress the part with sedative dressings.	0.4191253
The extra finger which grows on the hands of some men by chance is entirely fleshy, and sometimes there are some where there are bones, and sometimes there is a nail, and some of them grow at the base of the joint, where the growth is on certain parts of the fingers.	A superfluous finger growing on the hands of some men sometimes is all flesh, sometimes contains a bone, sometimes has a nail.	0.7894142
The one that grows on some part of the finger does not move, and the one that grows at the joint of the finger, by chance moves;	Some of them arise at the root of a finger, or on one of the phalanges of a finger, and the latter do not move, while those that arise from the root of a finger do sometimes move.	0.71572435
The removal of the one that is fleshy is easy, in this way: Cut it at its root with a broad spatula.	That which is purely fleshy is easily removed; you cut if off at the root with a broad scalpel.	0.7285842
The one that grows at the base of the joint is difficult to treat: so refrain from cutting it.	But the treatment of that which arises at the root of a finger is difficult; you should avoid amputating.	0.6775782
In the one that grows in the finger at the last joint, you must first cut the flesh roundly down to the bone, then cut the bone with a saw suitable for this, then treat it until it is healed.	In the case of one growing from the finger at a phalangeal joint, you should first cut through the flesh down to the bone with a circular incision; then saw the bone through, with one of the saws that suit the purpose; then dress it until it heals.	0.82784164
The fusion that occurs in the fingers together comes by birth, or by the healing of a wound, or by a burn from fire, or by similar things.	As for webbing of the fingers one to another, that occurs very frequently. It may be either congenital or from the healing of a wound or burn or the like.	0.7174231
You must cut this fusion, so that the fingers return to their natural shapes; then put between the two spaces tents or cloths soaked in rose oil, so they don't fuse back together; or you put between the two thin pieces of lead, until the place is healed, as is necessary.	You have to cut the web away until the fingers are brought back to their original form; then interpose between them a pad or piece of material soaked in oil of roses, to prevent them from rapidly joining together and to keep them apart; or you can put between them a thin sheet of lead until the healing takes place as it should.	0.8475358
If fusion occurs in any of his fingers with the palm, cut this fusion as needed.	Similarly, if one of the fingers becomes joined to the palm of the hand, cut through the adhesion according to the form it takes, and with proper regard for the shape of the member.	0.50600016

chapter-2-subchapter-90.txt
Worms are large convoluted veins full of melancholic superfluities, which appear in several parts of the body;	Varices are thick twisted veins filled with melancholic superfluities.	0.58453834
and occurs more in the legs of those who walk and who work and carry things, than in others.	They occur in most parts of the body, but generally in the legs, particularly in the legs of couriers and ploughmen and porters.	0.51045585
It is therefore necessary that you sometimes administer a purgative of bile, and then heal it with basil.	First you must purge the body free from black bile, several times, strongly. Then venesect the patient in the basilic vein.	0.58402526
The iron cure is done in two ways: one is that they are cut, and the black blood is drawn out; and the other way is that you lift the vein, and pull it all the way out.	The treatment with the knife is of two kinds: one is to incise and bring out all the black blood, the other is to draw out the vein and extract it bodily.	0.8609749
The cut is made in this way: first bathe the leg with very hot water, until the thick blood is thinned, then tighten the patient's leg from above the thigh down to the part below the knee;	The incision is done thus: the leg is first well fomented with hot water to liquefy the thick foul blood; then bind up the patient's leg well from the upper part of his thigh to below the knee; then make an ample incision into the vein in one, two, or three places.	0.8135247
then cut the vein in one place, or in two or in three, with a wide cut, then lift and draw out the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood comes out as the patient's strength can bear;	Then with your hand press the black blood upward from the lower part and downward from the upper part of the leg and draw off as much blood as you see suffices or as the patient's strength can bear.	0.6433234
and then tie it off, and instruct him to abstain from foods that generate black bile;	Then bind up, and bid him abstain from foods that give rise to black bile.	0.83952177
and repeat the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are full, and it harms the patient.	The evacuation and venesection should be repeated whenever the veins fill up again to the patient's hurt.	0.7416723
The raising of it is in this manner: Raise the patient's leg, if there is a lot of hair, then put it in the bath, and sprinkle the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and the veins swell;	Extraction is carried out in this way: the patient's leg is shaved if it is very hairy; then bring him to the bath and foment the leg in hot water until it becomes red and the veins are filled.	0.8697485
and if you don't have a bath, warm it by the fire, and then cut it along the vein from the thigh to the top of the knee, or in the lower part at the ankle;	Or if there be no bath available let him take violent exercise until the limb gets hot. Then make a longitudinal incision in the skin over the vein, either at the upper end of it near the knee or at the lower end near the ankle.	0.7265841
then open the skin with the hook, and scrape the vein on each side, until it appears when you feel it;	Then with hooks open up the skin and dissect away round the vein on each side until it is laid open to view.	0.7960627
and it appears red and black, and when it enters the skin it looks like a white cord;	When it is visible you will see it red almost to the point of blackness; and when it is freed from the skin you will see it look like a cord.	0.7177323
then push the thread underneath, until it is lifted from the skin, and then hang it on the hook gently, then cut it in another place about three fingers above;	Then pass beneath it a probe to lift it up, and when it is clear of the skin hold it with a blunt smooth hook.	0.54494476
then scrape the skin above the vein until it appears, then lift it with the thread, as you did before, and hang it on another hook, as you did the first time;	Then make another incision near by, three fingers distant; then dissect away the overlying skin until it comes to view; then raise it with a probe as before and lift it with a second hook as you did at first.	0.70387876
then make another cut, or several if you need them, then lift it and cut it with your toe, then pull and lift it up to the second cut;	Then make yet another incision or several if need be; then draw out the vessel at the lowest incision near the ankle and cut it through. Then pull it and draw it out until it emerges from the second incision.	0.75364834
then pull it from cut to cut, until it comes out completely, then cut it;	Then draw it towards the incision above that and so on until you draw it out of the third incision (or) the uppermost, until it is all extracted; then cut it off.	0.6352701
and if you cannot pull and lift it, then insert a needle with a strong double thread, and tie it and pull it, and put a thread underneath, and turn your hand from side to side, until it comes out; and be careful not to cut it, because if it is cut, it cannot be pulled or lifted, and it will harm the patient;	But if it does not respond to your attempts to draw and extract it, pass in a needle with a strong double thread and ligate it and draw it up; and introduce a probe beneath it, and twist it all round until it comes out; but be careful lest it break; for if it break the total extraction of it will be very difficult for you and harm will thereby come to the patient.	0.82235324
and when you have pulled it all out, then put on the wound site wool soaked in wine and rose oil; and treat it until it is healed.	When you have got it all out, apply to the incisions wool soaked in wine and oil of roses, or olive-oil, and dress it till it be healed.	0.81403756
And if the penis is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it carefully, but do not cut it; and pull it as we have said before.	If the varix be contorted, with twists and turns from side to side and not in a straight line, as we said, then you should cut down along both sides of the twisted part and the places where it is tortuous, then catch it up with hooks and extract it whole.	0.67722034
The shape of the iron with which the penis is cut is curved, and does not cut, so that it does not cut the vein;	Be careful in incising over it that you do not cut into or injure the vein, for this will render the extraction difficult; therefore be most careful. The lancet for cutting upon a varix.	0.5015513
and it has a large curve, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and here is the shape:	It should be of a broad curve and smooth, for if it is fine-pointed its fineness may cut the vein; rather it should be quite thick, as we said.	0.6933381

chapter-2-subchapter-91.txt
This vein appears on legs, in hot areas where neither grass nor trees grow, and in land without moisture;	This kind of vein occurs in the leg in hot countries such as the Hejaz and the lands of the Arabs and in hot arid infertile countries.	0.5594785
and sometimes it appears elsewhere than on the legs, and this happens from the putrefaction that comes under the skin, as it occurs inside the body with snakes and worms, generated between skin and flesh.	It also often occurs in other parts of the body beside the legs. The origin of it is a corruption taking place beneath the skin in the same way that round-worms and worms and gourd-worms arise in the inward parts of the body; also the worms that are generated between the skin and the flesh.	0.7271981
And the sign of the beginning of this vein is that a very large inflammation appears on the leg, then the location changes, and the vein begins to protrude, like the root of a plant.	The sign of the beginning of the occurrence of this vein is a violent inflammation in the leg; then the place swells up and blisters; then the vein begins to extrude at the blistered place as if it were a plant-stem or an animal.	0.7722192
When the head appears, you must wrap around it a piece of lead weighing from one and a half to two drams, and tie it, and let the lead hang from the leg, and each time it protrudes more when cauterizing, wrap it around the lead, and tie it;	When its extremity has appeared it should be wound and tied round a little piece of lead, from one to two drachms in weight, which you leave hanging from the leg.	0.6742455
and if it is too long, cut off a part, and wrap the remainder, and do not cut it at its root, until it is completely removed; for if you cut it, it will go back into the flesh, and cause an abscess and putrefaction in the area, and a serious illness;	Then as fast as any of it issues from the leg, wrap it in the lead, and if there be plenty of it cut off part and tie the rest of it; do not cut it right down until it has all come out; for if you cut it right down it will contract and draw back into the flesh and produce at the place an abscess and suppuration and a bad ulcer.	0.85496485
therefore it must be pulled little by little until the end, and nothing remains in the body;	Therefore it should be treated gently, and drawn out slowly until the very extremity of it emerges and not the least bit of it remains in the body.	0.7329406
and this vein is sometimes when pulled five palms long, or ten, and a man once came to me, from whom it emerged ten palms long, and when you cut it, insert a probe into the hole, and pierce it all the way through, so that it all comes out;	In some cases the vein comes out five or ten spans in length; indeed I have heard of one twenty spans long that came out from a certain man.	0.66606826
and the matter within should be emptied, and apply medicines generating pus to the area for a few days, then treat it like abscesses.	If it breaks during your treatment of it, then pass a probe into the hole and open it up with a long incision longitudinally, until all the contained matter is evacuated; and try to make the place suppurate with medicines for a few days, then treat as an abscess.	0.63627464
And sometimes this vein has several branches, and especially when it appears in the joint of the foot, or in the foot, and many holes appear there, from which branches emerge;	Sometimes also this vein is found branching, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot itself; and in this case there are many openings and a branch comes out of each.	0.87422085
then treat it as we have said before.	The treatment is as mentioned above in the section.	0.51681966

chapter-2-subchapter-92.txt
of worms that are born between skin and flesh This disease is called in our land "ox disease," because it often happens to oxen, and it is a small worm that arises between skin and flesh, and travels throughout the whole body ascending and descending, and one feels it well as it moves from limb to limb, until it breaks the skin where it goes, and jumps out;	This complaint is called by us in some regions 'the cattle disease' since it frequently happens to cattle. It is in fact a small solitary worm generated between the skin and the flesh, that creeps all over the body, both up and down; it can be felt as it creeps from one part to another until it breaks out at a place where it can break through the skin, and out it comes.	0.8464649
and it is generated from the corruption of certain humors, as worms and snakes and earthworms and ascarides arise in the belly;	It arises from the putrefaction of certain humours as do worms, round-worms and gourd-worms in the abdomen.	0.66632736
and one fears its malice, for when it travels through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye, perhaps it enters and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.	Part of the harm that may be expected of it is that when it creeps about the body and goes up to the head and reaches the eye it may make an opening in the eye and come out and destroy the eye; this frequently happens.	0.75763667
When you wish to treat it and extract it, you can only do so when it moves:	If you wish to treat this and extract it, it must be done while it is creeping about and can be felt.	0.7121736
therefore, you must tie the area above and below with a strong ligature very tightly, then cut into it and pull it out, and if the worm is deep in the flesh, and you cannot find it, cauterize it with fire on top, until it dies;	You must tie a tight tourniquet above and below it, then cut down upon it and extract it. But if it burrows into the tissues and you cannot locate it, then apply the actual cautery to the place until you have burnt the worm.	0.6844838
and the greatest harm that it does is that it infects the eye, as we have said;	The greatest damage to be feared from it is damage to the eye, as we have said.	0.80489814
and if you see it coming to the head near the eye, squeeze the eyebrow tightly below it, then cut into it and pull it out;	So if you see that it has entered the head and is near the eye, then bind a strong bandage over the forehead beneath it, then cut down upon it and draw it out.	0.7772517
and the patient must use body cleansing with laxative medicines for the bad putrid humors, and abstain from foods generating rot.	It is important also for the patient to take care to cleanse his body with laxative medicines from all corrupt and evil humours. He should also avoid all foods giving rise to putrefaction.	0.7776724

chapter-2-subchapter-93.txt
of the pain that comes from flatulence This illness is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that arises in certain limbs, and then moves from limb to limb;	The disease known in our region as 'the flitting disease' is a pain arising in a limb and then passing from limb to limb.	0.7461222
and I saw what I tell you. I was called to a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;	I have personally seen it as I shall describe to you: I was called to a woman patient in a country district, who uncovered her arm and showed me a small inflation of the cephalic vein.	0.7461277
and shortly after, I saw it rise like a worm to the shoulder, faster than anything, like quicksilver when it runs from place to place;	After I had waited a while I saw the swelling creep like a worm along the forearm, ascending towards her shoulder, with the greatest possible speed, as of quicksilver running from place to place.	0.75984377
the pain left that place, and settled in the shoulder, and then a little later ran throughout the body, until it came to the other arm;	Then the pain left that place and settled in the elbow. Then I waited a while and the pain ran through the whole body until it reached the other arm.	0.82919824
then she told me that it constantly moved around the body, as I saw it.	Then she related to me that it used to pass all round her body as I had seen it.	0.8513124
I marveled greatly how it moved thus from limb to limb, for I had never seen this illness in this way. However, I had often seen that pain could move from place to place, but I had not seen it as I saw it in the woman;	I was amazed at the speed with which it migrated from one part to another, as I had never before seen this disease in this form, though I had seen many who had a pain that passed from limb to limb; but never with my own eyes had I seen anything like what I saw in this woman.	0.902282
and I thought that this was because the woman had a dry body, and uncovered veins, and because of this, this constrained flatulence appeared;	The only opinion I could form of it was that it was due to the woman's being of the dwellers in the wilds, dry of body, with outstanding veins, and hence that moving vapour was perceptible.	0.6606829
and it does not appear in this way in those who are soft/delicate, and who have moist bodies and hidden veins.	But it follows then that it does not appear in that manner in people leading a leisured life, with humid bodies and hidden veins.	0.64158356
And when you want to treat this illness, and the patient feels this pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then quickly tie it above and below, and then cut into it so that this constrained flatulence at that place can come out; and cauterize the place;	When you want to cure this, and the patient feels the pain of it, and if you observe the appearance we have described, then tie a bandage round above and beneath it as quickly as possible and cut down on it so that the vapour enclosed there may come out; and cauterize the place.	0.87054706
and if you do not see it with your own eyes, treat it with something that expels flatulence, like fetid pills, and pills of serapin, and other similar things.	But if there is nothing visible to you then treat by purging of the body and by medicines dispelling and getting rid of flatus, such as foetid pills and pills of sagapenon and the like.	0.756978

chapter-2-subchapter-94.txt
Arrows/arrowheads are diverse, according to their appearance and according to the places of the body where they fall.	Arrows vary both as to types and as to the different parts of the body pierced by them.	0.7069833
Their diversity is such that there are some that have large points, and small, and barbed, and solid/unbarbed; and some that have two barbs, and some that have tongues/blades, and some that are in pieces;	They differ thus as to type: some are big and some are small; some with hollow heads and some with solid; some of them have three angles and some four; some have tongues; some have spikes.	0.7882633
And the sign of the brain when the arrow falls there and pierces the bone, and the dura mater, which is over the brain, bursts out, is when there is dizziness and stupor and vertigo and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps blood comes out of the nostrils, or the ears; and perhaps he loses speech and voice; and from the wound comes a white moisture resembling pus, and also something like burnt flesh comes out;	Now the signs when the arrow has struck the brain, and penetrated the bone and injured the meninges covering the brain, are these: there arise from that a violent headache and vertigo and giddiness and a redness in the eye, and a redness of the tongue, and convulsion and mental confusion and bilious vomit; perhaps also blood comes out of the nose or from the ears; often also the speech is affected and the voice is lost; also there comes out of the site of the wound a white fluid which resembles gruel, from which there flows something like the juice of meat.	0.9154837
and if these signs appear to you, abstain from treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is not inside.	If you observe these signs, avoid treating the patient and extraction of the arrow if it has not come out.	0.7814211
The signs of an arrow when it falls into the heart, are that it is near the left nipple, and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not hollow; and sometimes the arrow moves like the pulse, and black blood flows, and coldness comes with a cold sweat, and fainting: know then without a doubt that death is coming.	The signs of an arrow in the heart are: nearness to the left breast; the patient feels it as if it were fixed in something solid, not hollow; often also there will be imparted to the arrow a pulsating movement; and black blood will issue from the wound; and after this follow coldness of the extremities and a cold sweat and unconsciousness; then you may know that death is surely on its way.	0.90962684
And the sign of an arrow that injures the lung is that blood mixed with froth comes from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs deeply and seeks cold air.	The sign of an arrow that has wounded the lung is the exit of frothy blood from the wound; also the vessels that lie along the neck swell up and the patient changes colour, breathes heavily, and seeks to inhale fresh air very strongly.	0.8411157
And if the arrow falls into the covering of the chest, it is near the small ribs; and causes great difficulty breathing, great pain and sighing; and all the limbs from the shoulders down twitch/tremble.	But if the arrow strike the pleura then it will be close to the small ribs and he will breathe deeply with much pain and heaving of the chest, and all parts of his shoulders will be agitated. If the arrow hits the liver, there ensues violent pain, and blood flows from the wound, resembling the liver in its redness.	0.80490714
And if the arrow falls into the stomach, perhaps some undigested food will come out of the wound.	If the arrow strikes the stomach, often undigested food comes out of the wound and renders the case obvious.	0.68933964
And if the arrow falls into the belly, and some excrement comes out of the wound through a ruptured intestine, there is no hope in the treatment, nor in extracting the arrow.	If the arrow wounds the belly and is fixed in it, and from the wound there comes excrement or omentum or torn bowel, there is no hope in treatment nor in extracting the arrow.	0.77310294
And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and urine comes out of the wound, and the patient feels severe pain: know that the wound is mortal.	If the arrow has hit the urinary bladder, and urine comes out and some of the bladder protrudes and the patient has violent pain, then you may know that the wound is mortal.	0.7208159
The other limbs, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulders, armpits, spine, ribs, thighs, legs, and similar parts, are safe according to various factors. When the arrow is in a nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, so that you may do likewise.	But as for the other parts, such as the face, eye, throat, shoulder, arm, dorsal vertebrae, collar-bone, hip, leg, and the like, in most cases they will heal if the arrow does not happen to strike an artery or nerve, and if the arrow is not poisoned. Now I will relate to you certain cases of arrow wounds that I have seen, so that you may be guided thereby to your own methods of treatment.	0.79480016
It happened to a man that an arrow struck him in the tear duct at the root of the nose: I probed it, and drew it out on the other side under the fat of the ear, and he was healed without harm.	For example, once an arrow struck a man at the corner of his eye near the root of the nose, and I extracted it from him on the other side beneath the lobe of his ear, and he got well, and his eye was none the worse.	0.75887275
And I pulled out, as a game, an arrow that had fallen into the fat of the eye, below the lower eyelid, and the arrow was lodged, and I could only reach the tip towards the shaft, and the arrow was a large one from a Turkish bow, with a light, smooth iron head without barbs;	Also I extracted from a Jew another arrow that had pierced the orbit beneath the lower eyelid; the arrow had sunk out of sight and I could take hold only of the tiny extremity of it which is secured to the shaft; but it was a big arrow from a compound bow, the iron tip four-sided, very smooth without barbs.	0.77996445
the eye was healed, and no ill effects occurred.	The Jew recovered, nor did any ill befall his eye.	0.70340836
And I pulled an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabian arrow with barbs:	I also extracted another arrow from the throat of a Christian.	0.63301325
I filed down the barbs, and worked carefully until I pulled it out, and the Christian was healed.	It was an Arab arrow, one of those with two barbs; and I cut down upon it between the two jugulars (for it lay deep in the throat), and worked gently at it until I extracted it; and the Christian was saved and recovered.	0.5191225
And I removed an arrow from a man, that had fallen into his belly, and I thought he would die;	I also extracted another arrow from a man, that had struck him in the abdomen, and our opinion was that he would certainly die from it.	0.74908996
and after thirty days had passed, his condition did not change; I cut down upon the arrow, and manipulated it, and pulled it out, and there were no ill effects.	But when it had remained in him for the space of thirty days or thereabouts, and his condition was unimpaired, I cut down upon the arrow and manoeuvred it out and extracted it; and he recovered, nor did any harm befall him.	0.8281736
And I also saw a man who had an arrow fall into his back, and the wound closed over it;	I also saw a man who had been struck in the back by an arrow and the wound had closed over it; and when the space of seven years had elapsed the arrow came out at the root of the hip.	0.7105377
and the arrow remained inside him, and he did not change his natural habits, nor did he find harm in any of his natural functions.	And I saw a woman who had been struck in the abdomen by an arrow and the wound healed with the arrow remaining in it, and her condition was unimpaired; she felt no harm from it and her natural functions were not harmed.	0.6215004
And I saw another man, who had an arrow fall into his face, and the wound closed; and it remained thus without causing him great pain;	And I saw a man who had been struck by an arrow in the face, and it had healed over, and he did not feel much pain from it.	0.8571867
and many other similar cases.	And many such have I seen.	0.64603543
And I extracted an arrow from one of the king's princes, which had fallen into the middle of his nose, and was slightly inclined to the right side; and the arrow was completely embedded.	I once drew out an arrow from one of the officers of the State, that had struck him in the middle of the nose and was inclining a little to the right, and the whole arrow was buried.	0.80647695
I was called to treat it three days after it had fallen. I found the wound very narrow.	I was called to treat him three days after he had received the arrow wound; and I found the arrow wound very narrow.	0.88242793
I searched for it with a very fine probe, and did not feel it; and he felt a prick and pain under his right ear.	I explored it with a fine probe but did not find it; but the patient felt a pricking and a pain beneath the right ear, and I hoped that the pricking was due to the arrow.	0.78986704
I thought it was from the arrowhead. I applied an attractive and digestive plaster to the area, so that the place would not swell; and the location of the arrow appeared to me.	So I applied a poultice to the spot, a poultice with power to draw out and cause suppuration, desiring that the place should swell and that a sign to indicate the arrow should appear so that I could cut down upon it.	0.6954733
and the location of the arrow appeared to me. I put the plaster there for several days, and the wound healed over again, and the patient remained like this for a long time, until he felt the arrow one day inside his nose;	But nothing happened at that place to indicate that the arrow had come through to there; so I persevered with poulticing it for many days; yet nothing fresh manifested itself and the wound healed up meanwhile, and the patient despaired for a time of its extraction.	0.70904857
and he told me. I applied a sharp corrosive medicine to the wound for several days, until it was open, and I probed it, and felt the head of the arrow, which was stuck in place;	Then one day he felt the arrow inside his nose, and he told me of this; so for a number of days I applied a caustic medicine to the wound until it opened.	0.7798379
then I added more of that sharp medicine into the opening of the wound, until the head of the arrow became clearly visible to me;	I explored it, and felt the slim end of the arrow which is fastened to the shaft; then I enlarged the opening of the wound by the use of the caustic until the tip of the arrow was plainly visible to me.	0.61078227
and the time period certainly exceeded four months, and then the wound widened enough so that I inserted the forceps, and moved it back and forth, but it could not come out;	About four months passed. Then when the wound was enlarged and I was able to introduce forceps into it I pulled on it and moved it, but it would not come out.	0.77838886
then I did not cease to refine and devise different kinds of instruments, until one day I grasped it with well-made forceps, according to the form that will appear at the end of this chapter, until I pulled it out, and healed the wound.	And I went on skilfully and gently trying for it with various instruments until one day I caught hold of it with a pair of strong forceps (their shape will be described at the end of the chapter) and drew it out; then dressed the wound.	0.7731572
And physicians believe that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: then I restored it, and the wound was sutured, and the patient was completely healed.	The medical men judged that the cartilage of the nose would not be restored, but I restored it and the wound healed up and the patient made a complete recovery nor did he suffer any harm.	0.7672412
Now I have told you about the nature of extracting some arrows, so you should apply your care to that which I have not mentioned, because the book cannot include everything;	Now I shall tell you the method of extracting certain arrows so that you may take it as a guide and an analogy for others that I have not mentioned; since all parts and details of this art cannot be comprehended in any description, nor can any book include them.	0.66145694
but the wise master understands much from little, and based on what is present and lacking, finds new work, and new instruments, for the removal of strange things that occur in this art.	A skilful worker will form a judgement on much, from little; and on what is not present from what is before him; and he will think out a new method and a new instrument for an unaccustomed case when it occurs in the practice of this art.	0.72778916
I say that arrows do not emerge from the limbs where they are embedded except in two ways: either through the place where they entered, or through another part;	So I would state that arrows come out from the parts of the body they have transfixed, in two ways: either by drawing out from the site of entry; or from the opposite side.	0.8222699
and the one that comes out through where it entered is an arrow entering fleshy places, and sometimes comes out immediately.	An arrow that comes out by the track of its entry: the arrow may be visible, standing out from a fleshy part, in which case it may be extracted by pulling.	0.525877
And if it does not come out immediately, leave it until the flesh around it rots, and the exit is widened;	If it does not respond to traction immediately it strikes, you must leave it for a few days until the surrounding tissues have suppurated, when the pulling and extraction of it will be made easy.	0.5051311
and also if it is embedded in the bone, and it cannot come out, leave it like that for some days, and move it every day;	Similarly if it has stuck fast in a bone and will not come out, leave this also for a few days, repeatedly pulling on it and shifting it day by day, and then it will come out.	0.7827426
and then it will come out, and if it does not, then pierce around it entirely with a thin drill, until the place around it is widened, and then pull it out.	But if it will not come out after some days, you will have to drill away the bone from all round with a fine drill so as to make room for the arrow; then draw on it and pull it out.	0.6249943
And if the arrow is lodged in a place on the body where it cannot be seen, then search for it with the probe; and if you feel it, then pull it out with a suitable instrument;	If the arrow is buried in some part of the body and is quite lost to sight, explore for it with a probe, and if you can feel it then draw it out with any suitable instrument.	0.7968446
and if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound, and because of the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein there, then enlarge the wound until it is large enough;	But if you cannot get at it on account of the narrowness of the wound and the depth at which the arrow is, and there be no bone nor nerve nor blood-vessel, then cut round it until the wound be sufficiently wide to enable you to take hold of it and extract it.	0.7948288
and pull the arrow out if you can, and if the arrow has barbs which are holding it in, then remove the flesh which is pierced on both sides as best you can, and then break or bend the barbs of the arrow, so that you can pull it out;	And if it have two barbs by which it is held, free them from the adherent flesh all round, in any way you can; or, if you cannot free the tissues, try skilfully to break off the two barbs and twist them about until the arrow comes free.	0.7864632
and take care not to break the arrow, as you would have more difficulty removing it.	Whenever you try to extract an arrow from any part, employ a twisting motion of your hand with the forceps in all directions until you free it; and use the utmost gentleness not to break the arrow and thus make it hard to draw it out and remove it.	0.41996017
And if you cannot do it at once, leave it until the place around it is putrid, then pull it out, because the extraction will be easier. And if the flow of blood opposes you, then administer what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;	If you are unable to get it out at once then leave it for some days until the tissues that surround it putrefy, then return to it, for then the extraction will be easy; and if haemorrhage interfere use the remedies prescribed in the chapter dealing with that.	0.7822367
and beware of cutting a nerve or a vein, and strive how you can best remove the arrow without danger, either quickly or slowly, firmly or gently;	Exercise the utmost care not to cut a blood-vessel or nerve or tendon; and employ the greatest skill in freeing the arrow; it should be done gently and unhurriedly and with perseverance, as I have told you.	0.7453278
and position the patient in the same way he was when the arrow struck him, for this is the greatest help there is, and if you cannot, then place him according to what the signs indicate.	When extracting an arrow you should place the patient in the same position he was in when the arrow struck him, for that is more convenient; but if you cannot do this then let him be in whatever position is possible for you.	0.7309562
An arrow that comes out from another part, where any part of it is visible, or the skin is swollen around it so that it can be clearly seen or felt:	The arrow that is to be extracted from the opposite side either has some part protruding through or else the tip of the arrow gives rise to a palpable swelling just beneath the skin and you see it sticking out; then cut down upon it; the incision should be wide enough to admit the forceps.	0.66729313
then cut into it, until the forceps can grasp it, and then extract it:	Then pull on it, for the extraction of it will be easy.	0.4293224
And if it is stuck in the bone, then rotate your hand circularly, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.	If it is stuck in bone, twist it round with your hand until the arrow makes an impression in the bone and opens up a way for itself; then pull it.	0.7797505
And if it cannot come out, leave it again, and then recommence the extraction until it comes out;	If it does not come out, let it alone for some days, and repeat until it does come out.	0.68700516
and if the shaft of the arrow is there, push it out with the entire shaft;	If the arrow-shaft be in the wound, then thrust the arrow out with that.	0.6346373
and if the shaft falls, and you want to administer pushing, then apply a threaded instrument, so that the point of the arrow enters the threading of the instrument;	But if the shaft has fallen out, and you wish to employ thrusting, introduce down to it the hollow instrument whose cavity will enter upon the ferrule of the arrow, then push it forward with that.	0.75186026
and then push it out, and if the arrow is barbed, push in a pointed instrument, to facilitate the extraction.	If the arrow be hollow, thrust it forward with an instrument that will enter into the cavity, for the exit of the arrow will thereby be made easy.	0.6917128
And if the arrow is poisoned, you must cut away all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as appropriate.	If the arrow be poisoned you must, if you can, cut out in a circle all the flesh into which the poison has entered; then treat it with what is appropriate.	0.87120456
And if the arrow falls into the chest, or the belly, or the bladder, or the side, and it is close, and you can cut down to it, then cut;	If the arrow that has struck be in the chest or abdomen or in the urinary bladder or in the flank and it be close enough for you to explore it with the probe and you can cut down upon it, then do so, but beware of cutting into a blood-vessel or nerve.	0.6749975
and be careful not to cut the vein or the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew the wound, if necessary; and treat it until it is healed.	Then remove the arrow. Afterwards suture the wound, if suture be necessary, and dress it until it heals.	0.64993376
The shape of the forceps with which one draws out arrows are similar to a bird's beak, and here is the shape:	Forceps for extracting arrows. The extremities resemble the bill of a bird and are engraved like a file so as not to lose grip when you close them upon an arrow or some other object.	0.5258541
And there are many kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.	They are made in several kinds, large, small, or medium, all according to the bigness or smallness of the arrow and the breadth or narrowness of the wound.	0.6749532
The shape of the pushing instrument is like the feather of a bird, to push against the tip of the arrow, as is the shape here:	The extremity is solid like a probe, to facilitate entry into, and pushing, the hollow arrow.	0.46041024

chapter-2-subchapter-95.txt
The veins from which one commonly bleeds are five in each arm:	As for the veins that are bled in the arm and hand, they are five.	0.6140318
And the salvatella is the vein which is between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches;	And the salvatella which is the vein between the little and ring fingers; it has two branches.	0.93256795
and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is below the curve of the wrist on the left side, and the second, the saphenous, which is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein which is called "nesse," which is on the ankle of the other side;	There are also three veins in the leg and foot; one of these is the sciatic vein on the outer aspect; the second is the saphena situated near the heel on the inner aspect; and there is the external saphena situated near the heel on the outer aspect.	0.8111837
and in the other leg there are three veins below these.	And there are three veins, counterparts to these, in the other leg.	0.8062522
Bleeding the veins that are behind the ears helps with chronic catarrh and migraines;	Venesection of the two veins behind the ears. Bleeding from both of these will give relief in cases of chronic catarrh, migraine and chronic foul pustules, and scabs of the head.	0.6244658
and the way to bleed them, as I tell you, is that you raise the patient's head and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then have the patient tighten their neck by screwing their head, until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places hanging from the head: then search for them with your finger, and where you feel the pulse under your finger, bleed with a lancet;	The method of venesecting these two is as I shall now describe: the patient's head should be shaved and the hinder part, in the region of the two veins, should be strongly chafed with a rough cloth; then the patient should bind his neck with his turban until the two veins are visible; their position is behind the ears in the two flattened places of the head; feel for them with your finger and when you feel their pulsation beneath your finger then mark the place with ink.	0.8673513
then take the lancet, and push it under the vein down to the bone, then lift your hand with the vein upwards, and cut both the skin and the vein well the width of two fingers, and let out as much blood as you see fit;	Then take a knife-scalpel, known as a lancet, and insert it beneath the vessel into the skin until the scalpel reaches the bone; then lifting with your hand both vessel and skin make an incision dividing both skin and vein; the length of the incision should be about two fingers side by side; then draw off the quantity of blood you wish.	0.8424442
then bandage and tie it until it is healed;	Then bind them up with dressings and leave it until healed.	0.7187474
and I have already discussed incision and cautery in the first book.	The incision and cauterization of these two vessels has been discussed earlier in the book.	0.60763544
Bleeding the two arteries that are in the two temples is beneficial for chronic and sudden migraines, and habitual ophthalmia, and for a burning sensation of sharp tears in the eyes;	The section of the two arteries in the temples gives relief for chronic migraine and severe headache and constant ophthalmia and the flow of acrid superfluities into the eyes.	0.75353956
and the method of bleeding is as I say: and it is that the patient strains his neck until the two veins appear clearly; and feel the pulse under your finger, and then bleed with a lancet;	Now the manner of incising them is as I shall describe: the patient should bind his neck with a sash until the vessels stand out clearly to the eye and their pulsation is manifest under your finger; then mark with ink.	0.8025394
then lift the skin above the vein upwards with your index finger, and insert the lancet underneath, and lift the vein upwards, and cut it, as you have done with the two other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need;	Then with your forefinger raise the skin over the vessel and introduce a lancet beneath and lift up the vein and divide it as you did the other two; and draw off as much blood as you need.	0.88117355
then untie the patient, and put your finger over the vein for an hour, then apply cotton; and then bind it tightly, and leave it until it is healed;	Then loosen the band round the patient's neck and put your finger on the vein for a while; then apply cotton wool and a pad, bandage securely, and leave until it heals.	0.8029436
and we have already spoken of them and of their cutting and their extraction, at the beginning of the book.	They and their incision and extraction have been mentioned earlier in the book.	0.7631069
Bleeding from the vein of the forehead is as effective as bleeding from the cephalic vein for long-standing illnesses of the face, and for migraines, and for redness;	Venesection of the vein in the forehead is, after venesection of the cephalic, a relief to chronic diseases of the face such as pustules and scabs and erysipelas.	0.6328139
and the procedure is that the patient strains his neck by twisting, until the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called "digger," of which here is the form:	Now I shall relate to you the method of cutting: you bind the patient's neck until the vessel stands out; then you take the instrument called the 'pickaxe'.	0.7726483
And place the point on the vein, and strike upon it with your hand, or with something else, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity you desire; then release the patient's neck, and tie off the vein until it is healed, and sometimes it is opened with a broad lancet.	The spike in the head of the instrument you place on the vessel itself and then strike with a comb or some similar thing; and let the blood flow to the extent you wish; then loosen the band round the neck and bandage the vein until healed.	0.8048808
However, it is not necessary that the lancet be too sharp; and cut across it, because the bone is near, and perhaps the lancet breaks when it is thin.	Sometimes it is opened with a broad scalpel; the scalpel, however, should not have a sharp point like other scalpels but should be a little broader at the tip, and the vein is cut obliquely, because the bone is close and the scalpel, if it is too fine, may be broken on it.	0.65370536
Bleeding the two veins that are in the two tear ducts helps the eyes, and against ringworm, and redness, and sty in the eye, and diseases of the face;	Venesection of the two lachrymal veins gives relief in diseases of the eyes such as granular conjunctiva and inflammation and pannus, and in diseases of the face.	0.68184525
and the manner of bleeding them is that the patient strains his neck by twisting with some bandage, as before;	Now this is the method of incising: the patient binds a sash round his throat, then you cut open both veins, standing in front of him.	0.5120047
then bleed him, and let the incision be across, a little along the lancet a little wide, for there is no flesh there. And if the lancet is thin, perhaps it will break;	The incision should be oblique, slightly longitudinal, with a small, rather broad scalpel, for in this place there is no flesh; so if the knife have too narrow a point it may be broken on the bone.	0.70842314
then let the blood flow as much as you need, and then apply cotton on it, and tie it well.	Then let flow what blood you wish, put cotton wool on both, tie for one night, then loosen.	0.6767551
Bleeding from the vein of the nose is good for acute illness, and sudden madness, and diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes to the face, and especially when it is chronic;	Venesection of the vein of the nose helps in acute fevers, in violent headache, and in diseases of the face such as the red pustules that arise on the nose, especially if they are chronic.	0.65546584
and the way to perform the bleeding is that the patient tightens his neck, then you hold his nose with your left hand, and take the thin long lancet, and insert it in the middle of the lip in the space that is between the two nostrils, because the vein does not appear well there, and the blood will immediately begin to flow;	This is how you make the incision: the patient binds his neck and then you hold his nose with your left hand and take a long fine scalpel and stick it in the middle of the very lobule of the nose, perpendicularly in the nasal septum (for the vein is not obvious at that spot) and blood will immediately flow out.	0.7666209
and do not go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your need, then tie it up for a night, because it is very quickly restored;	You should advance the scalpel a little and cause the blood to flow as required; then bandage for one night, for it will quickly heal.	0.66304886
Bleeding from the two tonsils helps with shortness of breath, and the onset of leprosy, and many illnesses, and impetigo, and corrosive ulcers, and herpes, and malignant ulcers;	Venesection of the jugular veins helps tightness of breath and the early stage of elephantiasis, and the melancholic diseases arising on the surface of the skin, such as the black vitiligo and impetigo and malignant ulcers and cancrum oris.	0.5421595
and the way to perform the bleeding is that the patient stretches his neck below both, as we have said;	Now the way to venesect them is for the patient to bind his neck below them both with a band; let the operator stand behind the patient and let the patient be seated upon a chair.	0.5014132
and let the practitioner stand above the patient's head, and let the patient sit on a seat, then bleed the vein lengthwise a little widely, then draw blood moderately, or as much as is needed;	Then incise the vein longitudinally with a rather wide opening; then let a moderate amount of blood, or according to what you think necessary; then do the same with the other vein.	0.6522707
then do the same in the other vein, then untie the ligature, and compress both veins moderately, so that the patient does not choke; and leave it until morning, so that the wound is healed.	Then loosen the band and tie the veins with a moderate pressure lest the patient be suffocated; leave him until the next day and the wound will be healed.	0.79151714
of the bleeding of the lips Bleeding the upper lip veins helps with glue in the mouth, and with corruption of the gums, and cracked lips, and the nose and around it.	The four veins of the lips: venesection of them is effective, second to section of the cephalic vein, for pustules on the mouth and rotting of the gums and malignant ulcers and fissures of the lips and for malignant ulcer in the nose and round about.	0.58594084
And the way to perform the bleeding is to have the patient sit in front of you, and compress his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left, and they are recognizable because they are black, and because around them are small black veins:	The way to venesect is to seat the patient in front of you and bind a sash round his neck, then roll back his lips and look for the two veins, one of which you will see to the left and the other to the right; their dark colour will show them up against the lip and also the fact that round them are fine dark veins; so cut down upon both, dividing them.	0.8378849
then cut one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, cut the largest one on each side, and do the same for the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same method.	But if you are in doubt about the matter and are not sure what they are, set about incising the largest and most obvious. Do the same with the two veins in the upper lip.	0.6423059
of the bleeding under the tongue Bleeding the veins that are under the tongue helps after bleeding the cephalic vein, and this is for tightening of the throat, and for diseases of the uvula, and for diseases of the mouth;	The two veins under the tongue: their venesection is, after section of the cephalic, of good effect in the quinsy arising in the throat from disease of the uvula, and diseases of the mouth.	0.68597066
and the proper way to bleed is that the patient sits between your hands in front of the sun, and lifts their tongue, and you look underneath on each side for a black vein:	The way to venesect them is to seat the patient before you in the sunlight and raise his tongue, and look, and you will see beneath the tongue one vein on each side, blackish in colour.	0.7648635
bleed then one and the other, and do not go too deep, because underneath are the arteries.	Cut them; but be careful not to go too far in your incision, for beneath them lie arteries from which there may be haemorrhage.	0.6491904
The veins of the neck that are commonly bled are bled in two ways:	The three veins that are opened in the elbow are the veins which universal custom has used for bloodletting.	0.4512722
either by pricking with a myrtle-leaf-shaped lancet, broad, or a subtle olive-shaped one like cutting edges, and it is called "anesil"; and they are broad and narrow according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The myrtle leaf shape is very renowned, and is broad as you see:	There are two ways of venesecting these: either by piercing with a broad myrtle-leaf scalpel or a rather fine olivary; or by cutting with a knife-edged scalpel, the lancet whose figure follows. The broad myrtle-leaf scalpel.	0.658648
And it is needed for opening hairy veins full of visible thick blood, and that contain thick and turbid blood; and this is the shape of the olive-shaped lancet:	As you see, it should be broad so as to serve for opening hollow, full, outstanding, obvious and thick veins, and those containing turbid blood. The olivary scalpel.	0.7193583
and it is more finely pointed, and it is for bleeding thin veins, where there is thin, clear blood.	This scalpel is less broad and finer-pointed. It is suitable for venesecting fine veins that contain thin jaundiced blood.	0.6285372
Bleeding from the basilic vein, which is one of these veins, helps with illnesses that are below the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the belly;	The basilic vein, which is one of these three vessels, helps, when cut, by extracting blood from disorders below the throat and neck, in the parts neighbouring the chest and abdomen.	0.7409911
and the bloodletter must bleed wisely, and beware of the artery that is beneath. And if he cuts the artery, and bleeding occurs, then it must be stopped, as I have said; and the blade should not be piercing, but cutting like a lancet.	When one venesects it one must be careful and wary of it, for beneath the vein is an artery, so that if one is inaccurate and sticks the scalpel in too far one will cut the artery and cause a haemorrhage; therefore venesection of it should not be done with a transfixing scalpel but should be an incision with the lancet.	0.6982798
And if the basilic vein is not clearly visible, then you must compress it, and choose another; or you look for a branch of it, or you bleed from the vein in the middle of the arm instead:	If the basilic vein is not clearly discernible, leave it and turn to another, or look for a branch of it; or venesect the brachial cord instead, for that is evident; incise it with the lancet as we have said.	0.8337312
and make the incision with the lancet blade, as we have said. And if you wish to know the place for the bloodletting, you must first, before tightening the arm, touch the area until you feel the pulse; then mark the place with ink, and then tie the arm, and cut the vein with the lancet blade;	But if you wish to open the basilic vein itself you should, before you bandage the arm, palpate the place till the site of pulsation is found; then mark it with ink; then bind the arm and cut the vein obliquely with the lancet as we said, and take care that the stroke fall some way from the artery.	0.8534063
and be careful not to strike the artery when you see the place swollen, for that is the artery:	If, when tying the bandage, you see a swelling in the place that you have marked with ink, that swelling is the inflation of the artery, so avoid it.	0.6210689
And if you see it spurt upwards like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is blood from the artery: hurry then, and put your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger if the blood stops, which often happens; then bind the arm, and leave it like that, and let the patient not move it;	And if, on section, you see the blood spurt out like a child's urine, and it is clear and red, then you may know that it is arterial blood; so then be quick and put your finger upon it for a long while; then remove your finger and if the bleeding stops, as it often will, then bind up the arm and leave it.	0.9204533
and let him be careful, and not move it until he is healed.	Caution the patient against neglecting it; let him be careful and not move it for some days, until it heals.	0.6608283
And if the blood is not stopped, and it overcomes you, and the medicine is not at hand, then cut the artery if it is visible, for the ends will retract; and the blood will stop.	But if the bleeding is not stayed but resists your treatment and you have no medicament there at the time, then cut the vessel through if you can see it; for the two ends will contract and the haemorrhage will stop.	0.78100276
And take a rind of green stick, and split it, and take one of the halves and tie it on firmly until the next day;	Or else take a pistachio nut shell and split it and take one half and bind it over the site of the haemorrhage with a pad and bandage until next day.	0.5908776
if not, then treat it, as we have said, with powders that stop blood;	The bleeding may stop; if not, then treat by those means mentioned previously, namely the application of styptic powders.	0.681891
and stopping the bleeding is not difficult in most cases because of the small size of the wound, and the strength of the arm's ligature.	It is not difficult in most cases to stop the bleeding, because the wound is small and it is easy to bandage the arm.	0.80328685
The median vein bleeding in the middle is helpful as it draws blood from the head above and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said;	Venesection of the median vein results in drawing off blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; this being due to the fact, as we said, that it is composed of a branch of the cephalic and a branch of the basilic veins.	0.8477162
and the bloodletter must be cautious of the nerve that is underneath, and if he punctures too deep, and he finds the nerve, and it swells and healing is difficult, and perhaps it cannot heal;	The venesector should be very careful in opening it because there is a nerve beneath; and if he takes the scalpel too deep and hits that nerve it will cause stupor, the healing of which will be difficult and perhaps even impossible.	0.7407479
and this nerve is apparent many times, and if it is not apparent in some men due to its thinness, then you must bleed it with a lancet instrument; and avoid the nerve as much as possible.	Generally this nerve can be felt, but if in some persons it lies hidden and is slender and not discernible, then you should make your venesection an incision with the lancet and diligently avoid the nerve.	0.67162424
And if there is a vein between two nerves, then open it lengthwise.	If the vein lies between two nerves you should cut it longitudinally.	0.72730327
Bleeding from the cephalic vein is helpful, as it draws blood from the head, and helps the eyes;	The cephalic vein: section of it is effective in drawing blood from the head and in diseases of the eyes.	0.689525
and one should bleed by puncturing at the site of the olive leaf or the myrtle leaf, because it is the safest of all the veins, for there is neither nerve nor artery beneath it.	Particularly in this vein you ought, if you wish to incise it, to make your incision by puncturing with the olivary or the broad myrtle-leaf scalpel, for this is the safest of all veins as there is neither artery nor nerve beneath.	0.7723411
However, one should seek the easiest location, and it doesn't matter if one misses the first time, and starts again; and perhaps the area swells in some people, when one misses the first time, but it doesn't matter. The amount of bloodletting depends on your judgment.	It will not injure it, if at the first cut you miss the vein, to repeat the incision several times; except that in some people it will sometimes swell up if the section is not made at the first stroke; nevertheless that swelling will do him no harm. The manner of venesection, the accidents that may supervene, and the necessary preliminaries for performing it properly.	0.6475551
The first thing you must know about bloodletting is that it is administered only to maintain health, and to avoid future illnesses;	First you should know that venesection may be employed either for the preservation of health or in cases of disease.	0.56124926
and the bloodletting should be done in one of the three veins that are in the elbow: that is to say, cephalic, median cubital, and basilic; and one should be bled at the beginning of spring on an empty stomach, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of plethora appear;	When used for the preservation and maintenance of health and for guarding against the occurrence of disease, the venesection should be in one of the three vessels at the elbow, cephalic, median, or basilic; and it must be performed at the beginning of spring when the signs of repletion appear.	0.7532764
and one should be bled on the first or third day, after two or three hours of the day.	The venesection should be done on a Sunday or Tuesday, after three hours of the day have passed.	0.6329617
Bloodletting that is administered for illnesses has no fixed time, but rather when there is need, day or night, at all hours and at all times;	On the other hand, venesection administered for diseases has no fixed hour but when need and necessity arise, either by night or by day, at any hour, in any season.	0.8179401
and one should not bleed children until fourteen years old, nor pregnant women except from the fourth month until the seventh. Nor should the elderly who are past sixty years old be bled.	Children should not be venesected until their fourteenth year, nor should you venesect old men of over sixty years.	0.7955807
And when someone wants to be bled, in whatever manner it may be, they should cleanse the intestines with a light enema, if they have much retained stool, so that the veins do not draw from the intestines putrid superfluities harmful to the principal members;	When anyone has decided to be bled, for whatever reason, first of all his bowels must be purged with a gentle enema if they contain much excrement, lest at the venesection putrid superfluities be drawn from the bowels into the veins, that might harm the chief parts of the body.	0.8011272
nor should one bleed someone who is overly satiated with food, nor who is drunk, until they are recovered, nor the dropsical;	No one suffering from indigestion or surfeit or drunkenness should be venesected until recovered from these; nor a dropsical patient.	0.77723116
and one should beware of bleeding after colic, and vomiting, and diarrhea, and frequent sexual intercourse with a woman, and from exertion, from staying awake, and from fasting, and that which weakens all strength, whether by something of the mind or of the body;	Beware also of venesection after stomach-trouble or vomiting or diarrhoea or much intercourse or fatigue or exercise or sleeplessness or fasting and anything else that diminishes the strength both bodily and spiritual.	0.71394527
then thin the humors, if the blood is thick, through foods and drinks and through medicines, if you have the means;	Then, beforehand, see to the refining of the humours, if the blood be thick, by means of food and drink and medicines, if that is practicable for him.	0.73570555
then enter the bath, if nothing prevents it, to thin the blood, and be bled from the vein of the chest around the third hour, as we have said;	Then, if there is no contra-indication, let him enter the bath; or let him take a little exercise to make the blood thin. Then perform the venesection in the early part of the day, as we have said.	0.67200315
and on that day, guard yourself from exertion, and from difficulty, and from sexual activity, and from similar things;	Let him endeavour on that day to have his mind free from all such evil spiritual affections as anxiety, anger, or fear; and from all bodily affections such as excessive fatigue and weariness and intercourse and the like.	0.6431754
and be happy and joyful, and let the bloodletter be higher than the one being bled, and let him rub the arm two or three times, then tie the ligature moderately tight, because when it is too tight or too loose, the blood cannot flow;	Then let him stretch out his arm, and let the venesector chafe it two or three times with his hand; then he should bind a bandage round it by means of thongs twisted two or three times. The ligature should be moderately tight, for any other sort of ligature, be it too tight or too loose, will hinder the flow of blood.	0.7707519
and then rub the area with the hands, until the veins swell, and they can be felt;	After putting on the tourniquet the patient about to be venesected should chafe his own hands together until the veins swell up and become obvious.	0.5044705
then the bloodletter moistens the lancet with a little old oil, then puts a finger of his left hand on that vein a bit below the place where he wants to bleed, so that the vein does not flee and fail upon being lanced.	Then the venesector should wipe over his knife with a little olive-oil, preferably old.	0.49655208
For there are veins that flee like cords when being bled, and there are some that are full of wind, so that when one places the lancet upon them, it withdraws the lancet and the vein cannot be opened, and thus it is with these; and if he opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, therefore the bloodletter must be knowledgeable in these things.	Then he should place the forefinger of his left hand on the vessel itself below the place where he wishes to cut, lightly, so that the vein does not slip away and elude the stroke; for there are some veins that you may find like cords slipping away at venesection, while others are filled with flatus and when the knife is applied to them they contract under it and deceive the operator and the knife fails to open the vein or makes only a narrow opening. Wherefore it behoves the venesector to be firm and deliberate in all these cases.	0.68978846
And if the vein opens the first time, that is good; if not, then start again a little below that place or quickly above, if the place is not swollen.	Then he should apply the knife and if the vein is opened first time, good; but if not, let him repeat a little lower down or a little above, quickly, if the place does not swell.	0.8924378
And if the place is swollen, and the patient is frightened, let him be for a day or two, and do not bind the arm: perhaps hot abscesses will develop there;	If it does swell or the patient be anxious, then leave him for a day or two and do not bandage, for that might perhaps provoke an abscess; nor let him go to the bath.	0.73833764
do not enter the bath, then resume the bleeding if it pleases him;	Then if he likes, let the venesection be repeated.	0.47336414
and if the opening is small, or the blood flows thinly and you doubt that not enough blood will come out as you wish, then strike in that same opening with the entire blade directly;	If the knife has made an opening but it is small and the flow of blood is feeble and you fear that the amount of blood you require will not come out, then gently insert the knife again straight into the same opening and widen it a little.	0.78547263
and work a little hastily, before the place swells; for this often happens, when the wound is small.	Do this speedily before the place swells up; for in many people the place swells up at once from a small opening.	0.749667
If you see the place swollen, do not restart the bleeding, and put on a little oil lees, for it lightens the body of blood, and the lees are better in this place than the oil;	But if you see it swell up, on no account make another incision for it will be ineffectual; but apply to it a little lees of oil, for that will facilitate the flow of blood; it is superior in this situation to the oil itself and to all other unguents.	0.7236763
and thus administer the oil lees in every bleeding that you bleed from the veins, to staunch the flow of blood;	Therefore use lees of oil in all cases of venesection when the flow of blood is hindered.	0.66517556
and theriac does the same, and ox dung, when it is put on the place; thus the blood thins and spreads when it is too thick.	The great theriac and shakhzanaya both have the same effect, for when the blood is thick it is rendered thin and running.	0.6156285
And if there comes a large abscess, which happens often, especially when it is not bled except at the time when the opening of the vein is small, then hurry, and put on the place a sponge moistened in slightly warm water and salt, and squeeze it for an hour;	If there occur a big tumour at the site of venesection, as often happens, especially with a man who has not previously undergone venesection or if the opening in the vein be small, then quickly apply to the place a sponge soaked in lukewarm salt and water and bandage it for a while, then it will go down.	0.73749685
and you must do this after the blood has flowed from the vein, and if any blackness or greenness remains at the place after a few days, it does not harm it; and if you wish, put on something of aloes or myrrh mixed in juice of calamint, mountain mint, or similar.	You should do this after the blood has gone out altogether from the same vessel or from another one. If there remain after some days some discoloration or greenness at the site it will not hurt; if you like, apply some solution of myrrh and aloes, or juice of penny-royal or something similar.	0.86803627
And often an abscess and swelling appear at the opening of the basilic vein:	Often in section of the basilic vein there occurs tumour and swelling.	0.7094631
then put your hand on it, and if you find the place soft under the pressure of the hand, this swelling is bad. Be careful then that you do not apply any of the things that we have mentioned, for perhaps it cuts into the artery;	Put your hand upon it, and if you find that it sinks when pressed then it is a harmful swelling; be careful not to apply to it any of the things we have told you; for often arterial blood comes from it.	0.8247537
but make a dry plaster to harden the place, then treat it with other remedies, until it is healed.	But apply a poultice with some styptic qualities, to harden the place; then treat in the usual way until healed.	0.6963644
And draw blood from each finger according to the strength of its vein, and the color of the blood.	Now in each case you should extract blood in proportion to the person's strength and to the prevailing colour of the blood.	0.6555988
For if the blood is black, let it flow until it is red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it is thinned; and if it is too hot, let it cool.	If the blood be black, let it flow until it becomes red; in the same way, if you see it is thick, let it run until it is thin; and again, if it be sharp, until its sharpness is gone.	0.904678
And for one who is full and strong, and needs bloodletting, a larger wound should be made, and the lancet should be wide;	In the case that is plethoric, robust, and requiring venesection just the once, the incision should be wide and the knife should be broad.	0.6049513
and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and he should be bled little and often, and he should be bled by cutting across, not by pricking;	And on the contrary for the debilitated person, in whose case you should venesect several times and the opening should be small.	0.63559246
and this method of bleeding is safe from excessive bleeding and severing a nerve, and is better than bleeding along the length or width.	This manner of venesecting is safe from haemorrhage and from cutting the nerve; it is better and safer than cutting straight across or straight along.	0.8164435
And to one whose body fails during bleeding, give bread soaked in pomegranate juice; if he is feverish, then draw blood three or four times. And if he is of a cold complexion, have him eat before bleeding bread soaked in muscat syrup, or in honey syrup flavored with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and a fragrant syrup.	To the patient who habitually faints during venesection you should give to eat beforehand a little bread macerated in the juice of unripe pomegranates or oxymel, if he be of a warm temperament; and draw off the blood in three or four instalments. And if he be of a cold temperament let him take beforehand bread macerated in syrup of quinces or in aromatic syrup of honey or in fragrant syrup of basil.	0.855954
And if he faints during bleeding, after the loss of much blood, he should drink meat broth, and a fine, fragrant syrup, and use the other things that we have mentioned in the section or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of a vein.	If the patient faints during venesection and the cause is great loss of blood, then be should be given to drink meat-juice and thin syrup of basil; and he should perfume himself with galia moschata and anoint his chest with it. And for the rest, use what we have spoken of in its place in the chapter dealing with fainting due to evacuation.	0.681646
And if he wants to air out his arm and bleed again, he should, when he is weakened by extensive bleeding, bleed little by little, according to the extent of his strength, continuously.	As for him who wishes to ease his arm and draw off blood a second time, when he is undergoing the venesection on account of great evacuation and the lowness of his strength, you should let the blood slowly, in proportion to his strength, on successive days.	0.76477766
And whoever wishes to air out their arm after the first bleeding, and has a strong constitution, let them bleed seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.	For him who wishes to ease his arm and draw off blood a second time, being of robust body, it must be done seven or nine hours from the first venesection.	0.77154
And whoever wants to be bled from another location, should be bled on the second or third day.	He who wishes to draw blood from his body to the side opposite to that toward which it tends, should be eased on the second or third day.	0.7812355
For there is much blood within the body that is already heated, and causes fever; so a large quantity must be drawn, and the opening widened until he falls into a faint; then, as you observe all the conditions of bleeding, and place your hand on his pulse as he bleeds, so that death does not come instead of fainting, and this happens many times, when the bloodletter is negligent;	He who has abundant blood that has become hot and sharp and has produced fever should be bled at one time, and a large amount should be taken with a wide opening, until he faints (all the rules of venesection having been observed by you); but you should keep your finger on the pulse while the blood flows lest death take the place of fainting, for that often happens when the venesector is ignorant and there is carelessness.	0.8037596
and it is not appropriate, when you wish to untie the arm, and let the blood flow a second time, and the opening is closed, that you press firmly on it; nor if it is bent, that he extend the arm hastily, for that would be bad;	If you wish to loosen the arm and let blood a second time and you find that the opening of the vein is now closed up and the outflow of blood is difficult, you should not press hard upon it nor twist the arm violently, for that is very harmful.	0.79997635
but leave it until it bleeds a second time; or you prick it with the point of the lancet, until the blood that is congealed at the opening of the vein comes out, and put on it a little salt dissolved in water, and press lightly on it.	Either you must leave him a while and then bleed him again; or the clot of blood can be removed from the opening of the vein by using the blade of the scalpel, or by applying some salt dissolved in water; or apply some of the great theriac or shakhzanaya; and put light pressure upon it until the blood comes out.	0.7399706
And if the vein is swollen, leave it and do not constrict it, until the swelling has subsided.	But if the vein has begun to swell, leave it and do not touch it until the swelling has subsided.	0.8248687
And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, bleed it in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.	And if you are unavoidably called to let blood again, venesect either above the place or in the other arm or another vessel.	0.8312839
And the manner of the bloodletting is that the patient puts his hand in warm water, until the vessels are red;	The way to venesect it is for the patient to dip his hand in hot water until the forearm is red from the warmth and the vessel stands out distinctly.	0.71535593
then it should be moderately tied, so that the vein appears well, then bleed it immediately across, not lengthwise nor widely;	Then bandage a little above it with a moderate pressure, and then cut the vein a little obliquely, neither transversely nor longitudinally. The incision should be broad, and you should make the cut a little above the wrist.	0.7037327
and let the opening be wide, and be bled very near the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot come out, put the hand back in warm water, and let the blood run into the water, until you have enough;	The incision should be broad, and you should make the cut a little above the wrist. If the blood does not flow easily, have the hand again put into the vessel of hot water and let the blood flow into the water until you have extracted what is needed.	0.7559521
and if it is in summer, do not put the hand back in warm water, for it is put there more in winter than in summer;	If it be in the summer time you may be able to dispense with putting the hand back into the hot water; it is mainly in winter that you let the blood flow into hot water.	0.6927887
and bleeding from this vein is safer than all other veins, because there is neither artery nor nerve.	Venesection of this vessel is safer than all others for beneath it there is neither artery nor nerve.	0.857872
Bleeding from the cephalic vein of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is the method:	Section of the salvatella of the right hand is efficacious in case of diseases of the liver.	0.5311977
bind the hand, and put it in warm water, until the vein is swollen, so that it can be seen; and bleed it across, and if you cut it completely through, it does no harm;	The method of venesecting it is to tie a band round the wrist or grip it with your hand, after you have put it in hot water until the vein is swollen up and is plainly to be felt; then cut it somewhat obliquely; if you cut it right through that will not matter at all.	0.6829219
and do not go too deep, for the nerves are underneath, bare of flesh, and then put the hand back in warm water, if the blood is congealed in the wound, and cannot come out.	But be careful not to go too far with the knife, for underneath there are the tendons of the fingers and the place is bare of flesh. Then put the hand again into hot water and let the blood flow; for if you do not put it into hot water again the blood will clot in the opening and will be prevented from flowing.	0.77358615
And when you have drawn as much blood as is necessary, put oil and salt on the vein to heal it quickly, and do so for each branch.	When you have extracted the required quantity of blood, put oil and salt on the vein so that it does not heal too quickly. You should act thus with every narrow branch.	0.8597959
Bleeding it in the left hand is good for diseases of the spleen, and do just as I told you on the right side.	Incision of the salvatella of the left hand is of value in diseases of the spleen. Venesection of it should be carried out in the same manner as you did in the other.	0.6391407
Bleeding the saphenous vein is good for all illnesses that are below the body, such as illnesses of the marrow, and retention of menses, and illnesses of the kidneys, and of the thighs and of old legs, and similar illnesses.	Venesection of the saphena is beneficial in diseases of the lower part of the body, such as afflictions of the uterus and retention of the menses, and for diseases of the kidneys, and for chronic ulcers of the hips and legs, and similar diseases.	0.87463284
And the way to bleed it is that the patient puts his foot in warm water, and rubs the vein until it appears, and ties above the ankle joint; and the vein is at the ankle, and many branches go above the foot;	Now the manner of venesection is for the patient to put his foot in hot water, then friction should be applied to it until the veins fill up; then bind a thong over the joint of the foot; then the site of the vein at the ankle is shown up running toward the big toe and forming many branches on the surface of the foot.	0.83447826
bleed it then in the largest branch, or at the ankle, which is better.	Then make your incision either in the broadest branch or at the ankle before it ramifies, for that is better and safer.	0.71793735
And if you bleed it above the foot, beware of the nerves that are below, and bleed it across as if cutting;	If you venesect it on the surface of the foot, be careful of the tendons that are beneath on the surface of the foot. Make the incision obliquely as though you were cutting the vein through.	0.7063217
and let the lancet be sharp.	The knife should be a lancet.	0.5215076
And if the blood cannot come out, put the foot back in the water, and let the vein empty well.	If the flow of blood be impeded, put the foot back again into hot water and let the blood flow out into it until it is evacuated.	0.7530072
And if the bloodletter misses the first time, repeat the second time a little above, because the area is safe;	If the venesector makes a mistake the first time in the vein to be cut, let him repeat the section a little higher up, for the.place is safe; you need fear no mischief as long as you are careful of the tendons, as we said before.	0.6094713
do not fear the nerve, as we have said, and do the same with the saphenous vein of the other foot likewise.	In the same way you may deal with the saphena of the other foot.	0.46622187
The location of the sciatic vein is at the ankle outside, and its bleeding is beneficial for hip pain, when it is due to hot blood.	Now the position of the sciatic vein is, as we said, on the outside near the heel. Section of it is effective in pain in the hip when it arises from hot blood.	0.7831583
And the way to bleed it is that the patient enters the bath, and squeezes above the ankle four fingers' width by twisting, for otherwise the vein does not appear;	The way to venesect it is to make the patient get into the bath. Then hasten and bandage his leg from the hip to a distance of four fingers above the heel, with a long narrow bandage; for only this will cause it to appear.	0.7555876
and if it appears, bleed it in every way you can, and across; and it is better that you cut it, for the location is safe, and it is greatly renowned among many men.	When it has appeared then open it in whatever way you can; at an angle, which is best, or right through, or only cut it open, for it is a safe place.	0.64401835
and it is better that you cut it, for the location is safe, and it is greatly renowned among many men. And if you do not find it, bleed any branch of it that appears on the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves;	But in many people it is very hard to find; and if you do not find it or it is in no way palpable, then venesect one of its branches, which will be seen on the surface of the foot towards the fourth toe and the little toe. Be careful of the tendons, and let the amount of blood you require.	0.69859093
and let as much blood flow as you wish, and then untie the ligature, and apply cotton and tighten it; it is now healed.	Be careful of the tendons, and let the amount of blood you require. Then loosen the bandage and apply cotton wool to the site of the section and bandage the place; it will heal quickly.	0.7037758

chapter-2-subchapter-96.txt
Cupping glasses are made of horn, or brass, or glass;	Cupping-vessels are made of horn, wood, bronze, or glass.	0.6761782
and cupping is done in two ways: either by lancing and drawing blood, or without lancing.	Cupping is carried out in two ways: one with scarification and drawing blood, and the other without scarification.	0.8328871
And this cupping without lancing is done in two ways: either with fire, or without fire;	The latter, cupping without scarification, may be carried out in two ways: with fire and without fire.	0.7939848
and the other is in the middle of the neck; and two others on the two sides of the neck; and the cupping glass under the chin; and the cupping glasses on the two shoulders;	The points at which cupping with scarification and extraction of blood is performed are fourteen places in the body: the occiput, which is the back of the head; the interscapular region, which is the middle of the back of the neck; the two sides of the neck, equally on both sides; the chin, that is, beneath the lower jaw; the two shoulders; the coccyx, at the base of the tail; the antibrachium, the middle of the forearms; the two legs; and the two heel-veins.	0.64956975
and cupping does not draw blood, except from the small veins that are spread in the flesh, and therefore one does not weaken from it, as one does from bloodletting from a vein; and it should not be administered, neither with fire nor without fire, in any illness that comes from plethora, until the whole body is emptied.	What cupping does is to draw blood out of the fine vessels dispersed over the flesh; for this reason it does not cause the strength to decline as does venesection; nor may you use cupping, either with fire or without fire, in any disease due to plethora, until the whole body has been evacuated.	0.8689455
And if by necessity of illness cupping is required, or by habit, we administer it every time at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in the middle, and at any time;	If disease or custom prescribe cupping we may apply it at any hour, at the beginning or end or middle of the month, at whatever time it may be.	0.7593633
for there are some who, when they need cupping, have a heavy head;	For there are some people who, when there is an abundance of blood in them, so as to need cupping, feel heaviness and pain in the head.	0.7189903
and there are some who find fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness in their eyes;	Some find they have a fullness and redness of the face and also of the head and neck; some have an itching in their face and forehead and a dimness and irritation in their eyes.	0.8681091
and some who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and cough up blood; and there are some who dream, and see at night blood and wounds and death and similar things.	There are some who scratch the places where the cupping-vessels are applied; some laugh immoderately; some find a taste of blood in the mouth, and the gums swell up and they spit blood; some sleep overmuch; some frequently dream of seeing blood and redness and murdered men and wounds and the like.	0.8125283
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the middle of the month, we order them to be cupped after three hours of the day.	So when we see anything of this kind, and especially if it be in the middle third of the month, we thereupon prescribe cupping after the second or third hour of the day has passed.	0.72831833
The bloodletting of the nose helps with the heaviness of the head ... that comes to the eyes, and it is not necessary that this be after the evacuation of the whole body;	The effect of cupping the nape of the neck is to help in heaviness of the head and in a fluxion of humours into the eyes; but it should be done after a complete evacuation of the body.	0.6719254
and this cupping is in place of the bleeding of the cephalic vein, and it is not appropriate for those of a cold complexion to use it, or those who have catarrh, because it causes them great harm;	This use of cupping may take the place of venesection of the cephalic vein. But anyone suffering from coldness of the brain or catarrh should beware of using it, for this will cause serious harm.	0.6894458
and therefore it is not appropriate for the elderly to use it, nor those who have cold illnesses in the head.	So it should not be employed on old men or on anyone suffering from a cold disease of the head.	0.80445534
And he who is often bled becomes forgetful, and therefore it is necessary to place the cupping glass a little lower for fear of forgetfulness.	If anyone becomes addicted to it it brings about oblivion. You should therefore bid the cupper bring the cupping-vessel a little lower down lest oblivion supervene.	0.5935605
Cupping in the middle of the neck is in place of bleeding from the head and the basilic vein, and therefore it is good for tightness of the chest, and for cracking of the bronchial tube, and for coughs, and for congestion;	Now as to the application of cupping-vessels to the interscapular region: it is instead of venesection of the median and basilic veins; so it is effective for asthma and dyspnoea and for rupture of the organ of respiration, and for cough and plethora.	0.64682806
and there one should apply it lightly, because if it holds too firmly, it generates forgetfulness in the stomach and in the heart.	The cupping of the interscapular region should be made a little high, for if it is too low it will bring about weakness of the heart and stomach.	0.5085855
Cupping on the two sides of the neck is good for headaches, and ophthalmia and migraine, and for sore throat, and for pain in the roots of the teeth, and is in place of bleeding from the basilic vein;	Cupping the sides of the neck helps in pains occurring in the head, ophthalmia, migraine, and in quinsy and in pain at the roots of the teeth; it replaces venesection of the basilic vein.	0.77045214
and you must instruct the bleeder to loosen his hand when applying it, so that he does not cut the artery, and there is no excessive bleeding.	And you should bid the cupper not to scarify very deeply lest he cut an artery and cause haemorrhage.	0.71370625
Cupping under the chin is good for diseases of the mouth, and for corruption of the gums, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and is in place of bleeding from the two lips.	The application of cupping under thé chin helps against ulcers in the mouth and corruption of the gums and similar diseases of the mouth ; and may replace venesection of the four labial vessels.	0.7631454
Cupping on the shoulders is good for illness that comes from heat and plethora.	The application of cupping to the shoulders helps in palpitation of the heart arising from plethora and heat.	0.7110981
Cupping on the elbows is worth as much as from the three veins of the arm, because it draws blood from these large veins;	These capillaries draw blood from other larger veins till the drawing reaches those three great veins.	0.62501603
and instruct the bleeder not to strike too deeply, for the place is bare of flesh, and has nerves and arteries underneath.	You should bid the person who applies the vessels not to scarify deeply; for the place is bare of flesh and there are tendons and arteries beneath.	0.84417915
The cupping glass that is placed on the buttocks is good for hemorrhoids of the anus, and for illnesses below, and it is necessary that the cupping glass be large, and made of brass, because it needs to draw well; and perhaps, if it were thin, it would break; and make large wounds there.	The application of a single cupping-vessel to the coccyx is effective for haemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers of the lower abdomen. You must tell the cupper that the cupping-vessel should be large and of bronze, for the place requires strong suction, and a glass cupping-vessel may break; and he should scarify deeply.	0.74954724
Cupping glasses on the legs bleed openly, for they draw blood from the whole body, and are good for old pains of the loins, and of the spleen, and of the bladder, and restore menstruation; and are placed at the location of the two saphenous veins, and the two ankles, and nevertheless they weaken the body after long use, and cause fainting in many ways.	Cupping applied to both legs reduces plethora manifestly, because it draws off blood from the whole body, and so is beneficial for chronic pains in the kidneys and uterus and bladder; and brings on the menses. It also serves for pustules and boils; and takes the place of venesection of the saphenous veins and the heel-veins.	0.83952725
The way to apply the cupping glass is that you first place it empty, and suck moderately, and place it quickly, and move it evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the place red and swollen, and the redness of the blood appears;	The way to apply the cupping-vessels: the vessel is first put in position empty; then you suck moderately; do not long hold the cupping-vessel in place, but apply it quickly and remove it quickly so that the humours gather evenly at the place; and go on doing it time after time until the place is seen to redden and to swell, and the redness of blood is manifested.	0.8612127
then cauterize, and replace the cupping glasses, and take care in the disposition of the bodies, because there are some who have tender flesh and clear pores:	Then scarify, and repeat the suction very gently; then consider the bodily condition.	0.43907285
so it is necessary to strike only once, and make wide wounds, and a little deep;	The person who is tender of flesh and porous of skin you should scarify once only, not more, lest the place ulcerate.	0.45319664
And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to thin the path of the thick blood.	If there be a thickness of the blood he should scarify twice; the first time to make a way out for the thinner blood and serum; and the second time to complete the extraction of the thick blood.	0.70917773
And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to strike a third time;	If the blood be very turbid let him scarify a third time for completion.	0.6808548
and when we want to draw blood little by little, striking once is sufficient.	In general, one scarification is enough when we wish to draw a little thick blood; but if we wish to draw much blood we make more scarifications.	0.634869
And if we want a lot of blood, we start again often;	If we judge that the blood is thick we should scarify deeply.	0.42284346
and if the blood is thick, strike deeply, and the limit is that the heart be pierced suddenly, and for those who have thick and hard skin, and who have narrow pores, you should anoint the places of the cupping glasses with opening and dissolving oil: if it is in summer, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or oil of cucurbita seed;	He whose skin is thick, solid, desiccated, and narrow of pore: the operator should anoint the place with opening and emollient and resolving oils; if it be in the summer season, with, for example, oil of yellow gilliflower or of violets or of sweet almonds or of pumpkin-seeds.	0.7697942
and if it is in winter, with watercress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or similar.	If it be in winter, with narcissus oil or oil of lilies or camomile oil, or of jasmine, or the like.	0.8779025
And if the superfluity is thick and cold, take marjoram oil, or balsamite oil, or dill oil, and similar ones.	And if the superfluity be thick and cold, then with oil of marjoram or oil of wild thyme or oil of ben or oil of dill.	0.7988666
And if the one being treated has tender flesh and large pores, no oil should be applied, but it should be washed after cupping with rose water, or cold water, or nightshade water, or cucurbita water, or purslane water, or similar.	If he who is to be cupped has wide-open pores and tender flesh, he should be forbidden oil. After cupping, such people should wash the sites with rose-water or cold water or water of black nightshade or of gourds or of garden purslain, or the like.	0.807862
And he who has much moisture, should rinse with vinegar, or myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.	But he whose blood is very humid should wash the sites of his cupping with vinegar or water of myrtle or sumac, and the like.	0.7993754
And those who have thick superfluities should rinse with old wine, or elderflower water, or a decoction of dill or chamomile, or other similar things;	He that has thick superfluities should wash the sites of his cupping with old wine or water of purslain or decoction of dill or of camomile or the like.	0.7990935
and one should not be treated with cupping before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath an hour or two;	One should beware of cupping in the bath or just after the bath, but should use the vessels one or two hours after leaving the bath.	0.7825606
and should not sleep after cupping, and must take care when he is to be cupped and when he has been cupped.	And no one should sleep after cupping. The correct procedure to be observed before and after cupping by him who is to be cupped or venesected.	0.71524584
And be wary if the one who is being treated is choleric, and if the blood is too sharp and inflamed; then he should take cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuces with vinegar, and similar things; and eat chickens, and mutton, and moist foods.	It is necessary for you first to consider, and if he that is to be cupped or venesected be bilious, and bitterness and inflammation prevail in his blood, he should take cooling things such as pomegranates and endive with vinegar and lettuce and oxymel and julep, and the like. His diet should be chicken and mutton made into stews with vinegar, and soups with verjuice, and the like.	0.7904973
and eat chickens, and mutton, and moist foods. And he who has a cold complexion should take honey syrup, and moderately fragrant wine, which is between old and new, and eat little, and eat chickens and small birds and pigeons;	His diet should be chicken and mutton made into stews with vinegar, and soups with verjuice, and the like. The man of frigid constitution should drink syrup of honey or syrup of quince or spiced oxymel; he should also take perfumed raisin wine, not too old and not too new; he should be bidden to be moderate in eating and should make his diet young pullets and larks and sparrows and young pigeons in white stews.	0.79841757
and the day he is cupped, he should drink more than he eats;	And on the day of cupping and venesection he should drink rather than eat.	0.72625446
and it is necessary to give some men sometimes theriac or nutmeg before cupping, or after, to strengthen the principal members; and the blood should be thinned, but it is not necessary for those who are hot to drink it.	It may sometimes be necessary to have some people drink the great theriac or musk-medicine or shllitha before cupping and before or after venesection, to strengthen the chief parts and to render the blood thin; but these draughts should not be given to the feverish.	0.8357502
The cups that are applied without scarification are those that are placed over the liver, and over the spleen, and for gout, and over the belly and the buttock and the loins and the hip, because these parts do not tolerate being cut over the skin, and it is only done to draw blood from one part to another, as we place them on the breasts when the nose bleeds;	Cupping without scarification is the cupping practised on the liver, the spleen, the breasts, the belly, the umbilicus, the region of the kidneys and the acetabulum of the femur; for these parts do not tolerate scarification.	0.65730786
to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, as we put cups on the belly and on the buttock to reduce the limb;	Now the purpose of the vessels is either to draw blood from one part to another, as when we apply cups over the breasts in the case of nose-bleed; or to loosen from the part a frigid vapour that has become fixed in it, as when we place cupping-vessels on the abdomen and umbilicus; for they stimulate the part and warm it and remove the pain because they loosen the vapour.	0.47479525
and removes the pain, when there is blockage or stone, thus removes by its attractive power perhaps the blockage, or loosens the stone from its place;	Sometimes they are applied over the kidneys when there is an obstruction or stones in them; for often, by virtue of their drawing, the obstruction is opened up or the stones are dislodged from their site.	0.6082961
and so it does when it is placed on the liver and on the spleen when there is retained flatulence, and these cups are applied empty to only suck;	They act in the same way when they are applied over the liver and the spleen when flatus is permeating them. These cupping-vessels may be used empty with suction only; or they may be used with fire.	0.6840563
and sometimes they are applied together with fire, and sometimes filled with lukewarm water, as in diseases of the pleurisy, and in such a way that one fills the cup with hot water alone, or with water in which suitable herbs have been boiled for this.	These cupping-vessels may be used empty with suction only; or they may be used with fire. Sometimes in pleuritic complaints they are applied filled with tepid water. This is done by filling the vessel, which should be large, with plain hot water, or with hot water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.	0.7501871
The method of the cupping glass applied with fire is as follows:	This is the figure of the cupping-vessel for use with fire.	0.52389807
And let it be two fingers wide and half a palm deep, and let it have on the side around the middle a small hole, like for inserting a needle, and let it be made of brass, smooth in front so that it does not injure the patient when placed on the limb;	Its mouth should be the width of two opened fingers, as we have illustrated; the depth should be half a span; and in the side about halfway down there should be a small hole of a size to admit a needle.	0.76541865
and let it have in the middle a crossbar of brass or iron, to place a lit candle, and let there be both large and small ones according to the illnesses and the age of those who receive them;	And in the middle there should be a transverse rod of bronze or iron to carry the lighted lamp. You may make this kind of cupping-vessel in a large size, larger than we have described; and in a small size too, to suit various ailments and the age of the user.	0.7077732
for the cupping glasses for children are different from those for the elderly, and for the thin different from those for the fat.	For the cupping-vessels for boys and thin persons differ from those for men and stout persons.	0.75297254
And one should apply this cupping glass to the limb in this way:	Now this is the manner of applying this cupping-vessel with fire to a part of the body.	0.51991045
take a wax candle or a wick, and place it in the middle of the cupping glass across the bar which is in the middle of the cupping glass, so that the flame is at the bottom of the cupping glass so that it does not burn the patient;	You set light to a strongly twisted wick of linen or a small wax candle, and you set it on the middle of the cross-piece in the middle of the vessel so that the flame be directed toward the lower part of the cupping vessel and not burn the patient's body.	0.73677075
and then place it on the limb, and your fingers should be over the hole that we mentioned, so that when one wishes, the vapor escapes, and one removes the cupping glass;	Then the vessel should be placed on the part with the finger kept over the above-mentioned hole; then when we have held the vessel sufficiently long there the finger is taken away, the vapour will come out through the hole, and the vessel will become loosened at once.	0.71873605
and one takes the wick as before, and repeats this often, if you need to.	Then light the wick as prescribed and repeat if necessary.	0.623592
In the cupping glass then which is used in the case of pleurisy, acutely, there is no bar nor hole, and fire is used only when it is full of water, and it is placed only on the limb;	But the cupping-vessel that is used in pleurisy, with water, has no cross-piece nor hole; it is used by simply filling with water and applying to the part.	0.7015487
and this is the method:	This is the figure of it.	0.43120968

chapter-2-subchapter-97.txt
Leeches are used only on limbs where one cannot place cupping glasses due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and in places devoid of flesh, such as fingers or nose, and other similar places;	Leeches are mostly used on those parts of the body to which application of cupping-vessels is impossible, either because of their smallness, such as the lips, the gums, and so on; or because the part is bare of flesh, like the finger, the nose, and so on.	0.81430876
and the method of use is that when you find leeches that are in clean fresh water without filth, take them;	This is the way to use them: you seek some leeches that are in fresh water free of dirt.	0.6139523
and put them in fresh water for a night, so that they become hungry, and have nothing in their bellies; and then be bled by vein or cupping glass, then rub the limb until it is red, and place the leeches on it;	Then you leave them in fresh water for a day and a night until they are hungry and nothing is left in their bellies; then you purge the patient's body, either by venesection or by the application of cupping vessels; then you scrub the afflicted part until it is flushed; and then place the leeches on it.	0.8104434
and when they are full, and fall off, if it is a place where one can apply a cupping glass, apply it, for this is very beneficial afterwards.	When they are full they will fall off. If it is possible to make suction with a cupping vessel, the effect will be greater.	0.64318836
If not, then wash the area well, first with vinegar, and then with water, and then wipe it;	But if not, wash the part with vinegar followed by much water; then rub and put pressure on it.	0.7113498
and if the area bleeds too much after the leeches are removed, wet a linen cloth in cold water, and place it on, until the bleeding has stopped;	If the blood continues to run after the leeches have fallen off, and becomes an ooze, let linen dressings be wetted with cold water and apply them over the place until the oozing stops.	0.7634548
and if the blood flow is excessive, apply crushed vitriol, or gallnuts, and similar things, until it is stopped;	But if the bleeding be serious then sprinkle upon the place powdered vitriol or gall or similar styptics, until the haemorrhage is stopped.	0.76175964
or you can put on the area half of peeled beans, and leave them until they dry on the spot, this will stop it immediately;	Or let split shelled beans be applied to the place and left until they stick there, and then the bleeding will stop.	0.67915297
and if you need more, then take other leeches.	If it is necessary to repeat the application, the same leech should not be applied but another one if you possibly can.	0.51603734
And if the leeches do not want to attach, rub the area with fresh blood, or prick it with a needle until the blood comes out, and then put them on, and as soon as they sense the blood, they will attach;	If the leeches fail to stick on, the place should be wiped over with fresh blood or pricked with a needle to bring out a little blood; then apply them, for if they smell any blood they will immediately adhere.	0.8044828
and when you see that they are falling off, sprinkle on a little aloe and crushed salt, or ash, and they will fall off immediately.	When you wish to remove them, sprinkle over them a little powdered aloes or salt or ashes, then they will at once fall away.	0.7612697

chapter-3.txt
Here begins the book of fractures. This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and concerns the repair of fractures and dislocations.	ON BONE-SETTING This third part of the book, too, is an essential necessity in the practice of medicine; it concerns the setting of the fracture or dislocation occurring in bones.	0.64852923
Know, dear son, that fools throw themselves into this chapter, who have never seen any of the ancient books, nor read a letter of them;	You should know, my sons, that ignorant practitioners and laymen and those who have never turned the pages of a single book of the Ancients about it, nor studied a single letter of it, arrogate this part of the art to themselves.	0.73722136
and for this reason, knowledge is scarce in our land, for I never found any good one;	For this reason this section of the science has died out in our parts; I have myself found no one competent in it; and whatever skill I have, I have derived for myself by my long reading of the books of the Ancients and my thirst to understand them until I extracted the knowledge of it from them.	0.55402833
and I know nothing of it except through the knowledge of ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have extracted the knowledge, and through experience, and through the practice of my life;	Then through the whole of my life I have adhered to experience and practice. So now I have described for you in this book all that my knowledge has encompassed on the subject and that my experience has encountered; I have made it accessible for you and rescued it from the abyss of prolixity; I have reduced it to a brief outline; and have explained it most clearly.	0.61964417
and I have here described in this chapter what is contained, and have abbreviated it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are administered, as I have done in these two preceding chapters.	I have made for you many drawings of the instruments that are used in it, which is an adjunct to explanation, as I did in the two previous books.	0.6146233

chapter-3-subchapter-1.txt
It is therefore necessary that we state in the prologue of this book the main points of the discussion and the chapters where the wise man applies his understanding, and dwells on the truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.	Before we begin to speak of the fractures and dislocations of individual members we must, as an introduction to this book, give the general and particular information which compels your understanding and your being versed in it; both you and anyone else beside who is eager to learn this noble art.	0.6091906
I say that when a fracture or dislocation or sprain or break occurs to someone, you must hasten to treat the patient on both sides, unless something prevents you entirely, such as weakness of the body, or infancy, or old age; or if the weather is not very hot, or too cold;	So I say that when anyone has sustained a fracture or dislocation or luxation or fall, you should first hasten to venesect him, or get his bowel open, or both, if there be nothing to hinder such as physical weakness, or unless it be a small boy or a very old man to whom an accident of this kind has happened; or unless the weather be excessively hot or cold.	0.86202866
and eat cold, thin foods, that is to say, cold broths, and bird and venison meat, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not overfill yourself with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you no longer fear a hot abscess, or the spreading of matter in the limb;	Next, let his diet be restricted to cold vegetables and the flesh of fowl and kids; he is to be forbidden wine and rich meat and gluttony and all foods that fill out the blood-vessels, until you are sure that there is no abscess and see no reason to suspect a flux of matter to the place.	0.75236464
then the patient should return to their former diet that they were used to.	Then let the patient return to his former diet according to his custom.	0.8567872
And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary to nourish the patient with foods that provide substantial nourishment, where there is viscosity, such as wheat cooked in water, and rice, and heads, and feet, and cow's tripe, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For with such nourishment, the fracture repairs and heals more quickly.	When the broken bone has begun to mend, the patient should be nourished with very nourishing food, fat, strong, having some glutinous property, such as porridge, rice, heads, trotters, the tripe of cows, eggs, fresh fish, heavy wine, and the like; for on this diet the mending of the fracture will be quicker and better.	0.86789256
And know that the broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot heal or knit well according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor can those that are too tender, like the bones of small children;	You should know that fractures occurring in mature and old people cannot join and mend into the original condition, on account of the dryness and hardness of their bones; though any bones that are extremely soft, like those of infants, may make a union and heal.	0.76856625
but have no fear, re-align the broken bone, apply a firm splint that supports and binds the limb together, until it strengthens as it was before; and do not move it at all from its position, and for this reason it is necessary to nourish it with rich foods, as we have said.	Yet nature produces around the bone on all sides something like glue, with a certain viscosity, with whose help it joins, and it binds so that one part adheres to the other and they are linked to one another until it be good and firm as it had been before; so that there is no impediment to any of its functions. It is on this account that the patient's food should be the sort that has solidity and glueyness and thickness, as we have said.	0.63589436
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.	You should know that there are as many different types of fracture as there are members.	0.61177677
For a fracture of the head is different from a fracture of the chest, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. For there is a fracture that goes across, and another obliquely, like the cut of a quill for writing.	Thus a fracture of the leg bone differs from a fracture of the cranium; and a fracture of the breast bone differs from a fracture of the bone of the back; and similarly there are differences among the other parts. We shall give an exposition of each kind of fracture, each in its own chapter and distinguished from the others.	0.724627
For there is a fracture that goes across, and another obliquely, like the cut of a quill for writing. And there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with only a small crack.	We shall give an exposition of each kind of fracture, each in its own chapter and distinguished from the others. The fracture of each bone also has its own variations; for the fracture may be a clean break without splintering; or the fracture may be along the bone, with splinters and projections which may be sharp or may not; and the fracture may involve a wound and a laceration of the skin; and the fracture may be a crack.	0.5824119
And each type has its own technique and its own specific instrument for restoration, according to what is recalled in its place;	Each kind has its own special technique of setting which will be mentioned in detail, each in its place.	0.70278037
and the fracture of the bone is recognized by the fact that the place is twisted, and appears clearly by default, and makes a sound when pressed by the hand;	Among the diagnostic signs of a broken bone are: distortion, protrusion, the aspect of it, and the crepitus when you press on it with the hand.	0.4340899
and when there is no twisting or sound on touching, and the patient does not feel much pain, then there is no fracture;	When there is no obvious distortion or crepitus at the site, nor do you feel movement when you manipulate the bone, and the patient does not experience severe pain, there is no fracture there.	0.7024655
but there may well be twisting, or a fissure, or a small fracture. So you should not move it with your hand, but apply the medicines that come later, and then immediately bandage it carefully.	But it is possible that there is a luxation or a slight fracture or a little crack; so you must not disturb it with any extension or pressure, but apply one of the remedies suitable to the site, such as will be described later; then bind up gently.	0.76702636
And know that for the fracture that goes across, and the two parts are separated, they must be immediately set evenly, before hot swelling comes there;	If the bone is parted and broken in two and there is no fragmentation but a simple separation of one part from its fellow, then you should lose no time in straightening and aligning it before an abscess sets in.	0.48925728
and if hot swelling comes there, leave it for a few days, until the swelling subsides;	If an abscess does set in, then let a few days pass until it has subsided; then gently and skilfully straighten it in whatever way you can.	0.64936346
then set it evenly as best you can lightly and carefully, and know that its restoration is easier than the restoration of one where there are pieces;	You should know that the setting or alignment of this is easier than that of a splintered bone.	0.44023868
then bandage it, as is appropriate below.	Then bandage as will be prescribed.	0.67769516
And if there are broken pieces in the bone, extend it from two sides, if it is a hand or foot, or with your hand if it is a small limb, or with two cords, or with one cord and your hand;	But if the bone is splintered, extension from either side is necessary, whether it be hand or foot; with your own hands if it be a small member, or with two ropes or with one hand and a rope.	0.85060817
and place the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken limb are separated, skillfully bring the additional pieces back to their places as best you can, and be careful that your work does not cause the patient injury or pain;	You should place the part on a flat surface in its natural attitude so that when both parts of the broken bone have been extended you can try to restore the fragments to their proper place with all the skill and gentleness possible; and do your utmost to ensure that the patient experience no pain or distress as you operate.	0.76332057
and carefully join the two ends of the bones in the best possible alignment.	Try diligently to get one part of the bone fitted in the best form to the other.	0.6297655
And feel it carefully with your hand if it seems to you that it is not right:	At the same time you should palpate and investigate both of them with your hand, and if you find anything wrong then mend it and straighten it to the best of your ability.	0.4421305
then straighten it gently, and do not constrict it too much, nor press it as those do who, through their work, cause a hot abscess and contraction in the limb, as we have often seen.	But avoid violent extension or compression which many ignorant people apply; for by doing so they often cause abscess or crippling in the limb, as I myself have many times seen.	0.6194564
And when the limb is properly set, warn the patient carefully not to move it, neither while awake nor while sleeping, nor while turning, nor in any other way; and ensure that the limb is so securely positioned that they feel no pain. For when they feel no pain, it is not properly set, and it must be positioned in such a way that they feel no pain;	Then after you have exactly repositioned it and bandaged it, keep that limb still and quiet, and bid the patient beware of moving it while awake or asleep, and in his shifting and stirring, and in opening the bowel, and in every activity, to the utmost of his capacity; and that he should try to let the position of the limb be such that he is free from pain; when pain or distress is felt in any position in which he has disposed the limb, he should move it to a different position in which he feels no pain.	0.8341506
and ensure that the limb is so securely positioned that they feel no pain. For when they feel no pain, it is not properly set, and it must be positioned in such a way that they feel no pain; and take care that it is set straight, so that no crookedness develops when it is restored;	At the same time he should try to make that position even and straight, so that when the limb is mended there be no curvature in it.	0.5887654
and the characteristics of the broken limb are as I have told you.	As to the way to bandage a broken limb, it is as I shall now describe to you.	0.5678204
Know that broken limbs vary in smallness and largeness and in shape.	You should know that limbs which may be fractured vary in their size and shape.	0.842314
For there are small limbs, such as arms and fingers and similar: so it is necessary to wrap soft and fine linen cloths; and those that are large, such as the thigh and leg:	The strips of bandage for those that are small, such as an arm or finger or forearm or the like, should be soft and fine, while those that are thick, such as the hip, back, or breast, should have broad and strong bandages.	0.7056868
so it is necessary to wrap with a wide and strong bandage, for the wide bandage embraces the whole large limb, and constricts it evenly on all sides, so that there is no unevenness;	For a broad bandage holds fast to a big limb, binding it all round with an even pressure so that no defect may occur.	0.68452144
then tie around light padding, three or four turns according to the limb, and tighten your hand a little with the whole bandage, then go above the break and tighten less, as the break then moves away from the break a little;	Then, after you have finished the setting, begin by applying a suitable liniment on soft tow over the site of the fracture, then start to wrap the bandage over the actual site, three or four turns of bandage as the part may require, winding it fairly tight.	0.66071784
and loosen the bandage little by little, until you take a large part of the healthy area, then take another bandage, and wrap it again over the broken place;	Then carry on the bandage above the site of the fracture, winding it more loosely than on the fractured place, and continue a little with the bandaging beyond the place of fracture, loosening the tension gradually, until you have taken up a good amount of the sound part.	0.6649599
then go back to the part below the break, and tighten it moderately, not too tight nor too loose, as we have said in the first place above;	Then take another bandage and wind it several turns over the fracture and then carry it over the part below the fracture, the tightness and looseness being arranged in the same way that we prescribed for the first covering, of the upper part.	0.61725295
then put between the bandages linen padding or cloths, until it is all even, then tie a bandage over everything, and then put your well-made splints on, if there is no abscess or swelling.	Then put between the bandages enough soft tow or soft rags to correct the curves of the fracture, if any; otherwise put nothing in. Then wind over it another bandage and at once lay over it strong splints, if the part be not swollen and effused.	0.7542429
And if there is swelling or an abscess, apply something soothing and warm to the abscess, which removes the swelling, and leave it like that for a few days;	But if there be swelling or effusion in the part, apply something to allay the swelling and disperse the effusion; leave it on for several days and then bind on the splints.	0.7926886
then tighten your splints, and they should be wisely cut half the width of a large cane, or from wood which one makes roofing shingles, or from palm branches, and they should be according to this figure:	The splints should be made of broad halves of cane, cut and shaped with skill; or the splints may be made of the wood used for sieves, which are made of pine; or of palm branches; or of brier or giant fennel or the like, whatever wood be at hand.	0.7087747
but it is necessary that the splint that is placed over the break be a little thicker and wider than the others;	The size of each splint should be of this form and shape, except that the splint that is placed on the fracture itself should be a little thicker and broader than the others.	0.6118814
and be as long as is necessary for the limb, small or large;	As to the length of the splint, it should be greater or less as suits the fractured part.	0.5490209
then tighten the splints as you did at the first binding, then tie over it a thread suitably, as in the first binding over the fracture; narrower above, always less;	Then bind over the splints another bandage just as tightly as you did your first; then over that tie it up with cords arranged in the way we have said, that is, with the pressure greatest over the site of the fracture and lessened as you move away from it.	0.8066898
and the threads must be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and be of soft linen;	The cords should be of medium thickness, of linen supple of quality.	0.6910405
for if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the works of fools who make their bindings with twisted linen cords, and this is a great error, for the binding cannot be even if it is too tight, and there should not be less than a finger's width between each splint.	For if the cords are too thick, such as I have seen ignorant people use who made their cords of twisted bands of linen, that will be a grave error, for moderate tension with these is impossible. Nor are fine threads suitable either, for with these you cannot achieve sufficient tension. Between splints there should be a space of not less than a finger's breadth.	0.85985535
And if the patient is injured by the ends of the splints after tightening in healthy places, put linen wads, or carded wool, under them so that he is not hurt.	If, after bandaging, the patient is hurt in the sound parts by the ends of the splints, then put a little soft tow or carded wool under them until they no longer hurt him thus.	0.7633368
When the wound is with the fracture, and the heart is broken, I will discuss the treatment hereafter.	As for the case of a fracture accompanied by an open wound, it will be mentioned in a special section on its own.	0.44761902
And know that it is not appropriate to bind all fractured limbs with splints on the first day. For when the limb is large, splints should not be applied until after five or seven days, or more depending on your certainty of a hot abscess arising;	You should know that not every fracture should be bound up with splints on the first day; that is, when the part is big you should not apply splints until five or seven days after, or more, depending on when you are satisfied that there is no effusion.	0.8851111
and see here the method of ancient plasters to restore fractures, dislocations, and sprains:	This is a description of the plasters that the Ancients used for repair, applied to a fracture, dislocation, or sprain.	0.6504429
and you should take the flour that sticks to the walls of the mill, and mix it with plenty of eggs, and apply this mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way of the plaster restoring the fracture in many cases, and especially in women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold. Another method of plaster restoring fracture and dislocation and sprain:	Description of a common simple plaster for the repair of fractures, suited to most constitutions, particularly for women and children, because in it there predominates neither hot nor cold. Take mill-dust, that is, the fine flour that sticks to the walls of a mill as the grindstone moves. Pound it as it is without sieving, with egg-white, to a medium consistency; then use.	0.69820344
Another method of plaster restoring fracture and dislocation and sprain: take three of abaris and labdanum and elecampane and asafetida and gum arabic and musk, each ten drams; myrrh and aloes, each five drams; mastic nine drams;	Description of another plaster valuable for a fracture or sprain: let there be taken ten drachms each of mughath, pulse, and white marsh mallows, five drachms each of myrrh and aloes, six drachms of acacia, and twenty drachms of Armenian clay.	0.7167759
Armenian bole, ten drams, and grind well, and mix with water or egg white, and apply it.	Let them all be well beaten up and passed through a sieve and made into a paste with water or egg-white and used.	0.4706005
Another kind of plaster for joints and bones separated from their places, and soothes the resulting pain, and the cut from the bone, and the break: take new wool, and soak it in vinegar and cooked oil, and put it on the place.	Description of a plaster for dislocated joints or bones, soothing the accompanying pain, and for a crack or fissure of bone: let unwashed wool be taken and soaked in a decoction of oil and vinegar and applied to the place.	0.7024085
This plaster does not restore, but it is good for soothing a hot abscess, and cleanly removes the pains.	Now this plaster has no power of repair but it is outstanding for reducing effusion and dispersing pain.	0.6969579
Another kind of plaster that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves, and ground ivy leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.	Description of another plaster for the repair of a broken bone: let there be taken the leaves of the hard fig and of the wild poppy and both be beaten up together and a plaster made of them while still fresh and damp.	0.74583066
Another kind of plaster for the restoration of a bone fracture and to diminish the remains of the abscess. Take marshmallow root, chamomile, violet flowers, vetch flour, one part of each;	Description of another simple plaster used when a fracture is mending and you wish to disperse residual swellings: take one part each of marsh mallow root, chamomile, violet flowers, and flour of vetch; pound it all and make a paste with decoction of wine, if the part be not inflamed.	0.75988394
and grind, and mix with wine, and if the limb is inflamed, mix it with coriander water, or with water, and use it.	But if it be inflamed make it up with water of fresh coriander or plain water, and use.	0.5521084
Another kind of plaster, stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes at the restoration of the limb. Take marshmallow roots, and flax seed, pomegranate rind, melilot, and elderflower, and violet and chamomile flowers, equal parts of all; and grind, and mix with salt water, or fresh water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.	Description of another plaster stronger than the former for resolving, used if a hard swelling arises as the bone sets: let there be taken equal parts of each of marsh mallow roots, linseed, fenugreek, melilot, sweet marjoram, violet flowers, and chamomile; they should all be beaten up together and made into a paste with willow infusion or sweet water or wine, according to whether the part is inflamed or its heat has subsided.	0.84570944
Hippocrates said in his book that one should not put on a broken limb to restore it anything but a cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else more, and said that it should be between the two, neither too soft nor too hard.	Now Hippocrates in his book did not mention any application for the repair of a fractured part except a wax plaster made of wax and oil, nothing else. He prescribed that it be of a consistency midway between thick and thin.	0.8228448
And Galen seems to say that one should put on a broken limb, to restore it, somewhat warm dry things, such as myrrh and aloe and frankincense and similar things, as we have said.	Galen, on the other hand, thought it good to apply to the broken limb, when it is mending, things which have a certain power of drying, with some heat, such as myrrh, aloes, olibanum, and the sort of thing we have mentioned.	0.78884625
Another type of plaster that is good for injury and pain: take mugwort and cut human hair, or bird feathers, and marshmallow, and salt equally, and grind them, and make a plaster and apply it.	Description of a plaster valuable for debility and pain: let equal parts of each be taken of mughath, chickpease, minced human hair or birds' feathers, marsh mallows and salt; grind it up and pass through a sieve and make into a paste and use as a plaster.	0.7667068
And then unbind it a little later, and take care if the patient feels any pain, or if the bone has moved from its place; if not, do not untie it for many days. And if pain comes to the place, or itching, without rest or swelling, then hurry, and untie it, and remove the plaster immediately;	As to the length of time the bandages should remain on before being loosened: you should keep an eye on the patient and if he suffers no pain or itching or any shifting of the broken bone, then they should not be loosened for a number of days; but if he experiences at the place a violent itching or a disturbing pain or swelling, then hasten to loosen them and make no delay; and remove the plaster.	0.8282098
and take a light cloth, and a moist sea sponge, and dip it in water, and wash the area, until the itching stops, and the pain is soothed; then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply dry wool, moistened in water or rose oil, and bind it overnight, until you are sure of a warm abscess;	Then you must take a soft cloth or a soft marine sponge and dip it in tepid water and bathe the place until the itching subsides and the pain settles; then let the limb rest for an hour; then apply to it raw wool soaked in oil and vinegar or oil of roses, and bandage it on for one night until you are sure there is no effusion and the swelling of the limb has subsided and the pain has gone.	0.9141627
and the inflammation of the limb subsides, and the pain is removed, then begin again the fine binding, and a little of the plaster, and do not tighten it as much as before; and continue gradually until it is healed.	Then put the bandage on again gently, and a light plaster; do not bind it up as you did at the first but go gently with it until it heal.	0.7062681
And if you see that the warm abscess and redness and pain and swelling are completely gone, and you need plaster and bandage, then start again, just as you did the first time.	If you see that the effusion, inflammation, pain, swelling, and other symptoms are totally gone, and you need to plaster and bandage it, then repeat just as you did at first.	0.8404218
And if the limb does not experience any of what we have described, do not unbind it until after three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes leave it for twenty days, depending on what one sees, until the fracture airs out, and the joining of the flesh above approaches;	But if none of these things that we have mentioned occur, then do not loosen it until after three, four, or five days or a week; sometimes it may be left up to twenty days, depending on how the limb appears to you, as we said, until the fracture be united and the flesh over it be near to joining.	0.88367623
then bind it more tightly than before, and increase his food, as I have said before;	Then bandage more tightly than before, and increase the heaviness of the patient's food as has been mentioned.	0.7223291
and if you see the place drying more than it should, know that nourishment cannot get there; then moisten it with lukewarm water, every time you unbind it, and this should be every third day, and loosen the bandage a little;	If you see the place of the fracture getting more dry and thin than it should, you may know that nourishment is being prevented from reaching it; so foment it with tepid water each time you loosen it; do this every three days, and ease the bandaging somewhat.	0.88164544
by this method, then, nourishment flows to the limb, and quickly corrects what foolish physicians do, who improperly set the limb:	This action makes nourishment flow to the limb and it will quickly heal. What some ignorant bone-setters do is to break the bone again if at first the repair is not as it should be and has mended crookedly.	0.6365341
this is bad, and also frightening work, and I see nothing else to do but to leave it alone and work on it correctly.	This operation of theirs is mistaken and dangerous; if it were right the Ancients would undoubtedly have spoken of it in their books and would have used it.	0.4493864

chapter-3-subchapter-2.txt
There are many kinds of fractures, and various forms, and the causes are distinct;	The kinds of fracture occurring in the head are many, of various forms and differing causes.	0.7616799
for there are fractures caused by the blow of a sword, and the neck of the bone cuts the entire bone down to the syfac which is underneath the bone, as an axe does with wood; and this type of fracture is called a "hatchet fracture".	Some fractures are due to a sword-stroke which may cut right through the bone and reach the membrane beneath the bone, like an adze-cut in wood, for which reason this kind of cut is called 'ascial'.	0.7582461
Or the sword cuts the bone from above without piercing, and this type of fracture is called "complete";	Or the sword may cut through part of the bone, only slicing through the surface and not reaching the depth; this kind is called an absolute avulsion.	0.6472354
and the wound of these two fractures is large or small.	The wounds in these two fractures can be either big or small.	0.8331623
And if there is a blunt percussion, or a split or a cut from a stone, or from falling on a stone, or other similar things.	There are also some fractures accompanied by smashing or crushing; such as by a blow from a stone or by falling on a stone, and the like.	0.7290227
And if there is a piercing fracture, which reaches down to the membrane that is under the bone, or it is on the bone, and this wound is either large or small.	A fracture of this kind will be either penetrating, reaching the membrane beneath the bone; or superficial; the wound in these two fractures may be either big or small.	0.76349324
And also a wound which is placed in the bone as thin as a hair, and the crack is small, and therefore this fracture is called "hairline";	Then there is a type of fracture that is hidden in the bone, as fine as a hair, a thin crack; therefore this kind of fracture is called 'capillary'.	0.70955026
and if the wound, which is made either by striking with a stone, or by falling, or by a similar thing, causes the piece of bone to go down, and the place is sunken in as do the cauldron makers when they strike the cauldrons; then the stone enters inside.	There is a fracture due to a fall or a blow from a stone and the like, making a dent in the surface of the bone and a hollow at the site as occurs in a bronze bowl when a blow falls on it and a portion of it is pushed in.	0.76937425
And this happens more often to those who have moist bones in their head, like a child's head;	This mostly occurs in heads whose bones are soft, as those of children.	0.7589557
and it happens in all these types of fractures that small pieces are separated like splinters; and I will speak about it in its place.	Any of these kinds of fracture may also have splinters, jagged or otherwise; we shall deal with the treatment of all these in their place.	0.5916016
And we recognize all kinds of fractures by the depression above them, and probing with a tent, and by the corrupted flesh which is on top.	All these kinds of fracture are diagnosed by laying them bare and investigating them with probes and removing all the lacerated tissues over them.	0.5843234
The hairline fracture is recognized because when the bone is uncovered, and one rubs ink on it, the fracture appears black.	The 'capillary' kind is diagnosed by laying bare the bone, wiping it clean, and rubbing ink on it, when the fracture will appear black.	0.62976795
In the treatment of a fracture, pay attention to the patient's symptoms, and if you see any bad symptoms, such as vomiting bile, and loss of consciousness, and stretching, and swelling, and high fever, and the eyes bulging and red, and other similar symptoms with many variations, then it certainly cannot heal.	As to the treatment of the fracture: begin by paying attention to the patient's symptoms. If you observe any symptom clearly indicating something dangerous, such as bilious vomit, convulsion, mental derangement, loss of voice, fainting, high fever, protrusion and inflammation of the eyes, and similar symptoms, then leave the patient alone and do not treat him; for in the majority of cases these symptoms undoubtedly indicate the approach of death.	0.794888
And if you do not see alarming symptoms, and you hope for recovery, then begin treatment.	But if you find symptoms that do not alarm you and you see hope of recovery for him, then begin treatment as follows.	0.82984185
And when the wounded person first comes to you, and it is in winter, it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day as quickly as you can.	If he be brought to you immediately after his injury and it be the season of winter, you should try to remove the bone, at all events before the fourteenth day.	0.7781044
And if it is in summer, then hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, before the tissue under the bone becomes corrupted, and the symptoms we have mentioned appear.	If it be summer you must hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, before the covering membrane beneath the bone and over the brain be infected, and before the above-mentioned symptoms occur.	0.8365513
And if the fracture of the bone reaches the membrane that covers the brain, then you must cut the fractured part thus:	If the fracture has already reached the cerebral membrane with fragmentation of the bone and depression, then you must cut out the splintered and broken part as I shall now describe to you.	0.6647047
And you should take the head of the wounded patient, and uncover the bone in all the ways you can, and over the shape of the wound as gently as you can, and if bleeding occurs when uncovering the bone, or a hot abscess, treat it appropriately, and then fill the area with cloths soaked in rose oil; And let the wound rest until the hot abscess is calmed, and you are sure of the cessation of bleeding;	Shave the head of the injured patient and lay the bone bare in any way you can, following the course of the injury and in the manner least grievous to the injured man. If, when you lay the bone bare, you encounter a haemorrhage or abscess, meet the case with suitable remedies; that is, pack the place with dressings soaked in wine and oil of roses, and cleanse the wound until the swelling subsides and you are safe from haemorrhage; then begin the trepanning and removal of the bone.	0.8949989
Then begin to remove the bone around the edges, and this is done according to two methods of operation:	This may be done in one of two ways.	0.44632953
One method is that you cut with a narrow chisel in front, and this is the shape:	One way is to cut the bone with a fine-bladed chisel, this being the figure of it.	0.6856509
And then use another chisel larger than the first.	Then use yet another chisel still broader than the second.	0.8423158
And the second method is that you have a number of different chisels, some narrow and others wide, and they should be pointed, and made of Indian steel;	You should have by you a number of different chisels, some broader than others and some shorter than others; their tips should be exquisitely sharp; and they should be made of Indian iron or best steel.	0.7281142
and work lightly, so that you do not injure the head.	Let the strokes upon the chisel be gentle lest the head be shocked or injured.	0.4660074
And if the bone is strong and hard, then you must pierce around it, before you use chisels with drills, not so deep that they pierce through the bone of the skull, and it should have on the tip a flange or a circle, so as not to let the point pass through the bone;	If the bone be strong and hard you should, before you use the chisel, make perforations round about it with drills called 'non-sinking' drills. Their name of non-sinking drills is due to their not piercing the cranial bone through to what is beneath, because the drill has a circular margin beneath its sharp head like a small collar or wheel, that prevents it from sinking in and going beyond the thickness of the bone.	0.75546664
and you must have several of them, so that each one comes in its place according to the thickness of the bone, so that you have drills for every skull;	You must obtain a large number of these drills each of which will suit a certain thickness of bone; so that for each skull you have a drill whose pointed extremity is of a length to suit the thickness of that skull.	0.76719654
and this is the form of the three types of drills:	Here are figured three kinds of drill, large, medium, and small.	0.46728784
The method for piercing around the fractured bone is that you place a drill on the bone, and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced;	As to the manner of perforation round the fractured bone, you apply the drill to the bone and revolve it with your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced, then you transfer the drill to another place, making the distance between the perforations about the thickness of a probe.	0.76024747
then put the drill somewhere else a little further on, and so do all around, then cut with chisels the piece of bone which is between the holes, and do this as carefully and lightly as you can, as we have said, until you remove the bone with your hand, or with some of the instruments that you have, such as tongs, forceps;	Then with the chisels cut out the bone between the perforations, using the utmost delicacy, as we have said. Then take out the bone, either with your hand or with some other instrument you have ready for the purpose, such as forceps or fine tongs.	0.7659795
and be careful not to touch the brain or the dura mater.	You will have to observe the utmost caution that neither drill nor chisel touch any part of the membrane.	0.5505369
And when you have pierced and extracted the bone, you must cut the piece that remains of the bone with another instrument similar to a chisel, but it must be thinner and more delicate than the other chisel;	When you have cut the bone circularly, free from the membrane if adherent to it, and have removed it, then you will have to scrape away and smooth out all the roughness in the remaining bone with another instrument, resembling a chisel, except that it must be finer and slenderer than any of them.	0.77071416
and if any small bones or splinters remain, remove them gently with one of the instruments; then treat the wound with dressings and ointments that we have mentioned.	If there are any little bits or spicules of bone left, pick them out with whatever instrument you can, gently; and then treat the wound with dressings and ointments as we shall describe.	0.881299
And the other method of operation is the one that Galen described, which is safer; and he praises it highly, and these are his words. You must first expose a part of the bone, there where the fracture appears most obvious, so that when you have exposed that part, you will place under the head of this lenticular incisor, of which this is the shape:	The other way of operating is altogether easy and free from danger; Galen mentioned it and greatly praised it; these are his words: You should begin by laying bare that part of the bone where the fracture is severest and most obvious; when you have done so, place under it the tip of this lenticular chisel figured here.	0.88534474
And do not cut on one side, and the part is sharp on both sides, so that the cutting edge is towards the bone;	The lenticular part of it should be smooth and not for cutting, the sharp part of it being on both sides longitudinally, as you see; so that the lenticular part is resting upon the meninges while the cutting surface is on the bone.	0.6070026
then strike with a small mallet, so that you lightly cut the bone all around, and take good care of the membrane that is underneath;	Then with a small hammer strike the tool on one side until you gently cut through the bone in a circle, in the confident knowledge that nothing untoward can happen to the membrane even though the operator be the most ignorant and cowardly of men; yes, even if he be sleepy.	0.5042187
if it is attached to the bone, remove it lightly, for it can be removed well without harm, and without fear.	If any membrane stick to any part of the bone, strip it off with the lenticular tip of the chisel and free it gently from it, for it will come away without harm or danger.	0.6623216
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate to the membrane, and the bone is only cut on the surface, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to smooth this roughness, and remove the splinters with a fine scraper of which you should have various sizes, to administer in each place the most suitable one, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.	If it be a fracture of the bone not reaching to the meninges, only the surface of the bone being separated, and there remain some roughness and fine splinters, you should smooth down the roughness and remove the splinters with fine scrapers, of which you should have a number, of varying sizes so that you can use the one best fitted and most suitable, in the light of what is suggested by your operative method and the broken bone itself and its shape.	0.826647
So start again with large scrapers, and then with finer ones, and do not stop doing this until it is good.	When you smooth the bone you must first use the broadest of the scrapers and then a finer one, and so on until you come to use the finest and slenderest of all.	0.59802496
In each of the other hair-line cuts and fine fractures, you must administer treatment according to its correction;	As to the rest, the little capillary fractures and fine fissures, you will have to apply to each of them that treatment that will bring about a perfect repair.	0.5933212
And if the peritoneum is exposed, you must take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it on the wound; then take another cloth, folded in two or three, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth; and do this as gently as you can, so as not to aggravate the peritoneum, then apply another bandage over it, and do not tighten it except enough to hold the wound covering in place;	If the meninges are left bare when you remove the bone, you should take a linen dressing measured to the wound, soak it in oil of roses, and apply it to the opening of the wound; then take another dressing, folded in two or three, soak it in wine and oil of roses and apply it over the first with the utmost gentleness so as not to press upon the meninges; then employ a broad bandage on top, but tighten it only enough to keep the wound covered.	0.877398
and leave it like this for a day or two, until the hot inflammation has subsided, then untie it and apply medications such as lily roots, and vetch flour, and incense powder, and birthwort, and similar things;	Leave it with this dressing on for a day or two until you are sure there is no abscess; then loosen it and apply desiccant remedies such as lily roots, vetch-flour, powdered frankincense, birthwort, and the like.	0.7861469
and make a powder of these things, and put it on the wound, and constantly apply cleansing medications without causticity;	The method is that you make a powder of these drugs and sprinkle it, dry as it is, upon the wound; in short, in these cases use drugs whose nature is cleansing and not irritating.	0.61224294
and make sure the wound is always clean, that you do not leave the ointment there, and do not allow pus to collect, because when pus collects on the wound dressing, it will rot and become infected, and this will cause the patient great harm; because when you put something caustic on the peritoneum, it blackens on the surface.	In this be most diligent, that the wound, while you are treating it, be clean; nor let there be any dirty vestiges of ointment in it or any filth; and let no pus collect in it; for when pus collects on the meninges it corrupts them and renders them necrotic, which causes great harm to the patient.	0.8254857
And if blackness appears only because of the medicine that has been applied, which has such a property, then you must take one part honey, and three parts rose oil and a drop of glue, and put it on the peritoneum; then treat it with the appropriate treatments, until it is healed.	But if the blackness be due to some medicament applied to it, which has the power to produce blackness of that kind, then you should take one part of honey and three parts of oil of roses, beat them well up together, spread on a cloth and apply it to the membrane; then treat as necessary until cured.	0.815787

chapter-3-subchapter-3.txt
Know that sometimes both parts of the nose above are broken, or just one of them, for there are two bones;	You should know that the only portion of the nose that can break is the upper portion in its entirety or in one of its two parts; for it consists of two bones.	0.8164005
and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break, but only bends or twists, and then heals.	The lower portion is cartilaginous and unbreakable; what can happen to it is contusion, twisting, or flattening.	0.69345045
And if one of the two parts is broken, you must insert your little finger into the nostril, and align the fracture inside with your index finger and thumb from the outside, until the nose returns to its natural shape; and do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.	If one of the two (upper) parts be broken you should pass your little finger into the nostril and straighten out the fracture from inside, with your index and thumb outside, until you reduce the nose to its natural shape; do it gently, and take care that you do not cause the patient pain in doing it.	0.8833628
And if the break is in the upper part of the nose, and the finger cannot reach the spot, then you must align it using the end of a somewhat thick rod.	If the fracture be in the upper part of the nose and your finger does not reach it, it should be evened by means of a probe with some thickness to it.	0.8411886
And if the break is in two parts, do the same, and hurry to restore it the first day, if you can;	If the break be on both sides, follow the same course.	0.43590146
if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the hot swelling has subsided, then insert linen cloth tents into the end of the nose, if the break is in one part.	Haste must be made to set it on the first day if possible; but if not, after the seventh or tenth day when the effusion has subsided.	0.60935694
Or insert another one on the other side, if the break is there; and the tents should be so thick that they fill the holes of the nose.	Then introduce into the nasal foramen a linen pad, if it be a unilateral fracture, or two pads if it be bilateral; the pads should be thick enough to fill the nasal foramen.	0.6116799
And some restorers say that the tents should be moistened with butter and changed every day. It does not seem good to me, but they should be moistened in a mixture of egg white and powder of wheat flour; then leave the tent until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardened.	Certain of the ancient bone-setters suggest that you should soak the pads in butter and change them daily, but I do not think so; you should rather soak them in egg-white made up into a paste with mill-dust; then leave the pads in until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardens.	0.8358042
And sometimes goose feathers are placed in the nose instead of tents, and a soft cloth is wrapped around it, and the fracture is held, and the patient breathes through it; now do whatever you wish.	Sometimes, instead of pads, the stems of goose-quills are introduced into the nose after being wound round with a piece of soft cloth, so as to make a stronger support for the fracture of the nose and not to hinder the patient's breathing. This is not absolutely necessary; do it if you prefer; or, if you prefer, put in pads.	0.69171995
And if hot abscesses appear in the nose while you are working there, apply cerate or cotton moistened with rose oil, or a little diachylon.	If during your operation an abscess occurs, apply to the nose a wax plaster or cotton wool soaked in vinegar and oil of roses or a little diachylon ointment.	0.8449149
And if hot abscesses do not appear there, apply a soothing plaster of sesame flour and incense powder, mixed with egg white, then place light compresses on top, and do not tie the nose;	If no abscess occurs you should apply externally a plaster of white flour and frankincense made into a paste with egg-white; then put on top some soft tow, but do not bind up the nose at all.	0.79184747
And if the nasal fracture is small, and it is broken into small pieces, extract them with suitable instruments, then sew up the wound, and treat it with flesh-generating and healing things, such as suitable plasters and ointments;	If the nasal bones are broken into small pieces or crushed, you should cut down upon them, remove them with a suitable instrument, and then suture the incision and dress with suitable ointments which encourage granulation and scarring.	0.750092
And if there is no wound inside the nose, treat it with tents, and put lead tubes in it until it is healed.	If there occur an internal wound of the nose, you should dress it with pads and employ leaden tubes until it heals.	0.7612359

chapter-3-subchapter-4.txt
When the mandible/jaw is broken underneath, and there is no external wound, and the fracture is internal only, and is not broken in two, except for internal fragments, it is easily recognized.	When the lower jaw is broken and it is a fracture without an open wound, examine it.	0.48214275
It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, that you put your index finger in the patient's mouth; And if the fracture is in the left mandible/jaw, put your right index finger in, and gently push the fracture inwards, and adjust it with the other hand from the outside, and make it even.	If it is merely an external fracture, not broken in two but sunken inwards, which is easily recognized, you should introduce the index of your left hand into the patient's mouth if it be a right-hand fracture; but your right index if it be a left-sided fracture; and with this, from within, push the concavity of the fracture gently outwards, with the other hand outside, regulating the correction.	0.8203205
And if the fracture of the mandible/jaw is separated in two, then you must apply traction from both sides until it is even.	If the break in the jaw be total, into two, traction must be employed, in a straight line on both sides, until it can be set.	0.64906687
And if loosening or breaking of the teeth occurs, secure them with a gold or silver or silk thread, then apply a plaster to the broken mandible/jaw, and put on a double bandage; And put over the bandage a well-made large splint, or a piece of leather evenly shaped, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it on as tightly as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.	If any of the teeth be loosened or broken away, bind those that you hope may be preserved with a gold or silver or silken ligature; then put wax upon the fractured mandible, and upon that a doubled dressing, and upon the dressing a large and strong splint or a piece of shoe-sole leather, the length of the jaw; then over that bandage in such wise as you conveniently can and as will conduce to drawing it together so as not to loosen. Bid the patient hold himself quiet and still, and let his food be soft broths.	0.88498235
And if you see that the shape changes, untie it on the third day, and then reset what has changed; and apply a plaster, made from mill dust with plenty of egg or sesame flour, after you have removed the previous plaster;	If you think there is any change of form at all, hasten to loosen it on the third day; then correct the change and apply a plaster of mill-dust and egg-white, or of white flour, after you have removed the wax from it, applying soft tow over the plaster.	0.83107764
and put light wool over the plaster, and if the plaster dries and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until he is healed; often he is healed in three weeks.	So long as the plaster sticks on it and the bone undergoes no change of state, let it be and do not loosen until it heals and the fracture mends, for often a fracture of this kind mends in three weeks.	0.7057129
And if hot abscesses develop, then administer what we have said many times.	If during that time an effusion occurs, employ those means of allaying this that we have often mentioned, until the swelling subsides.	0.47298354
And if there is a fracture and a wound together, see if any piece of bone has been removed; then carefully remove it with instruments suitable for this.	If the fracture be with an open wound, examine it, and if one or more splinters have been detached from the bone, gently remove the pieces of splinter with any suitable instrument.	0.7345855
And if the wound is narrow, widen it with a lancet according to your need.	If the opening of the wound be narrow, open it up with a scalpel as much as you need.	0.65540594
And when you have removed all these pieces, and none remain, stitch the wound, if it is large, and apply one of the plasters suitable for this, to generate flesh, until it is healed.	When you have removed these pieces, letting no trace of them remain, suture the opening of the wound if it is wide; otherwise apply one of the ointments that are suitable for that purpose and will encourage the growth of flesh over the wound, until it heals.	0.8099443

chapter-3-subchapter-5.txt
The forceps often break forward, towards the shoulder, and the breakage occurs in three ways:	The collar-bone is very often broken from the end of the humerus anteriorly, and the fracture of it may be in one of three ways.	0.62882125
or it is broken and separated in two, and there are pieces, and it is the easiest to restore;	It may be broken and separated into two without splintering; this is the easiest to repair. Or else splintering occurs, which is most difficult to repair.	0.6979207
or there is a fracture with a wound.	Or it is a compound fracture.	0.65355974
And the procedure is as follows when the fracture is without a wound: you should have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder where the forceps/clavicle is broken; and the other extends the neck towards the side;	When it is a simple fracture the operation involves having two assistants present; one of them to hold steady the arm adjacent to the fractured clavicle, and the other to stretch the neck in the opposite direction.	0.74753964
then set the fracture evenly with your fingers, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is neither a bump nor a depression.	Then level the fracture with your fingers until it is reduced to its proper form and there is neither prominence nor concavity.	0.80567026
And if you need to extend it further, place a round bolster made of cloth, or wool, under the patient's shoulder, and its thickness should be according to your need; and extend and lift the clavicle, and press down on the bolster with your hand, so that you evenly set the fracture, as is necessary.	If there is need of still greater extension, place in the armpit of the patient a ball of cloth or wool made to a suitable size; and stretch and lift up the clavicle and squeeze the roll with your hand until the fracture is set in the proper way.	0.8740502
And if you cannot draw the end of the clavicle outwards, because it goes inwards too deeply, then the patient must lie often on his back, and place a medium-sized pillow under the shoulder, and the practitioner pushes the shoulder down, until the bone of the clavicle is raised.	If you are unable to draw the extremity of the clavicle outwards on account of its being depressed, the patient will have to lie on his back and there must be put under his shoulder a medium-sized bolster. The assistant is to press the shoulder down until the depressed collar bone is elevated, and then you can set the fracture and even it out with your fingers.	0.80766535
And then straighten the fracture with your fingers, and if you find it shattered, then you must cut into it;	If you feel a splinter separated from the clavicle and movable, you must cut down upon the splinter and gently remove it.	0.47053415
and gently pull out the pieces, and if the bone cannot be joined because of some overlapping, then trim it with one of the incisors that you have; but you should place this instrument under the clavicle, to protect the periosteum:	If the splinter sticks to the bone, you must contrive to cut it with one of the chisels you have prepared for that, having first put beneath the clavicle the instrument to protect the membrane; an instrument made of wood or iron, of which this is the figure. It resembles a spoon but without a hollow.	0.6388279
and it resembles a spoon, and is not sharp, and is as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the requirements of the work;	It resembles a spoon but without a hollow. It should be as broad as you need, having regard to the size of the bone, and as long as you can use at operation.	0.66417646
and it has two heads, as you see, and one is wide, and the other is narrow, like the shape of the wound that you made when you pulled out the bones;	As you see, it should be provided with one wide and one narrow extremity. If the opening you made when you extracted the splinter of bone be wide and you feel safe against an abscess, suture the edges together.	0.5785666
and when you are sure of a hot abscess, then stitch the wound, and if the opening is small, or you suspect a hot abscess, then fill the wound with compresses and tents, according to its size.	If the opening you made when you extracted the splinter of bone be wide and you feel safe against an abscess, suture the edges together. But if the opening be small or you fear an abscess, pack the wound with material and pads proportional to the opening.	0.67915964
And if hot abscesses develop there, soak a cloth in rose oil and vinegar and wine, and apply it.	If an abscess occur, soak the dressing with oil of roses and vinegar or wine and apply.	0.8123867
and bring it around from each side, and when you see that the bandaging holds the fracture properly, and you clearly see that the splint does not move on the broken bone, then check it every day, and when the bandaging loosens, tighten it;	The whole point is that the splint should not slip from over the fracture; so you should examine the patient every day, and whenever the bandage has loosened and you see the splint has shifted, then put it right and tighten the bandage.	0.7589793
and have the patient lie on his back, and when he sleeps, put a small pillow under his armpit to raise the shoulder up; this will relieve the pressure on the fracture by easing the shoulder, or you can tie his arm to his neck and not untie it unless some bad incident occurs, until twenty days have passed;	Make the patient sleep lying on his back, and at night when he is asleep place a small bolster under the axilla so as to raise his arm from his side, for with the raising of the humerus the fracture of the clavicle will be elevated. Or bind his arm to his neck. Do not loosen the bandage for twelve days unless there arise at the place any pruritus or swelling.	0.88404644
then reapply the plaster, if you see that there is need for it, and tighten it and leave it thus, until he is recovered;	Then renew the plaster if you think it necessary, and bandage again and leave until the fracture of the collar-bone is set and knits.	0.675087
and it is restored in most cases within twenty-eight days, and in some men, sooner.	The majority of these cases are firm and strong in twenty-eight days, though in some people it takes less.	0.71715987

chapter-3-subchapter-6.txt
of the fracture of the shoulder	On the repair of a fracture of the scapula.	0.46997616
It rarely happens that the shoulder breaks except in a wide place or in the middle, and one does not know it except by touch;	The scapula is rarely fractured in the broad part but it does break at its margins.	0.54806507
so prepare it according to the form of the break, and restore it according to its natural form, in every way that you can;	When any part of it is broken or it breaks in the middle (which is recognized by palpation) you should attempt the correction of the fracture according to the shape it takes, and its restoration to its natural form, by whatever means you can.	0.45121592
then put on the area mill dust with plenty of egg, and light stuffing, and put on a double cloth; then put on a wide and thin splint, a little wider than the shoulder, and if under the splint there are hollows in any place on the shoulder, fill that hollow with linen stuffing, so that the splint sits evenly;	Then apply over the place mill-dust with eggwhite, and soft tow; and over that a dressing made of a folded cloth; and over that a broad splint made of thin board to the size of the whole scapula or a little wider. If there be beneath the splint a hollow in any part of the scapula, level it with soft tow so that the splint rests evenly.	0.8694838
and then bind it all firmly with a large bandage, so that the splint does not move from its place, and check the bandage every day;	Then bind tightly over it a long sling and make sure that the splint does not slip out of place.	0.6479931
and every time it loosens, tighten it, and adjust the splint if it is out of place, and have the patient lie on their side;	Examine the bandage daily; and whenever it gets loose tighten it and adjust the splint if it has shifted. The patient should lie on his sound side.	0.7502623
and the shoulder is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.	The scapula mends in twenty or twenty-five days.	0.79345024
And when this time is complete, unbind it, and be certain, for it is not a bone that dislocates easily.	When this time has elapsed you may safely loosen the bandaging, for this is one of the bones in which there is no danger of fragmentation or cracking.	0.71592784
And if a piece of the bone protrudes forward, and points below the heart, then cut over it, and remove it, and do what we have said regarding the breaking of the clavicle to soothe a hot abscess.	If a splinter of bone protrudes and starts to prick under the skin, cut down upon it and remove it, and do as I said under fracture of the collar-bone, to allay the effusion, if anything of that kind happen.	0.7217195

chapter-3-subchapter-7.txt
of the fracture of the breastbone/sternum	On the repair of a fracture of the breast.	0.4325534
The breastbone/sternum is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks lower down.	The breast is sometimes fractured in the middle but this happens rarely; more often it is the extremities of it that are broken and comminuted.	0.8605739
And when it is broken in the middle, it sinks downwards, and the patient feels great pain, and shortness of breath, and coughs, and perhaps vomits blood, and the displacement is visible in the broken bone, and one can feel it well.	The symptoms that occur when it is broken in the middle are that he bows downwards and suffers violent pain, difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and sometimes he vomits blood; and there is an obvious and palpable concavity in the bone.	0.7830316
And the restoration is as follows: the patient often lies on his back, and you place a cushion between the shoulder blades, then press the shoulders, and bring the ribs of the two sides together with your hands, and be careful to set it evenly in all the ways that you can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be;	Now the way to mend it is for the patient to lie on his back, and you place a pillow between his shoulders; then his shoulders are squeezed, and with your hands you press together his ribs from both sides and skilfully try to equalize them in any way you conveniently can, until the bone is reduced to its proper form.	0.85207605
then apply plasters and compresses on a thin splint of wood, or other light wood, and wrap it in a cloth, and tie it over the broken bone, so that it does not move; and wrap the bandage around the back, and tighten it appropriately, and check the bandage every hour, and if it loosens, tighten it;	Then apply over it a plaster and a pad and place over that a splint of thin willow board or brier or similar light wood, first wrapping it in cloth; then gently bind this upon the fractured bone so that it does not slip; and carry your bandage round about the back several times, tying it firmly; then inspect it constantly, and whenever it loosens tighten it.	0.85577965
and if it needs to be untied, because of corrosion or itching that occurs at the site, or pain or abscess, then hurry, and untie it, and scrape the plaster, and address what has appeared there by means of treatments;	If you are compelled to loosen it on account of itching at the place, or pain or swelling, loosen it quickly and remove the plaster and correct whatever has occurred with the appropriate treatment.	0.7937521
then reapply the plaster, and tighten it until it is healed.	Then renew the plaster if you think fit, and keep it bandaged until it heals.	0.7712201

chapter-3-subchapter-8.txt
of the fracture of the ribs	On the repair of ribs when they are fractured.	0.41803783
Know that the fracture of the ribs only occurs in thick places near the back, and at the end inside, and they only bend because they are slippery; and one feels it well by examination with the fingers.	You should know that fracture of the ribs occurs only at the thick parts bordering on the vertebrae, whereas the anterior extremities are only contused, because they are cartilaginous; this is easily diagnosed on examination with the fingers.	0.7998048
And the restoration is that you set the fracture evenly, as it should be. And then apply the plaster, and bind it with a splint, if you need to.	They should be set by levelling out the fracture with the fingers in any manner you can so that the form is as it should be; then apply the plaster and bind the broken bone with a splint, if necessary.	0.7624459
And if the rib fracture is pointing inwards, the patient feels very great pain, and a pricking sensation, like pleurisy, because the bone pricks the membrane; and breathes with difficulty, and coughs and vomits a large amount of blood, and this is a serious condition, and the ancients have put much effort into it.	If it be a depressed fracture of the ribs, then the patient will have a vehement pain and a piercing sensation like that of pleurisy, since the bone is piercing the pleura; in addition he will have difficulty in breathing and will cough, and vomit much blood; the treatment of this is difficult. In this the Ancients practised many devices.	0.8972425
And there are some who say that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the belly, to push the fracture outwards.	Some said that the patient should have food of such a kind as to generate wind and inflation to blow out and stretch the belly and so push out the fracture.	0.6509696
We do not do this, so that hot abscesses do not develop there, if they have not already appeared. And if they have appeared, then treat them.	We, however, reject this, since it will excite an effusion if one has not already arisen; and if one has arisen it will increase and confirm it.	0.5985147
And some of them said that one should place cupping glasses on the area, to suck strongly, and this seems reasonable; however, there is concern that the cupping glass may attract excess fluids to the area due to its weakened state.	Some of them said a cupping-vessel should be applied to the place and strong suction be made; this seems more reasonable except that there is a risk of the vessel's drawing superfluities to the place on account of his weak state.	0.8495676
And some of them said that the area should be covered with wool soaked in hot oil, and tents should be placed between the ribs to make the place even all around, then it should be treated with the treatment for pleurisy, with food and medicine.	Some of them said that the place should be covered with wool soaked in warm oil and that a pad should be placed in the intercostal space to fill it up so as to make the bandaging level when you wind it round. Then treat the patient with diet and medicines as for pleurisy.	0.80698526
And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear from the bone piercing the skin, and there is concern for the patient, then it is necessary to cut over the location of the broken rib, and it is necessary to place an instrument underneath to protect the peritoneum;	If the patient is in such a bad way that he cannot bear it, the bone painfully piercing the pleura, and we are afraid for him, then we shall have to cut down upon the place and lay bare the broken rib; then we place under it the instrument to protect the membrane, which has been described, and gently cut out the bone and remove it.	0.7162508
and then one should cut the bone, and pull gently, and then sew the two edges of the wound, if it is large, and treat it with plasters, until it is healed.	Then the edges of the wound should be joined, with a suture if large, and dressed with ointments until healed.	0.6650562
And if hot abscesses develop, then apply cloths soaked in rose oil, and place them on the area;	If meanwhile there arise an abscess, quickly soak pads in oil of roses and apply them to the place and treat the patient with internal remedies against abscess too.	0.6238389
and meanwhile treat the area as appropriate for an abscess, and let him lie often on the side where he should, until he is healed.	Let him lie upon the side which is easier for him to sleep on, until it heals.	0.5821749

chapter-3-subchapter-9.txt
and also in the spine of the back.	On setting the vertebrae of the back and neck.	0.45782802
And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, take note if you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and they cannot move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.	When a fracture occurs in the bones of the neck, which is rare, as mostly they suffer contusion, as do the spinal vertebrae—when it happens to anyone and you want to know whether it will heal or not, then look and if you see both his hands relaxed and numb and dead and he has no power to move or stretch or close them, and when you pinch them or prick them with a needle he does not notice it or feel any pain in them, you may know, as a general rule, that it will not mend, for he is doomed.	0.70042443
Know that he is mortally [injured] in many cases, and if he moves them and feels well when they are squeezed and pricked, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if care is applied.	But if he moves them both and feels in them the pinching and pricking, you may know that the spinal medulla is still intact and that under treatment the patient will recover.	0.5614966
And if a similar thing occurs in the spine of the back, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, note if the feet are softened, and if the same symptoms are there as in the hands, and on the back jumping flatulence and involuntary defecation;	If anything of this nature happens to the vertebrae of the back and you wish to know if he will recover or not, then pay attention to his feet.	0.6055698
and when he is turned on his stomach, involuntary defecation occurs. And when he is turned on his back and he wants to sit up, he cannot. Know that he is mortally wounded: so do not work on his treatment.	If you see them relaxed and in the situation we described in the case of the hands, and when he lies on his back he passes flatus and faeces involuntarily, and lying prone he passes water involuntarily and lying on his back he cannot pass water if he wishes, then you may know his case is hopeless, so do not concern yourself with his treatment.	0.5849659
And if this accident does not happen to him, then the matter is less serious.	But if nothing of this kind occur then the case is easier.	0.6170752
And the treatment is that you look to see if there is a hot abscess, then put on the spine rose oil or oil of egg yolks, until it is soothed;	The way to treat this latter kind of case is to try to reduce the swelling by applying over the injured vertebra oil of roses, alone, or with roasted yolks of egg; apply three times a day until the swelling has gone down.	0.5833963
then apply one of the strengthening and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and tell the patient to rest; and not to sleep on the side where he feels the pain, until he is healed.	Then apply to the place one of the strengthening and absorbent plasters and bind it on; bid him keep quiet and still and sleep only in the attitude in which he has no pain, until he is well.	0.8280032
And if any bone is separated, then it is necessary to cut to the heart; and remove the bone, then bring together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, then treat it with flesh-generating ointment until it is healed;	If the injury is accompanied by fragmentation or a separation of part of the bone, you must cut down on it and remove the bone; then bring together the edges of the opening, by suture if it be wide; then treat with granulating ointments until it heals.	0.73161525
and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "tail head," then place the ball of your left hand there and align it with your other hand as best you can, then apply the plaster and splint, if you need it;	If the last bone of the coccyx, which is the sacrum of the tail, breaks, introduce the thumb of your left hand into his anus and reset the bone with the other hand in whatever way is possible and affords the best setting; then apply over it a plaster, and a splint if necessary, and bind it up.	0.71588326
then bind it, and if there is a separated bone, then cut open, and remove it, and treat the wound until it is healed.	And if you perceive a fragment in the fracture, cut down upon it, remove it, and dress the wound as before said, until it heals.	0.6797348

chapter-3-subchapter-10.txt
of the fracture of the hip bone	On setting a fractured hip.	0.47953218
It rarely happens that the hip bone is broken, and if it happens, it only happens with a small fragmentation at the head; and cut lengthwise, and lean towards the inside, and the patient feels pain in the area, and a pricking sensation, and swells up where it is broken.	It is rare indeed that hip-bones are fractured, and if they are fractured the fracture consists of a comminution of the extremities of them and a longitudinal splitting and a bending inward; and the patient feels a pain and a piercing at the site, and the leg on the fractured side is benumbed.	0.8659668
And the restoration is such that you extend your hand over it, until you are over the fracture; and you know what the fracture is and its shape;	To set it, you pass your hand over it and ascertain what the shape of the fracture is.	0.53053033
and if the fracture is only at the head, then make this fracture even, so that it is in its natural shape.	If it is a fracture of the extremity only, set that fracture in whatever manner is convenient for you until it answers to its proper shape.	0.637259
And if the fracture is lengthwise, or it leans inwards, then have the patient lie on their stomach, so that the resetting of this fracture is prepared for you. And when you have set it evenly, then apply the plaster, then put on a splint of wood or leather, and tighten the fracture, so that it does not move;	But if it be a longitudinal fracture or it has bent inwards, have the patient lie on his stomach so as to make it convenient for setting the fracture; and when you have set it apply over it a plaster and over that a splint of wood or leather, and bandage it in such wise that you have no fear that the fracture may extend or the splint slip.	0.84435046
and pad the place below the ribs, so that the bandage is even. And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side, or on their back.	Level out the cavity of the lumbar region with some filling so that it may take the bandage evenly, and bid the patient sleep on his back or on his sound side.	0.72909856
And if a hot abscess develops there, do not touch it until the hot abscess has subsided, and apply what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and tighten it as needed, if there is no adverse event;	If there occur an effusion, then refrain from bandaging or setting it until the effusion subsides; and apply to it something to allay it as before said; then return to setting it and bandaging it as it should be.	0.7866797

chapter-3-subchapter-11.txt
of the fracture of the shoulder	On setting a fracture of the humerus.	0.4529671
The shoulder blade is that which is between the neck and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it should be restored according to one of the two methods:	The humerus is what lies between the elbow and the head of the scapula. If it is fractured it may be set in one of two ways.	0.7155564
one of which is that you take a stick of medium thickness, of this shape:	One is to take a smooth bow-shaped piece of wood of medium thickness, like this.	0.7907771
And tie two cords to the two ends, and hang them up, and have the patient sit on a seat;	You tie two bands at the two ends and then it is hung from above.	0.5748193
then place their broken arm on the stick, up to the armpit, and have a curved piece of wood in the middle, then hang some heavy object on it or have the assistant extend it downwards;	The patient is to sit on a seat; then his broken arm is folded upon the piece of wood in such a way that his axilla fits into the middle of the curve of the piece of wood.	0.62809193
then the physician sets the fracture by putting his hands together, until the fracture returns to its proper place.	Then hang a heavy weight from the arm, or have an assistant pull it downwards; then the doctor should straighten out the fracture with both hands together until it is properly reduced.	0.5696366
And the other method is that you lay the patient on their back, and tie their hand to their neck, then instruct two assistants, one to hold above the fracture with his hands, and the other to hold below with a cord, and each pulls on their side.	The other way is to make the patient lie back and to suspend his hand from his neck by a band, then you instruct two assistants. One is to grasp with both hands the arm above the fracture, and the other the arm below the fracture; and each should make extension toward himself.	0.92177814
And if you want the pulling to be stronger, tie a cord below the fracture, and above the fracture, and have each assistant pull on their side.	And if you wish to extend more strongly, tie a band below the fracture and another above, and let each assistant pull toward himself.	0.8987974
And if the fracture is close to the head of the shoulder, you should place a cord under the armpit, and another towards the neck, below the fracture;	If the fracture is near the extremity of the shoulder you will have to put one band beneath the axilla and the other below the fracture near the elbow.	0.80624396
and similarly if the fracture is near the neck, a cord must be placed there gently, without force, so that the fracture is aligned with the place, and with the neck;	Similarly, if the fracture be near the elbow you will have to put a band over the place and over the elbow itself.	0.68424445
then set the fracture properly, as it should be, and bind it, unless an abscess develops there.	Then gently and without violence straighten out the fracture until it is restored to its proper shape and fits together well, and then tighten it if no abscess occur.	0.73022914
And if an abscess develops there, do not bind it for up to seven days, and apply wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil, until the hot abscess subsides;	But if an abscess occur, leave the bandaging until the seventh day and apply raw wool soaked in vinegar and oil of roses until the abscess subsides; then bind it up.	0.8362217
then bind it, and the way to bind it is to put the plaster on the fracture, then bring the arm against the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the chest;	The method of binding it is to apply a plaster to the fracture; then wind round the plaster a bandage of new material; then bind the forearm to the humerus, placing his hand open on his shoulder.	0.7186229
and put on the bandage, and tighten it over the shoulder and over the arm, so that the arm is in the shape of a star, unless something prevents it, or if the bone is displaced.	Then apply pads and bandages to the arm and forearm so that the forearm serves instead of splints, if there is no contra-indication and you see no pathological change in the broken bone.	0.60746634
And if you are concerned that the bone might move, use splints, and place a splint on the fracture wider and stronger than the others, and have a finger's width of space between each splint, and each splint should be large enough to extend three fingers' width past the fracture on each side;	But should you fear any such change then use splints. The way to use these is to place over the fracture itself a splint that is broader and stronger than the rest; and leave a space of a finger's breadth between splints; the splint should be of a length to suit the fracture with the addition of three fingers' breadth all round.	0.8424387
then bind over the splints, as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the fracture, tighter and less loosely.	Then bandage over the splints in the manner mentioned at the beginning of the chapter. That is, you should bandage more tightly over the fracture itself and more lightly as you get away from the fracture.	0.7475416
And if you consider the placement of the splints, and the bandaging, as we have described, at the time you are setting the broken limb, and you fear a hot abscess, leave it unbound until the seventh day, as we have said;	If you decide to put on splints and bandage, as we have said, at the time you set the limb, do so. But if you fear an abscess, leave the splinting and bandaging until the seventh day as we have said.	0.80503654
then check the bandaging every three days, so that itching or swelling does not occur at the location, or that nourishment cannot reach the limb because it is too tight. Adjust it, as we have described.	Then examine the bandaging every third day lest there be itching or swelling at the place; or nourishment be prevented from reaching the limb on account of excessively tight bandaging; treat all these in the proper manner according to our prescriptions.	0.87959456
And if no such issue arises, do not unbind it before three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, with his hands on his stomach;	But if you are confident that nothing of this sort is happening then do not loosen the bandaging until after many days. The patient should be made to sleep on his back with his hand on his stomach, and under the humerus there should be placed a cushion evenly filled with wool.	0.6289102
and place a cushion filled evenly with wool under the shoulder, and check every hour of the day or night that the alignment of the broken limb does not shift, or that the bandaging does not loosen;	The patient should be made to sleep on his back with his hand on his stomach, and under the humerus there should be placed a cushion evenly filled with wool. And examine it at all times of the day and night lest the shape of the broken limb suffer any deformity or the binding loosen; do your utmost to put any such thing right.	0.7512084
correct it with the power of medicine, and give him the food that we have mentioned before, in such a way that the food is initially light; and when he begins to recover, let it be substantial.	You should also direct the patient's diet along the line that we have given earlier; namely, at first the food should be light until the bone has begun to knit; then you should order heavier food.	0.63133645
And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be fully healed in forty days; and then it should be untied and administered a bath and medicinal ointments to restore the area.	Now it is the nature of the humerus and of the leg to knit in forty days; then they should be loosened and the patient should go to the bath and be treated with suitable ointments.	0.7972553
And if the stiffness is severe and swollen, it takes fifty days or two months to loosen.	If the fracture be ugly and contused, do not unfasten it for fifty days or even two months.	0.7853675

chapter-3-subchapter-12.txt
of the fracture of the arm	On setting a fracture of the forearm.	0.42904615
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two "radius" bones, of which one is small, and this is the one that follows the thumb;	The forearm consists of two bones and is sometimes called 'the two firesticks'.	0.59539974
and the other is large, and is the one that is below, towards the little finger;	One of these bones is small and is in line with the thumb, the other is large; this is the one placed lower, under the smaller one.	0.67839265
perhaps the large radius bone is broken alone, or the small one, and perhaps both together.	The larger alone may be broken, or the smaller alone, or both broken together.	0.8341659
When the small radius bone is broken, the restoration is easy, and the healing;	When the small upper bone (radius) is broken it is easy to set and its mending is rapid.	0.6794303
and when the large one is broken, the healing is bad, and more serious than when they are both broken together.	When the lower bone (ulna) breaks it is bad and its mending is difficult. Worst of all is when both bones break together.	0.607331
If it is the small radius bone that is broken alone, it should be extended a little, lightly, and set evenly.	If the broken bone is the radius, the doctor when setting it must use light traction, gently, until he has it straight.	0.6498282
And if it is the large radius bone, it must be extended more strongly;	If it is the ulna that breaks, he must employ stronger traction on it.	0.58022225
and extend it on a cushion, and hold the ball of the hand higher than the rest, and the little finger lower than the other fingers, and let the patient be propped up on himself, with a cushion in front of him, higher up, so that the patient doesn't suffer any strain;	During setting and extension the hand must be disposed on a cushion, spread out with the thumb uppermost, higher than all the fingers, and the little finger downmost, while the patient sits cross-legged upon the floor. The cushion should be on a level with him so that he does not suffer discomfort.	0.76645696
then let the practitioner extend his arm on the underside of his hand, or with a cord, and another practitioner on the other side above.	Then let an attendant extend the arm from below, either by hand or by means of a band, while another attendant extends it from above similarly.	0.84642196
And then let the physician set it evenly, according to its best form.	Then the doctor may straighten the bone so as to restore it to the best possible shape.	0.65143776
And if there are pieces in the fracture, put each one in its place, and if there is any separated that pricks the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut open and remove it, as we have said before.	If there be any splinters in the fracture he must do his utmost to restore each splinter to its place. If a detached splinter appears there and is piercing the skin and you have no hope of restoring it, cut down upon it and remove it in the manner we have mentioned earlier.	0.7244894
And if there is a wound with the fracture, I have spoken of it in the individual chapter; then undertake the treatment.	If the fracture is accompanied by a wound, we have devoted a separate section to this, so take the treatment of it from there.	0.7443365
And if at the beginning of the restoration hot abscesses arise, then glue on a cloth of cerate made with rose oil and white wax, that is neither too hard nor too soft; and tie a cloth over it delicately, until the hot abscess is soothed.	If, when you begin to set the bone, an effusion occurs, smear a cloth with the wax made from oil of roses and white wax, of medium thickness, and bind the dressing on gently.	0.7051021
And then remove the cerate, and apply a poultice of mill dust with plenty of egg, then apply the splints, and the splint for the fracture should always be stronger, and a little wider than the others;	When the effusion subsides, remove the wax and apply the plaster prepared from mill-dust and egg-white, then apply splints; the splint that goes on the actual fracture should be a little wider and stronger than the rest.	0.7012236
and know that there should be six splints on the arm in several positions: whether the fracture is in one of the bones, or in two;	You should know that the number of splints for an arm is, as a rule, six, whether the fracture be of one bone or of both together.	0.6893327
and tighten more over the fracture than elsewhere, and always less as you move away, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and the bandages that are over the fracture should be soft and moist, and not hard or rough;	Then bandage more tightly and strongly over the site of the fracture, and, as you wrap the bandage above and below the fracture, bind little by little more loosely according to the instruction given at the beginning of the book.	0.65741056
and the bandages that are over the fracture should be soft and moist, and not hard or rough; and the thread with which it is tied should be linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.	The dressings wound round the fracture should be gentle and soft, not very hard, while the cord for binding is best made of linen of medium thickness as we have prescribed.	0.7206707
And examine the limb and the bandage after a few days. And if any adverse event occurs to the limb, such as itching, then you must bathe the limb with warm water, until the itching is soothed;	Some days later, examine the limb and the bandaging and if anything has happened that should be put right, such as pruritus in the limb, the limb should be bathed in warm water until the pruritus has subsided.	0.7729473
and let the limb rest, not tightly bound.	Let the limb be unbandaged for one night so that he may rest, then put the bandage on again.	0.41695872
And then resume the bandaging, and if the bandage is loose and the bone separated, or similar thing, then adjust it.	If the bandaging has become loose and the bone has shifted or anything of that sort, correct it all diligently.	0.6217781
And take care if nourishment cannot reach the limb, because it is too tight, then you must loosen it a little, and leave it thus for a few days, until the nourishment flows there, and then tighten it.	Look also to see if nourishment is being prevented from reaching the part on account of over-bandaging, in which case you will have to loosen it a little and leave it for a few days until nourishment flows to it; then bind it up.	0.7827324
And if none of these things that we have said happen to the patient, do not unbind it for up to twenty days.	But if none of those things that we have mentioned happens to the patient, it should not be loosened until after about twenty days.	0.8788661
or thereabouts, then he hangs his hands around his neck, and his neck should be straight, and he should avoid movement and restlessness, and sleep on his back;	Then the patient's hand is to be suspended from his neck, the arm being level, and he should guard carefully against agitated movements, and should sleep on his back.	0.6660496
and know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-five, and perhaps in twenty days, depending on the compositions and complexions of the humors.	You should know that this fracture of the arm mends in thirty or thirty-two days, and sometimes in twenty-eight, depending on the individual's constitution and the condition of his strength.	0.7516787

chapter-3-subchapter-13.txt
of the fracture of the hand	On the repair of fractures of the palm and fingers.	0.41335037
Know that on the back of the hand and at the knuckles of the fingers, few fractures occur, and there is often only swelling.	Fractures of the metacarpus and of the small bones of the fingers very rarely occur; the only frequent occurrence is contusion.	0.6999743
And when the palm of the hand is fractured or bent, it is necessary that the patient sits cross-legged, and sits straight before him evenly;	When a fracture or crushing of the palm of the hand occurs the patient should sit cross-legged with a chair of the right height in front of him, on which he should put his outstretched hand.	0.7508216
then he places his hand on your outstretched thigh, and the practitioner extends the broken bones, and sets them evenly, until they are well joined;	Then an assistant is to extend the broken bones while the doctor straightens them so as to achieve a proper union.	0.61731696
and applies the plaster and the padding, if no abscess develops, then applies a splint according to the size of the area; and it should be wrapped in a linen cloth.	Then a plaster and a dressing should be applied, if an effusion do not occur; then a splint over that, measured to the site and wrapped in a soft cloth.	0.8055028
And if the fracture is on the inside around the hollow of the palm, make a ball of cloths, and instruct the patient to squeeze it against his fractured palm; and then bind it with a long cloth, and let the splint be of soft leather, as large as the palm of the hand, and bind it as needed.	If the fracture be lower down, near the inner part of the palm of the hand, make a ball of cloth, bid the patient grip on it with the fractured palm of his hand, and then bind it up with a long bandage. The splint should be of leather that is somewhat soft, so as to fit into all the folds of the palm; and bandage it on suitably.	0.86928236
And if the fracture is on the outside, you must put a splint on top and another underneath in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie it all around the hand, and tighten the bond between the fingers.	But if the fracture be on the outside you will have to put one splint above and another beneath the palm of the hand, to keep the hand opened and straight; then put on the bandage, carrying it round the hand and in and out between the fingers.	0.8794768
And if the fracture occurs at a knuckle of the fingers, if it is the thumb, set it evenly, as needed; and bind it with the palm, and if you see fit, put a small straight splint to raise the fracture, so it does not move;	If it be the thumb, then set it in the proper way and bind it down to the palm of the hand; if you like you can apply a small straight splint to it to keep the fracture straight so that it does not shift.	0.8269168
and if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as the index or one of the others, align it, and tie it with the healthy finger next to it; or you tie them all together in one grip, which is better, or you put on a splint, as with the thumb;	If the break be in any of the other fingers, such as the middle or index or little finger or the ring finger, straighten it out and bind it to the sound finger next to it; or let them all be bound up one to another, which is better; or apply a small straight splint, as we said for the thumb.	0.8612253

chapter-3-subchapter-14.txt
The thigh bone is often broken, and it is clearly visible when it turns forward and backward;	The femur is often broken, and this is readily discernible, for it will rotate forwards or backwards.	0.8069899
and the restoration is such that one ties one bandage above the break, and another below. And the patient lies on his face, then each attendant extends his bandage on his side equally;	It is set by binding a bandage above the fracture and another below, while the patient lies flat on his face. Then each assistant should make an even extension in his own direction, by the bandage.	0.83725935
and this is when the break is in the middle of the bone.	This is when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.	0.80439377
And if the break is near the top of the thigh, let one of the bandages be towards the buttock, and the other bandage below the break.	But if the fracture is close to the root of the thigh, you should tie on a soft bandage of wool or something similar, at the root of the thigh toward the groin, so that extension may be applied above, and another bandage below the fracture.	0.69325083
And also if it is near the knee, then let the bandage be next to the knee, and the extension be downwards;	Likewise if the fracture is near the knee the bandage should be near the knee, so that extension may be made downwards.	0.767026
then the physician sets the bone straight with his two hands, until it is in its natural shape, and then applies the plaster, and bandages it, if no abscess develops.	Then the doctor should straighten it out with both hands until he has reduced it to the pattern of the natural form and the bone unites neatly.	0.6359639
And if there is a hot abscess, let it subside then return to your work and your treatment; The binding is done in this way.	Then you will have to apply the plaster and bandage if there is no effusion in the limb, but if there is an effusion leave it for a few days until the swelling has gone down, then resume your treatment.	0.50867516
You must wrap a hard bandage, doubled in two or three, over the fracture, leaving the excess, then bend the leg so that the heel comes to the base of the buttock, and place a long thread between the thigh and the leg, next to the knee underneath, and bring the ends of the thread to the top;	As to the bandaging, you should wrap a firm broad sash two or three times round the fracture, leaving some over; then bind the leg up so that the heel is brought to reach the root of the buttock. Then pass a long cord in the space between the thigh and the leg, low down near the knee, and let the ends of the cord come up on either side, then bind the rest of the sash over the leg and the thigh.	0.84410685
then turn the bandage over the leg and the thigh, then place splints on the fracture, and place a splint on the leg bone;	Then apply splints to the thigh at the very site of the fracture and put one of the splints on the leg-bone.	0.7015079
then fill the empty space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths to even out the pressure, then begin to tie tightly three or four turns over the fracture; and the higher you go above the fracture, the less you tighten it;	Then pack soft material in the space between the leg and the thigh to make the bandaging even. Then start with three or four turns of a strong bandage in the middle over the site of the fracture, and as you get away from the site of the fracture bind lighter and softer and looser.	0.8176562
then pull on the two ends of the thread that you placed between the leg and the thigh, and tie the three splints that are on top, then go back down to the end of the thread, until you come near the foot;	Then turn to the two ends of the cord which you previously passed between the thigh and the leg, and with the cord bind the adjacent splints above, then carry the ends downward until you end up at the great tendon of the foot and with them bind also the extremities of the splints at the other end so that the bandaging will not shift from its place.	0.8007126
and tighten it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like that, until no abscess, swelling, or other similar thing appears. And if it does occur, untie it, and address what appears there, as we have said many times;	Then let the bandaging remain on as long as no pruritus or abscess or effusion or anything of that sort happens to the limb; but if any of these occur loosen it quickly and put right whatever has taken place, in the manner we have often mentioned.	0.78400457
and if there are pieces of bone that stick out, you must remove them, if possible; and if not, then it is necessary to cut into the area and pull them out; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.	If there be a penetrating fragment of the bone, you must reposition it if you can; but if not then cut down upon it and remove it and treat the wound in the sort of way mentioned previously, until it heals.	0.8076052
And sometimes the thigh is broken so that splints are put on it, just as with the shoulder and the arm;	This fracture of the thigh is sometimes bandaged without bringing the leg alongside with splints, in the way we spoke of for the humerus and the forearm.	0.59961194
however, in a restoration done this way, the patient does not limp.	But setting after the former manner does not cause the patient any lameness; whereas if the femur is set alone without binding the leg to it the patient will inevitably be lame for always.	0.56296253
And know that the thigh is restored in fifty days, or a little less or a little more, according to the differences in complexions.	You must know that the femur knits in fifty days or a little more or less, according to the different constitutions and other circumstances.	0.73987705

chapter-3-subchapter-15.txt
Know that in the kneecap, fractures rarely occur, but it bends often.	You should know that the patella is rarely fractured, but crushing often occurs.	0.81715643
And if it breaks, it is only a fissure, or a hole, and it happens with a wound, and without a wound, and this one feels well.	If a fracture does happen to it, it will be either a splitting or a shattering which may be simple or compound; and all these can be palpated.	0.5959381
And the restoration is that one sets even that which is round with one's fingers, as much as it can be assembled by feel;	Now the way to set is for the separated parts of it to be put right with the fingers, so that they unite and join as far as straightening and gentleness and skill can serve.	0.44046825
then apply the plaster, and put a round splint, if you need one, and tighten it as needed, then consider all the dispositions that we have discussed in other fractures, such as hot abscesses and other similar things; so apply to each injury what is appropriate, until it is healed.	Then apply the plaster and put upon that a circular splint, if need be, and over that a suitable bandage. Then keep an eye on it for all the conditions described for the other fractures, such as an effusion and the like, meeting whatever arises with what is good for it, until it is healed.	0.8821733

chapter-3-subchapter-16.txt
of the fracture of the leg	On setting a fracture of the leg.	0.5518016
Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is rightly called "fibula," and the other is called "tibia";	The leg consists of two bones. One of them is thick and is called 'leg bone' (tibia). The other is slender and is called 'fire-stick' (fibula).	0.74904966
and fractures occur just as they do in the arm, and therefore the restoration is similar to that of the arm, and the procedure is the same. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns in all directions.	Both of these are liable to the same kinds of fracture as occur in the two bones of the forearm, therefore the repair of them will be like that of the arm, and the operation is one and the same. If both bones are broken together, the leg will turn in all directions.	0.85805786
And if the slender bone is broken, it turns forward.	If the fibula is broken there will be a forward deformity of the leg.	0.6094331
And if the large bone is broken, there is great pain, and it is clearly visible; and it turns downwards.	If the tibia be broken, and that low down, it will be obvious to you.	0.55222857
Then apply traction, and set it evenly, and bind the splints evenly as well;	Employ levelling and extension and binding on of splints similar to that (sc.	0.46026462
but nevertheless, if the fracture is severe, and there are many pieces, the traction must be less and lighter; and align it according to your skill.	But it will be necessary, if the fracture of the leg be a serious one with much fragmentation, for the extension to be gentler and lighter; and you must employ the utmost gentleness in setting it.	0.7842382
And when you have completed all your work, then take two wooden splints, shaped so that they enclose the leg on one side and the other, and are the length of the leg from the knee to below;	Then wrap each of them in a cloth folded into two longitudinally, and put one on each side of the leg; they should reach from the knee to the extremity of the foot.	0.72023237
then wrap in two places a bandage above and below, and tie it in the middle also, and at this point the leg will not be able to bend to the right or left, and so it is well;	Then tie the two strips in three places, namely at the two ends and in the middle; this binding prevents the leg from bending to right or left and it will be held in a good straight position.	0.7995238
and some apply a cradle the length of the leg, and it is made of wood, and the leg is placed in it to prevent movement, and this is properly done in a fracture where there is a wound;	Sometimes a 'gutter-splint' is used, made of wood according to the length of the leg; the leg is placed in this and it keeps the leg motionless. This is particularly necessary in a compound fracture.	0.67749405
and move the leg each day to see if there is a hot abscess or another problem; thus treat it until it is healed.	Then carefully examine the leg every day and use the utmost care to guard against effusion or swelling or other like things; and when anything of this sort happens employ the means to meet the case until it heals.	0.7081311

chapter-3-subchapter-17.txt
of the fracture of the bones of the foot	On fracture of bones of the foot and of the toes.	0.6683264
At the ankle there is no fracture, but in the bones of the foot sometimes there is a fracture and in the toes a little, and there rarely occurs more than a simple fracture in several places.	The heel is never fractured; but the bones of the foot sometimes are. The toes too are rarely fractured; but mostly they get crushed.	0.72289574
And if there is a fracture in the bones of the foot, and you see these bones overlapping each other, have the patient put his foot on the ground, as if he wanted to walk, and then immediately put your foot on his, where the bones are raised, then press it until they return to their places;	If a fracture occurs to the bones of the foot, and you see the bones riding over one another, let the patient plant his foot flat on the ground as if walking. Then stand and put the sole of your foot on the prominent bones and with your foot put pressure upon them and level them to their proper place.	0.84840596
then put the plaster and padding on it, and place under the arch of the foot a small board with two flat ends, then tie it to the leg appropriately, after you have wrapped cloths around it, and other things that you need.	Then apply a bandage and some tow on top, and put under the inner part of the sole of the foot a small board with two flat heads. After you have wrapped them in material and so on, bind them tightly to the sole of the foot.	0.8272411
And when three or four days have passed, untie the bandage, for you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or dislocated.	When three days or four have passed, loosen the binding and you will find the bones in position; whether they have been fractured or dislocated, the operation is (the same,) as you see.	0.8417402
And if any of the toes are broken, set them as we have described for the fingers of the hand; then put on the broken toe a splint along the length of the toe, and let it be a little wider, then place under the foot that board which I mentioned, and tie it appropriately;	If one of the toes be broken, reposition and straighten it in the way that I described for the fingers; then apply to the broken toe a splint of a length corresponding to the toe and a little wider than it. Then under the sole of the foot put the board that I have just described, and bandage it on firmly.	0.9140609
and if there are two or three, or more, broken, put on each toe a splint according to its size, wrapped in a linen cloth, and tie the board under the foot; and it should extend over the end of the board beyond the arch of the foot, so that it holds it well.	If the broken bones number two, three, or more, then apply over each toe a single splint measured to it, wrapped in soft material, and bind the board on the sole and let the flat portion of each of the two heads extend beyond the end of the sole of the foot, so that it may be held firmly.	0.82247907
And you must not forget the other things that I have mentioned for other fractures, from what we have said; and treat each incident as appropriate.	And you must not forget to pay attention to all those contingencies that we have mentioned to you in other fractures; meet each contingency with the means proper to it.	0.84033686

chapter-3-subchapter-18.txt
of the fracture of the wrist bone	On fracture of the female pudenda and of the pubic bone and of the male organ.	0.40815806
When the bone of a woman's hip is broken, have her sit spread-legged, then lean her back, and be held from behind;	When a woman's pudenda are fractured, make her sit cross-legged, then bend her backwards little by little, being supported from behind.	0.83437294
then the practitioner fills the patient's vagina with cotton, and puts in as much as a fist;	Then let a midwife pack the vulva with cotton wool so as to form a kind of spherical packing in the vulva.	0.5165478
then have the woman stand, and lift her back little by little, and then the cotton jumps out, until it comes to the opening of the vagina, and the bone returns with the wad;	Then shake the woman and by degrees elevate the dorsal spine, for the cotton wool will emerge until it is like a sphere at the opening and the fractured bone will be reduced.	0.6606636
and when she needs to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and do this for seven days or thereabouts:	Then put a pillow upon her back and when she wants to pass water gently remove the cotton wool so she may do so, then put it back in the same way in which it was put in at the first. Then she should return to her pillow as before. She should do this for about seven days, then it will be mended.	0.6430116
thus the fracture will be restored, and if you wish, take a sheep's bladder, and tie a tube to the opening, and put the whole bladder into the vagina; then blow strongly into the tube, until the bladder is inflated inside:	If you prefer, take a sheep's bladder and bind a hollow reed to the opening of it; introduce the whole bladder into the pudenda and then blow hard into the tube so that the bladder is inflated within the passage and the fracture will then be reduced.	0.82338095
then it should be filled with cotton, and left like that for some days, until it is healed.	Then pack with cotton wool and let her wait a few days as we have described, until it be healed.	0.7623339
And when the wrist bone of a man, or of a woman, is broken, restore it as we have described for the hip bone;	Now when a man or woman has the pubic bone broken you can use for the setting and repair of it the method we gave for a fracture of the hip.	0.6910224
and these fractures, close together, are not hidden from him who applies his study and practice, and understands my book.	The correct practice in these uncommon fractures, which very rarely happen, will be obvious, especially to one who has some experience and understands well this book of mine.	0.51218605
For the fracture itself, in many arrangements, indicates the right way to restore it: understand it then.	For the fracture itself will in most cases indicate the correct way to repair it and bind it up, so use your intelligence.	0.60718954
For the penis, when it is broken, take a goose quill and place the penis inside; then wrap cloths around it, and leave it for three days or thereabouts, and it will be quickly healed.	When a man's organ is fractured, take a goose's neck and introduce the penis into it; then let it be wrapped and bandaged and left for about three days until it be healed.	0.8081273

chapter-3-subchapter-19.txt
of fracture with a wound	On the repair of fractures accompanied by wounding.	0.53854144
It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, such as in the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that it be healed immediately, as the healings that we have described demonstrate.	When a man has a compound fracture, especially when it is a large bone such as the femur or humerus or the like, you should at once venesect him if the conditions are suitable for venesection as set out above.	0.77464044
And if the wound heals, staunch it with vitriol if you have nothing else, then begin to restore the fracture in that same hour, or that day, if hot abscesses do not arise.	If there is bleeding from the wound you must hasten to stanch it by sprinkling it with powdered vitriol if you have nothing else at hand. Then begin on the reduction of the fracture the very same day; do not put it off unless an abscess occur.	0.768946
And if hot abscesses arise, leave the restoration until the ninth day, until the abscesses are calmed, and do not touch them on the third or fourth day, for you would cause a bad outcome.	But if an abscess does occur, leave the reduction until the ninth day so that the abscess may subside, and in no circumstances touch it on the third or fourth day, for you will bring evil consequences on him.	0.8599924
And if the broken bone is apparent on the open flesh, then you must set it lightly with your hands, using slight extension.	If the fractured bone be overriding the skin you must try to reduce it and to straighten it out by hand, gently and with moderate extension.	0.66346824
And if the extension devices are not ready for you to use with your hands, then set it with this instrument which is made of iron, which is seven or eight fingers long, and its width is according to the size of the wound; and for this reason the physician needs to obtain three or four, according to what he needs for each treatment of a fracture;	If reduction and straightening by hand is unsuccessful, then reduce it with this instrument; it is made of iron, seven or eight fingers' breadths long, and wide in proportion to the size of the wound; that is why the doctor should have three or four of them in the sizes he may need for treating every kind of fracture.	0.8757195
and it should be round and a little thick, so that it does not bend under the pressure on the limb during your work, and it should be pointed at the front, and thicker from the middle forward, like this:	It should be round and somewhat thick so as not to bend when pressure is put upon it at the time of operating. It should be sharp-ended with a bend at the end; the upper part should be of some thickness, but from the middle to the lower part it is a good bit thinner. This is its form.	0.7129702
and push it at once, until it returns, and is aligned with the other.	When the bone is repositioned and straightened in some measure, try to straighten the ends of the fracture, one to another.	0.45362905
And if the fracture is fine, and the instrument cannot grip the bone well, then you must trim the end of the bone, so that the instrument can have a hold on it.	If the fractured end be very thin and the instrument does not grip it firmly you will have to cut off that end so as to give purchase for the instrument.	0.73292696
And if you cannot reduce the bone, as we have said, then cut it with a suitable instrument, either an incisor or a saw, as you are able;	If you cannot reduce the bone at all by the means we have described, cut it off with any of the osteotomes we have mentioned that is suitable, or saw it off with one of the saws as best you may.	0.68634355
then smooth what remains of the bone's roughness and small splinters.	Then strip away any remaining roughness of the bone and fine pieces of shell.	0.8433361
And when the bone is set, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place.	If, when you have reduced the bone, the patient feels severe and troublesome pain, you may know that the bone has not returned to its natural site.	0.70871365
So work until it is in its place, then soak a cloth in dark, astringent wine, and especially if it is in summer; and do not put on the wound a cerate or anything else containing oil, lest it cause rot and corruption;	When your setting of the bone is complete, soak a dressing in dark sharp wine, especially if it be in summer, but do not put wax or anything oily upon the wound lest it cause putrefaction or corruption.	0.75569236
then apply splints once you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and fit the covering all around, according to the size of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not constricted by the bandage;	Then apply splints the moment you have finished setting the bone; and leave the wound open, that is, by making with scissors an opening in the coverings the size of the wound.	0.73952866
and many times foolish physicians have done this, and have caused the patient to die or sometimes to become crippled; and the bandaging should be softer and gentler than other bandages.	And take the utmost care not to bandage up a wound with a fracture; for many ignorant doctors have done that, thereby causing their patients either death or ulceration or a defluxion; so make your bandage soft and loose, as opposed to that of other fractures.	0.7001569
And if the wound is bad or large, and you fear that a bad outcome might occur, as we have said, and you find pain at the location, then you should not apply splints; but wrap around, instead of splints, hard cloths, and tie them.	If the wound be severe or of great size and you fear for it some one of the grave accompaniments such as we have described, and the patient feels a disturbing pain at the place, then you should not put on splints; but instead of splints make wrappings of a stiff material and bind them on.	0.84516287
And when you see after one or two days pus forming at the wound, then remove what you have put on with wine, and apply a wound-healing ointment, such as tetrapharmacum ointment and similar ones.	If, after one or two days have passed, you see that the wound is beginning to suppurate, remove the dressing with wine that you had put on it, and then apply the pads and ointments with which it is our custom to heal wounds, such as Tetrapharmacon ointment and the like.	0.86251724
And you must unbind the limb twice a day, morning and evening, until it is healed and healthy.	Every evening and morning you will have to loosen the bandaging and carefully examine the wound until it knits and is healed.	0.6633493
And the limb must be positioned in such a way that the pus flows downwards easily.	You must also place the limb in such a position as to let the pus flow down easily.	0.83815974
And if many days pass, and it cannot heal but continually produces pus, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which you must explore the wound with a probe, and remove all these separated pieces which cause this pain.	If, after many days, the wound is unhealed and it goes on suppurating, you may know that there are some little fragments of bone there; so you will have to examine the wound with a probe; and those fragments that are loose take and extract; and those that are not loose but nevertheless pierce the limb and cause pain, attempt to cut them out and extract them by whatever means you can.	0.8153133
And if a fistula develops at the site, or another kind of infection, you must treat it according to what is said in its chapter earlier.	If a defluxion or ulceration or other kind of corruption or putrefaction happen to the wound, you must meet all these occurrences with the proper remedy described before in its place.	0.62531304
And when the bone is broken, and exposed on the limb, like the bone of the thigh or the shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not pull on it, because death often results, but leave it until it rots;	One thing that is necessary is that you should comply with my words and keep them in mind: when a large bone is broken and protrudes from the limb, such as the femur, the humerus, and the other bones of the long limbs, do not meddle with pulling or extracting it, for this often causes death; but leave it to suppurate.	0.69717467
perhaps it will fall off by itself after 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound, if you can;	It may come away of itself in twenty or thirty days.	0.5865301
and if you cannot, then leave it.	Then dress the wound if you find occasion; if not, let be.	0.44929028

chapter-3-subchapter-20.txt
We often see, after the healing of a fracture, especially when it is near a joint, an ugly thing to see, the shape of the limb; and perhaps the limb cannot perform its natural functions.	This callus often occurs after the healing of a fracture, especially one near a joint, and thereby the shape of the limb is spoilt; and sometimes there is limitation of the natural function of the limb.	0.76289946
Therefore, take care if the knot is fresh: then administer styptic medicines, such as aloe, frankincense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, acacia, and similar others, so that you take some of these, or all together, and mix them with styptic wine or with egg white or with vinegar; and put them on the knot at night in compresses, and tighten it well, and do not loosen it for many days;	Examine it, and if the callus be soft, apply astringent remedies to it, such as aloes, olibanum, myrrh, balsam of sarcocol, acacia, and the like. Take some or all of these; beat them up with a dry wine or egg-white or vinegar, apply to the callus on some tow and bind up firmly.	0.77922916
and put them on the knot at night in compresses, and tighten it well, and do not loosen it for many days; and then undo it, and start another one, until the nodule is removed;	Leave the bandaging on for many days; then undo it and repeat until the callus is removed, God willing.	0.62084985
or you tighten over it a well-made piece of lead; for the property of lead is that it removes all swellings from the limbs;	Or bind on it a firm sheet of lead; for lead has the property of taking away lumps from limbs.	0.79762405
and if the nodule has already turned into a hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then cut over it, and incise the apparent excess; or you scrape it with a scraper, until it is removed, and treat it until it is healed.	But if the callus is stony hard and its removal is urgent, incise the place and cut away the superfluous prominence, or pare it away with a scraper until it is gone; and dress the wound until it heals.	0.73459315

chapter-3-subchapter-21.txt
of the limb that is weak after healing	On the treatment of a fracture when, after repair, the limb remains unnaturally thin.	0.47841784
When the bone fracture is restored, and the limb remains weak and thin afterward, it happens for many reasons: one of which is because it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bandages, and nourishment could not reach the limb;	When a fractured bone has been repaired but the limb remains thin and weak, this may be due to many causes: the bandaging being too often loosened and not properly tightened; or excessive binding-up so that nourishment cannot flow to the limb; or excessive fomenting; or excessive and premature movement; or the thinness and weakness of the patient's blood.	0.85431576
And the treatment is that you make the patient eat, and make the body supple, until the blood is increased in him; and administer baths to him, and give him joy and happiness;	The treatment of this consists in the nourishing and restoring of his body so there be plenty of blood; and the use of the bath; and cheering the patient and making him happy, and so on.	0.81498736
then put pitch on the limb, so that the pitch attracts great nourishment to it, and frequently bathe it with warm water, so that the nourishment flows to the limb; and it returns to its natural form.	Then apply pitch to the limb so that it may draw much nourishment to itself, or continue the massage to the limb with tepid water, so that nourishment flows in the limb and it returns to its normal shape.	0.8076253

chapter-3-subchapter-22.txt
of the crooked limb after healing When the limb is crooked after restoration, and the bone is visibly broken, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function:	On the treatment of fractured bones when they mend crooked and are inhibited from their proper functioning. When a limb that has been set has some distortion after healing, or the bone that was broken has some prominence or callosity, so that the limb is deformed, but there is nevertheless no limitation of its natural movement, then you should not listen to those who think that the bone should be broken again.	0.69421923
so do not believe the fools who say that the limb must be broken all over again, and many foolish physicians have done this in our land;	In our parts there have been many ignorant doctors and bone-setters who have done this.	0.44532079
and this practice is condemned, and great harm comes from it, and possibly death;	The operation is most blameworthy and leads to great dangers, death itself not being the worst possibility.	0.62018156
however, if the knots and distortions are fresh, they should be bathed with hot water, in which softening herbs have been cooked, such as marshmallow leaves and roots, and melilot, and similar things;	But if the distortion and callosity be recent you should massage it with an infusion of the herbs that have an emollient quality, such as leaves and roots of the marsh mallow, and melilot and the like: and apply one of the emollient plasters such as carefully prepared diachylon.	0.7309449
and make a softening plaster, such as a well-made diachylon, and take marshmallow mucilage, and mix it with chicken fat or sesame oil, and make a plaster on top;	Or take mucilage of the root of the marsh mallow and beat it up with chicken fat and oil of sesame, and let a cataplasm of these be applied.	0.64169586
or take ripe figs, and crush them with dove droppings, and similar medicines that reduce swelling.	Or take a fat fig and beat it up with pigeon's dung; and the like remedies that are termed 'inhibitors of scarring'.	0.76560783
And sometimes the knot is removed by rubbing continuously and for a long time with wet hands. And movement should be applied to the limb every hour.	Sometimes also the callosity is resolved by long-continued gentle friction with the hands; and constant movement in every direction should also be applied.	0.6621605
And if the crookedness is old and hardened, like stone, and it is necessary to remove it with an instrument, then it must be cut down to the bone, with a thin scalpel, gently; and put care and study into the treatment.	But if the deformity be long-standing and fixed and hardened and you are compelled to treat it operatively, you will have to cut down on it from above, and free the junction of the bone, and with fine chisels cut away the redundant callus or bone; be gentle in this, with diligence and care.	0.6823329

chapter-3-subchapter-23.txt
Dislocation is the displacement of a joint from its place, because of which it cannot move, and the limb is deformed, and the patient feels great pain and great injury.	A dislocation is a displacement of any of the joints from its place, whereby the movement of the joint is hindered, the member is deformed, and the patient is caused violent pain and hurt.	0.85052526
When a dislocation happens to someone, it must be reduced immediately without delay.	When anyone sustains a dislocation he should hasten to have it reduced, not delaying it at all.	0.789722
For if one delays, the area swells, and perhaps it can only be put back in place with difficulty;	For if it is delayed the place will swell up and the reduction will be thereby made difficult.	0.6998255
therefore it should not be moved at the time when it is swollen: often it causes spasms and other pains;	So it should not be delayed, nor moved or extended during the time it is swollen, for that often leads to spasm and excruciating pain.	0.7181306
however, when this happens, have the patient bled, then leave it alone until the swelling has subsided;	Instead, when this occurs, you must hasten to venesect the patient, and then let be until the swelling has subsided a little.	0.77118444
then bathe the limb with hot water and oil, then reset it gently, and treat each limb as the treatment comes to its place.	Then massage the member with hot water and oil and let it be gently reduced. And treat every member with the things that will be mentioned in their place.	0.7843048
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations from the head down to the feet.	I have disposed the chapters on dislocations in the same order as the foregoing ones on fractures, that is, from the upper part of the body to the lower part.	0.616272

chapter-3-subchapter-24.txt
It rarely happens that both mandibles (jawbones) are dislocated, and the dislocation of both is in two ways: either they are slightly out of their places, and slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated, and hang towards the chest, and saliva runs from the mouth which he cannot hold, nor can he close his mouth, and he mumbles his speech with his tongue.	It is rare indeed for the jawbones to be dislocated. Their dislocation may be in one of two ways: either they may shift slightly from their place and be a little relaxed; or they may be completely and utterly dislocated so as to be relaxed down toward the breast so that the patient's saliva runs out and he cannot control it; nor is he able to close his mouth, and he stutters in speaking.	0.89681697
When the dislocation is minor, it returns by itself in most cases.	If it be only a slight displacement it will go back in most cases spontaneously without much trouble.	0.6912676
And if it is complete and full, then you must reduce it quickly, and do not delay;	But if the dislocation be complete and total it is necessary to set about the reduction of it at once without any delay.	0.5881587
and in such a way that the assistant holds the patient's head, and the physician puts the thumb of one of his hands at the root of the jaw's dislocation inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides;	This is done thus: an assistant holds the patient's head and the doctor introduces into his mouth the thumb of one hand at the root of the jaw, if it be a dislocation on one side, or both thumbs if it be a bilateral dislocation, with the rest of the fingers outside to keep it straight.	0.7587345
and instruct the patient to relax his jaws and move them in all directions. And the physician sets it evenly, until it returns to its place.	Then let him bid the patient relax his jaws and allow them to move in any direction; while the doctor sets the dislocation, thrusting the jaw until it return to its proper place.	0.8213601
And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated together, then moisten them with hot water and oil, until you can reduce them easily;	If the reduction be difficult, especially if it be a bilateral dislocation, administer a fomentation with hot water and oil, so that the reduction of both sides may be facilitated.	0.7083671
and do not delay the reduction, as we have said.	And on no account delay the reduction, as we have said.	0.8956938
And when they are reduced evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well without difficulty, then apply cloths soaked in a cerate made of rose oil and wax, then bind it lightly with soft bandages;	When the reduction and straightening have been done and the patient's mouth closes and is not relaxed, then apply to both sides dressings steeped in wax prepared from wax and oil of roses. Then bind it up gently, with a loose bandage.	0.7308206
and the patient should sleep on their back, with their head placed between two cushions, so that they do not move it to the right or left, and do not try to chew, but take light food, until the pain is gone, and the jaws are healed;	The patient should sleep lying on his back with his head held between two pillows so that he does not move it either to right or to left; nor should he burden himself with chewing but should be on a diet of broth of corn starch until the pain is gone and the jaw is firm; then he may eat whatever he wishes.	0.84376127
and then they can chew what they want lightly, and not strain to open their mouth when eating and drinking, until the jaw is well healed and healthy.	Let him use it gently; let him not work his mouth heavily in eating or drinking or yawning until the jaw is firmly knit and healed.	0.6775777
And if the two jawbones cannot be reset at once, and are not returned to their places, fevers and sudden illnesses may occur, and possibly diarrhea, and perhaps vomiting pure bile.	If the reduction of both sides is hard when it is a simultaneous bilateral dislocation, and there is no return to the proper position, then thereby in many cases fevers and perpetual headaches occur; sometimes the patient's belly is loosened and he vomits actual bile.	0.6767615
And when you see this, then know that it is fatal; and many times the one to whom it happens dies within nine days.	When you see this you will know that he is doomed; in most cases in which this happens death follows in ten days.	0.85188514

chapter-3-subchapter-25.txt
The splint cannot dislocate inwards from the side of the arm and chest, but it is sometimes dislocated outwards, and one feels it clearly.	The clavicle is never dislocated inwards because of its continuity with the breast-bone; but sometimes it is dislocated outwards, and then it is detected by palpation.	0.7115184
And the restoration is such that the patient lies often on his back and extends his arms; and then press the place firmly with your palm, and it will return;	The replacement is thus: the patient is to lie on his back and stretch out both arms; then with the palm of your hand press heavily upon the place and it will go back.	0.8517356
then apply the plaster and the bandage, and tighten it;	Then apply to it the plaster and pads, and bandage it up.	0.83173525
and the head which is towards the elbow cannot dislocate; at least not easily, and if it does dislocate at any time, then put it back in its place, as we have said;	As to the extremity of the clavicle, which is close to the shoulder and joined to it, it is only rarely dislocated; but if ever it is dislocated you must reduce it and set it straight as we have mentioned, by any convenient means.	0.6747056
then put on the plaster and the bandage, and tighten it, and tell the patient to rest until he is healed;	Then apply the plaster, pads, and bandages, and bid the patient keep quiet and still until it is healed.	0.80010647
and in the same way the head of the shoulder is reset, when it is separated from its place.	By this same treatment you may also reduce the head of the humerus when it is displaced.	0.5517647

chapter-3-subchapter-26.txt
of the dislocation of the shoulder	On the reduction of a dislocation of the humerus.	0.49773416
Know that the shoulder is dislocated only in three ways:	You should know that there are three ways in which the humerus may be dislocated.	0.71948344
one of which is that it dislocates towards the armpit below; and the second is towards the chest/breast; and sometimes it dislocates upwards, and this happens rarely;	One is a dislocation down into the axilla, another is a dislocation toward the breast; it may also be dislocated upward, which is rare.	0.82632774
and it does not dislocate backwards because of the shoulder blade, and it does not dislocate inwards because of the sinews/nerves;	It is not dislocated backward, because of the scapula; nor is it dislocated forward, on account of the tendons.	0.7967658
and it often dislocates downwards towards the armpit, especially in those who have little flesh, because in these it jumps out easily;	Mostly it is dislocated and displaced down into the axilla, and particularly in those of a spare build; in such it quickly comes out and quickly goes back.	0.661722
in those who have enough flesh, it dislocates with difficulty, and returns with difficulty.	But in those of a fleshy build it is the opposite; it comes out with difficulty and goes back with difficulty.	0.6765243
And sometimes it happens to some men a blow or a fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think that it is dislocated because of this.	Sometimes a man suffers a blow or a fall, so that the upper arm swells up with an effusion, whence he forms the opinion that there is a dislocation.	0.760725
It is therefore necessary that you examine it, until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.	So you must examine it to make sure of it and then proceed to treat it.	0.85601324
And the dislocation is recognized when it is down towards the armpit, and compare the injured shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear difference between them; and you will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder, and under the armpit when touching the head of the shoulder, as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose, nor make any movements;	A dislocation down into the axilla may be diagnosed by comparing the sound and the dislocated humerus; for you will find an obvious difference between them; you will find a hollow at the head of the humerus, and in the axilla the head of the humerus may be palpated like an egg, and the patient is unable to lift his hand to his ear, and full movements are restricted.	0.82106197
and also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you find it clearly by touch;	Similarly if it is displaced toward the breast or upward you will find it obvious to the touch and not hidden.	0.6616727
and this type of dislocation is not difficult to reset when it is recent, or if the patient is a child.	The reduction of this dislocation will be quite simple if it be only recent or the patient be a child.	0.7256074
And the method is that the practitioner lifts the patient's hand upwards, then places their fists under the armpit, and forcefully lifts the joint upwards into place; and the practitioner lifts the hand and extends it upwards, then puts it underneath; it will return quickly.	To reduce it, his hand should be lifted up by an assistant, then you should put both your thumbs under his axilla and lift the joint up powerfully into its place, while the assistant lifts and stretches his hand upward; then he puts it down and the dislocation will at once go back.	0.74699175
And if it does not return as we have said within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in hot water; and the practitioner should administer softening and soothing ointments, such as a decoction of marshmallow, fenugreek and melilot in water, and it should be applied;	If it is not reduced by the means we have stated, being a dislocation of many days' standing, the patient should take a hot bath and use relaxing and softening fomentations, such as decoction of marsh mallow root and fenugreek and melilot.	0.8046493
then the patient should lie on their back, and a pad of wool, even, neither too soft nor too hard, should be placed under the armpit, then the practitioner should place their heel on the pad and carefully lift the head of the shoulder, and pull the patient's hand;	Then the patient should lie on his back and you put under his axilla a ball of wool of moderately hard consistency.	0.6263167
and another practitioner should hold the patient's head so that it does not move downwards; that shoulder will return immediately, and you see, reset it in this manner:	Then the doctor should put his heel on the ball and grasp the patient's hand and draw it downward, while pushing the ball with his foot, and it will straightway be reduced.	0.6008699
and you should have a man present who is taller than the patient; and he should stand upright beside him, and put his shoulder under the patient's armpit, and lift the armpit up, so that the patient hangs in the air; and another practitioner should pull the patient's hand downwards towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, hang something heavy with him, and the dislocation will immediately return (to its proper place).	Or, if you prefer, reduce it in this way: get a man taller than the patient to stand on one side and pass his shoulder under the patient's axilla and lift it up until the patient is suspended in mid-air, while another assistant pulls the patient's hand down towards his lower abdomen (if the patient is light it will be necessary to hang a weight from him); then the dislocation will straightway be reduced.	0.7660187
And it is also reduced in another way:	It is also reduced by another method: that is, to fix in.	0.7465818
a long stick is driven into the ground, the top of which should be as round as a pestle, and neither too thick nor too thin; then it should be placed under the patient, but with soft cloths on top, and the patient lies along the length of the stick;	the ground a long spar of wood; its head should be of a round shape like the pestle of a mortar, neither massive nor slender; then after a soft pad has been put on the head of the spar it should be placed under the axilla of the patient, who should be standing alongside the spar; then let his hand be drawn downward on one side and his body on the other, powerfully.	0.81700665
then his hand is pulled downwards strongly on the other side, and the joint will quickly return to its place;	Then the joint will immediately return to its place.	0.66692746
and if it will not return despite all these things that we have said, then do this treatment: take a firebrand two arms long and four fingers wide, which has a round end so it can be inserted deeply under the armpit, in this manner:	If it proves difficult to reduce it by any of the means we have stated, employ this treatment: take a wooden spar some two cubits in length, two fingers thick, and four wide; it should have a round head to facilitate its introduction into the hollow of the axilla; of this shape.	0.69297653
then tie soft cloths over the end of the stick, so that the stick does not injure the patient, then place it under the patient's armpit;	Then you bind on the round head soft rags so that the wood will not hurt the patient. Then it is placed under the patient's axilla, and his whole hand and arm are stretched down over the spar, which is to be bound down to the upper arm, the forearm, and the tip of the hand.	0.68461204
and extend his arm along the stick, and tie the shoulder to the stick, and the arm at the wrist, then place the arm on a rung of a ladder of sufficient width, and his hand should be extended downwards, and let the body hang on the other side: the joint will return to its place immediately.	Then it is placed under the patient's axilla, and his whole hand and arm are stretched down over the spar, which is to be bound down to the upper arm, the forearm, and the tip of the hand. Then let the arm be placed cross-wise over the rung of a ladder and the hand stretched downward, and let the rest of the body hang down on the other side; then the joint will very quickly go back.	0.8194313
And when it is in place, in whatever manner, you must put an even layer of wool under the armpit, then apply the prepared plaster of mill dust, with incense and egg white, over the whole shoulder and around, then tighten it suitably under the armpit, and turn the bandage over the plaster, and bind the hand to his neck, and let the hand remain thus.	Once it has gone back properly, in whatever way is possible, there should be put under the axilla a ball of wool of moderate size; then apply the plaster prepared from mill-dust with olibanum and egg-white, all round the shoulder. Then firmly bandage the ball under the axilla and carry the bandaging round over the plaster. Sling his hand from his neck, then let him be left without moving his hand for a week.	0.8124989
And he should eat little, until the limb is strengthened, for it will heal faster;	The patient's diet should be light until the limb gets strong, for that will hasten the cure.	0.653572
and then eat more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is firm and not soft, it is healed.	After five or seven days it can be unfastened and he can make trial of its movement; if it is firm and not slack then it is healed.	0.7542524
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come there, or for another reason, you must apply cauteries with three holes, as described above in the chapter on cauteries.	If the joint is frequently dislocated, on account of a humidity arising in it or some other cause, then use should be made of the cautery with three prongs spoken of earlier, in the book on cauterizations.	0.77076256
And if you do all this, and it loosens after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot lift his arm up, then know that the nerves at the top of the shoulder are cut or stretched or weakened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.	If you do all this and loosen the bandaging after a week and the joint is still not firm, and you repeatedly plaster it and bandage it, and it is still loose and comes down and dislocates and you are unable to raise it up, then you may know that the tendons at the head of the humerus are either cut through or stretched or loosened; in which case you may know that the joint will never stay firm in its place.	0.83504605
The dislocation which is near the chest, and the breasts, or behind, occurs from a push, and stretching of the hands, and there one applies another dressing;	As to the dislocation toward the chest and breast, and posteriorly, the reduction of this is done by thrusting and extension with both hands until it goes back.	0.59806085
and treat it until it is healed.	And apply the usual bandaging and treatment until it is healed.	0.63190466
And if after healing, stiffness comes to the limb, and slowness in movement, then the patient should use baths many times, until that stiffness is relieved, and returns to its former state.	If, after it has healed, a callosity arises in it, and it is slow in movement, the patient should take frequent hot baths until that callosity is softened and the member returns to its original condition.	0.7970654

chapter-3-subchapter-27.txt
of the dislocation of the elbow	On the treatment of a dislocation of the elbow.	0.55982375
Know that the joint of the elbow is dislocated with difficulty, and with difficulty returns;	The elbow is with difficulty dislocated and with difficulty put back.	0.6440384
and it is dislocated in all directions, and especially forward and backward, and the dislocation is not hidden, for it is clearly seen and felt; and dislocates according to each position. And when you compare the injured elbow with the healthy one, you can see it clearly. For the joint is separated, and he cannot bend his arm or touch his shoulder at all.	Now dislocation may be in all directions, and particularly forward and backward. Whatever way it is dislocated it will not be concealed from you, because it is both visible and palpable, and whenever you compare the dislocated elbow with the sound one it is quite openly and plainly manifested; for the elbow joint is hollow and the patient cannot flex the forearm back or touch his shoulder with it.	0.88335115
And you must reduce it before a hot abscess develops there, because if a hot abscess were to develop, it would be difficult to reduce;	You must hasten and reduce the dislocation as rapidly as possible before an abscess occur.	0.49564528
and perhaps it cannot be completely reduced, especially when it is at the back; it is worse than other dislocations, and more painful, and sometimes death results.	For if an abscess occur the reduction of it is difficult and maybe it will never be healed; especially when it is a posterior dislocation, for this is the worst and most painful of all the kinds of dislocation, and often it is fatal.	0.73300135
And the restoration, if it is such that it can be reduced, is that you extend his hand with your two hands; and his arm should be spread, and the physician's hands placed along the side, above and below, and push the joint with his thumbs together, or at the base of his palm, until it returns to its place.	Now when it is one of those that can be reduced, the way to reduce it is for an assistant to perform a two-handed extension of the patient's hand, the patient's forearm being opened out, while the doctor's hands are above and below the elbow joint and he thrusts the joint with both thumbs together or with the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.	0.807371
And if the dislocation is at the front, it is reduced when he bends his hand with his hand, and strikes with the base of the palm the side that is dislocated.	If it be an anterior dislocation, it may go back if the hand is bent sharply back until it strikes its own shoulder with the root of the palm.	0.6410292
And if it does not want to return to its place, then apply strong extension;	If the dislocation does not respond to reduction, apply very strong and powerful extension.	0.5945732
and two assistants should extend the arm, and two assistants should hold him, so that he does not move during the extension;	For this, let two assistants pull on the arm while two other assistants hold the patient against the extension.	0.66371095
then turn the arm in each direction, after you have wrapped it with a double-layered cloth, long and wide;	Then the arm should be rotated in all directions after the limb has been wrapped in a long folded cloth or a broad wrapper.	0.69694555
and when the physician has joined the joint with his hand, he should anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then push the joint firmly, until it returns;	When the doctor begins manipulating the joint he should anoint his hands with oil so as to assist, by its lubrication, the movement of the joint; then he should thrust the joint powerfully until it goes back.	0.80608016
and when it is in place, apply a dry plaster with some egg white, and bind it firmly, and suspend the arm from the patient's neck, and leave it for some days, then untie it.	After its reduction he should apply to it a plaster having some styptic and absorbent qualities, with egg-white; and put on a firm bandage and suspend the patient's arm from his neck and leave it for some days.	0.7642263
And if the joint is firm in its place, untie the bandage and leave it;	Then undo it; and if the joint remains fixed in its place, then untie the bandaging and leave it.	0.8076663
and if you see that the joint is not tight, reapply the plaster and the bandage, and leave it thus for some days, until it is firmly set; then untie it.	If you see that the joint is not thoroughly firm, replace the plaster and bandaging and leave it for a few more days until it is firm; then untie it.	0.9258019
And if he feels severe pain after the reduction of the joint, and it moves, bathe and rub it gently, and apply pressure until it is relieved; or you put on the joint a greasy sheep's bladder, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and have him enter the bath; and when he sweats, rub the joint temperately, then put the bladder back on, and then enter the bath;	If, after the reduction and unbandaging of the joint, it becomes stiff and is difficult to move, soften it in the bath and apply gentle friction and massage until it is softened, or apply to the joint the tail of a fat-tailed sheep; bind it on and leave it on for a day and a night; then remove it and send him to the bath, and when he sweats apply moderate friction to the joint; then replace the tail and again and again, alternating with the bath, until the joint softens.	0.8798739
and if you wish, put on warm, moist cow dung with butter, and bind it on;	If you prefer, apply to it, and bandage on, fresh cow-dung lightened with butter.	0.63774586
it will return to its proper position.	Do this a number of times and it will soften and return it to its original state.	0.43708736

chapter-3-subchapter-28.txt
Dislocation of the hand	On the treatment of a dislocation of the wrist.	0.430152
The joint of the hand dislocates, and the return is easier than other joints. However, it must be returned to its place quickly, at the very hour it is dislocated, before the area swells, or a hot abscess develops there.	The carpus of the hand is often dislocated. Unlike other joints, the reduction is easy, but there should be haste to reduce it as soon as it is dislocated, before the place swells or an abscess occur.	0.7823937
And the reduction is done by placing the injured hand on a table, and the practitioner extends the hand, and carefully sets it evenly, placing their palm over the appearance of the joint, and pushes until it returns to place.	The way of reducing the dislocation is to place the patient's wrist upon a board while an assistant stretches the hand, and the doctor puts the palm of his hand upon the prominence of the joint and applies pressure on it until it goes back.	0.7987355
However, you must check if it is properly in place; then have the patient place the back of their hand on a table for the extension and reduction. And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, the patient should place the back of their hand on the table, and the physician should place their hand over the appearance of the joint.	But he should examine: if it is a displacement toward the ventral aspect of the hand, the patient should place the back of his hand upon the board for extension and reduction; but if it be a luxation toward the dorsum of the hand, then the inner part of the hand should be laid upon the board so that the doctor's hand may come upon the prominence of the joint itself.	0.8348219
If it returns to place now, that is good. If not, bind it with soothing plasters for hot abscesses, and leave it thus without restarting.	If it go back at once, good; but if not, bandage it with a plaster that settles swelling and let it be.	0.7839637
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it in place after a few days, the joint will remain crooked;	Do not revert to it, for it will not tolerate that, and you will not be able to effect its reduction after some days have passed.	0.5562969
and it doesn't harm the patient except that the hand is weakened, and he cannot grip anything at all: then know that the nerves are cut, or the artery;	But the joint will retain its deformity; and the patient will in no wise be harmed except if his hand is slackened so that he be unable to grip anything; then you may know that the tendons are either severed or bruised.	0.7697772
so there is no other solution but to burn with a cautery next to the break, and perhaps nothing else will help.	In this situation there is no method but to strengthen it by cauterization; this sometimes helps but sometimes is of no use at all.	0.48075885
And when the hand is in place, apply the plaster that we have mentioned, then bind it and leave it for five days, then untie it and leave it like that.	When the reduction of the joint is complete, apply to it the plaster we have described, then bandage it and leave it for five days; then loosen it and try out the hand.	0.8034954
And if he cannot move it well, and there is some stiffness, then wet it with warm water, and rub it until it is healed.	If movement be hampered and any hardness occur in it, soften it repeatedly with hot water and sweating until it be softened.	0.70842385

chapter-3-subchapter-29.txt
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand	On the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.	0.5879748
Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated in any direction, sometimes on the back of the hand or on the palm;	The fingers may be dislocated in any direction.	0.51371026
then stretch the finger, and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns, then support the tip of the finger, and bend it toward the part where it is disjointed;	When one of the fingers is dislocated dorsally or ventrally, then extend the finger and thrust the dislocation with your thumb until it goes back.	0.6694319
and leave it for two days, and then set it straight that day;	Then bind the head of the phalanx, suspending it in the direction in which it was dislocated, and leave it for two days. Then unbind it and extend it so that it may straighten out all that day. Then at nightfall bind it in just the same way.	0.5811038
and at night bind it, as we have said, and unbind it during the day, and make it move, and bind it again at night;	Then unbind it and extend it so that it may straighten out all that day. Then at nightfall bind it in just the same way. Continue to loosen it by day and to exercise it with movement, bandaging it by night.	0.6686306
and do this often, until it is stable, and do the same if it is dislocated on the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed;	Do this for some days until it is knit. Do the same with it if it is a ventral dislocation, binding it in that direction, and treat it as explained above until it is healed.	0.64688957
and do the same, when it is dislocated elsewhere.	Do likewise with dislocations in other directions.	0.6682851

chapter-3-subchapter-30.txt
of the dislocation of the spine of the back	On the treatment of dislocation of the spinal vertebrae.	0.5938548
When the spine of the back or the neck is dislocated, or if there are several dislocated, there is no cure, because death quickly takes the patient.	When any of the vertebrae of the back or the neck are completely dislocated or a number of vertebrae are displaced, there is no treatment in this case for death is hastening toward the patient.	0.84581786
And the sign is that the excrement comes out involuntarily, and he cannot hold it, and often some limbs are paralyzed, either both thighs or both arms or one.	The sign of this is that the injured man passes a motion involuntarily, being unable to hold it back; often too some of his limbs go limp, either both legs or both arms or one of them.	0.83505094
And often the spine is displaced in four parts;	If, as often happens, a single vertebra is displaced, the displacement may be in any of four directions.	0.5846018
that which is displaced to the rear is called "gibbosity": (or hunchback)	When there is a displacement backwards it is called 'curvature of the spine'.	0.5490576
The treatment is that you look to see if the gibbosity has come from childhood: then there is no cure or healing at all.	As to its treatment: examine it; if the curvature dates from childhood then there is no treatment or cure at all for it.	0.7346803
And that which comes from a fall or blows or similar things, the ancients spoke of methods of treatment with grand words, where there is not much benefit in any of them;	As for the sort that occurs from a fall or a blow or the like, the Ancients indulged in lengthy dissertations thereon, giving many kinds of treatment, the greater part of which is of no use.	0.7004159
but I have shortened it according to my understanding, and have fashioned instruments in various ways.	But I have abbreviated from it, making a little which will serve in place of their much, consisting in my clarification and exposition of the sense. I have also depicted the instrument differently from their account and their explanation.	0.59447217
I say that for the gibbosity that comes on the chest in front, there is no remedy nor health;	I say then, that in a curvature occurring forward there is no technique or cure for it.	0.62711096
and also that which comes directly on both sides, and one cannot treat except properly that which comes on the back, as I say;	And likewise in a curvature laterally. The only curvature that can be treated is that of the dorsal spine exclusively, by the means I now describe.	0.57188165
and the patient should be lying on their face in a level place, and have padding beneath them so they do not injure themselves;	The patient should be stretched prone upon a level bench near a wall, and a soft palliasse should be spread under him so that his chest may not be hurt.	0.67893803
then firmly fix a firebrand in the ground at the head, and another at the feet, and tie a cord beneath the armpits of the patient, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;	Then wind round the patient's chest and beneath his axillae a soft strong wrapper, and stretch one end of the wrapper to the spar at his head, and tie it to it.	0.656038
and two assistants hold the cords, one at the head and the other at the feet, across the two firebrands;	Then bind other wrappers: over his hips, his knees, and by both tendons of Achilles; then bring the wrappers together and tie them to the other spar at his feet.	0.55539
and let them be firmly fixed, the firebrands as we have said, and the physician places his palms firmly on the spine until it returns to place.	Then each assistant extends the spar with the tie towards himself; the two spars will not shift from their places in which they are planted, but, as we have said, they are not to be fixed. Meanwhile the doctor is to press hard with both his palms upon the spine until it goes back; or he may place a board upon it and apply pressure to the board with his feet until it goes back.	0.57968473
And if it does not return by this treatment, then take a board three cubits long, and dig beneath the wall, and let the patient be on their side, and put the end of the board under the wall, then place the middle of the board on the spine; and let the physician place his feet on the other end of the board, and press firmly, until it returns to its place;	But if it does not go back under this treatment then let a board be taken, about three cubits long, and let a place be hollowed out in the wall, which, as we said, should be near the patient, into which you put the end of the board; then place the mid-point of the board upon the hump, and he—the doctor—should place both his feet on the other end and strongly thrust upon the spine until it is forced back into position.	0.87205
and if you wish, you can do this with a winch that is turned by hand. And you should place two firebrands at the patient's head, an arm's length away, and towards the feet two others, and there should be between each firebrand, above and below, a handspan of space in length;	If you wish you may operate by means of a winch turned by hand; thus: you fix in the ground at the head of the patient, at one end of the bench, two wooden spars each one cubit long; and the same at the lower end, at his feet; there should be the distance of a span between the spars (of each pair).	0.839739
and each firebrand should have a hole through which the winch runs, and the firebrands should be firmly fixed in the ground so that they do not move;	In each spar there should be a hole in which the shaft may run, and each spar should be firmly fixed in the ground so as not to move at all.	0.8000894
and between each two firebrands there should be a turning bar, around which the ropes turn, and on the two turning bars, two small bars a handspan long, to turn the winch;	Then you introduce a round piece of wood, the shaft on which the rope is wound, into the two openings of the two wooden spars. At one end of each shaft is a hole into which is firmly fixed a piece of wood a span long by which it is wound. Likewise with the other two spars.	0.646828
and then tie the rope that is through the armpits to the winch towards the head, and the other rope towards the feet to the other winch, and each of the assistants turns his winch with all the rope, and the physician places the spine straight as we have described.	Then bind the wrapper that you have bound round his chest to the shaft at the patient's head, and those bound round his legs to the shaft at his feet. Then have an assistant standing at each shaft to turn with his hand the handle by which the shaft is revolved, while the doctor straightens out the curvature in the way we have described.	0.8132106
And when it is straight, apply a desiccative plaster with plenty of egg, then the compresses, and then the splint of a small board three fingers long, so that it covers the place of the gibbosity and the healthy part of the vertebra, then tie it with a bandage, as we have said, and the patient should consume a light diet until he is healed;	After the spine has been restored and the place has been straightened it will be necessary for you to apply an absorbent plaster with egg-white, then packing, then over the plaster apply a flat splint about three fingers wide and long enough to cover the site of the curvature and several sound vertebrae on either side. Then let it be bandaged as is needful and let the patient follow a mild diet until he is cured.	0.7782606
and if any problem arises at the end of the healing process, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medications, along with the splint that we mentioned previously;	If after he is healed there still remains some prominence at the site, it will be necessary to employ remedies to relax and soften the parts, together with the use for a long time of the flat splint we described; in this case a leaden plate may be employed.	0.6409887
and sometimes a piece of lead is applied there, and sometimes the appearance arises in the last vertebra of the back, and it is thought to be a dislocation; and it is the bone that is showing, therefore one should not be presumptuous about it: perhaps it would cause death.	Sometimes there occurs a prominence at the end of the dorsal vertebrae, from which one may form the opinion that there is a dislocation, whereas it will be a superfluous bone that has become prominent; do not interfere with it by this treatment, for death may result.	0.8105389

chapter-3-subchapter-31.txt
Know that at the hip joints and at the shoulder joints only dislocations occur, not like in other joints;	You should know that a complete dislocation alone is sustained by the hip and shoulder joints; they do not sustain the lesser displacements, with concavity, as do the other joints.	0.7601448
and the hip joint is dislocated in four ways: inwards and outwards, and forwards and backwards;	Now the hip joint is dislocated in four directions, interior, exterior, posterior, and anterior.	0.78556955
and more inwards than elsewhere, and rarely dislocated forwards and backwards.	Most commonly it is dislocated interiorly; and rarely is it dislocated anteriorly or posteriorly.	0.67206824
And the sign of its inward dislocation is that when the injured leg is placed next to the healthy one, it is longer, and the patient's knee appears higher than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee to the buttocks; and the area close by is swollen with a hot abscess, because the head of the femur comes there.	The indication of an internal dislocation is that when you compare the patient's sound leg with the injured leg it will be longer and the knee will be prominent as compared with that of the sound leg; nor will it be possible for the patient to flex the foot back on the groin; and there will be an obvious swelling near the groin because the head of the femur has moved there.	0.8524196
And the sign of one that dislocates outwards is that these symptoms are opposite to the previous ones.	The sign of the occurrence of an external dislocation: the symptoms will be the exact contrary to these.	0.6750586
And the sign of one that occurs forwards is that they can extend their leg fully; however, they cannot bend the knee without pain, and if one wants to make them walk, they cannot move forward, and retain their urine, and the groin swells, and when they walk, they step on their heel.	The sign of an anterior dislocation is that the patient can stretch his leg out fully but cannot flex it without feeling pain in the knee; and if he tries to walk he will be unable to walk forward; and he has retention of the urine and his groin swells, and in walking he hobbles upon his heel.	0.8712226
And the sign of the one that occurs backwards, is that they cannot extend or bend their knee, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the femur is positioned under the ribs.	The sign of a posterior dislocation is that he cannot extend the knee, nor can he flex it before flexing the hip; also the leg will be shorter than the other, the groin will be relaxed, and the head of the femur will be evident at the lumbar region.	0.79964113
The reduction of this type of dislocation is such that you consider if the dislocation is old, and it remains fixed in its position, there is no cure; and there should be no attempt (to reduce it).	As to the reduction of the various forms of this dislocation, you must examine the case and if it be an old dislocation which the patient has suffered from for a long time and the reduction of which has not been contrived and which remains as it was, there is no treatment for it at all, nor should any be attempted.	0.725692
And in the one where the dislocation is fresh, and it's one of the four types of dislocations, you must hurry to replace the joint, extending it inwards and outwards, and moving it right and left; perhaps it will return (to its place), and no other treatment will be needed.	But in that case whose dislocation is recent, whichever of the four kinds of dislocation it be, hasten to rotate the joint and extend it internally and externally and move it to the right and the left; for often it will return and no further treatment will be needed.	0.82760227
And if it does not return in this way, then you must prepare a strong assistant, and extend the leg strongly with two hands, or with a strap that is tied above the knee; and another assistant should extend his hand from above in such a way that he puts his hands under his armpits, then tightens it with a soft band above the thigh; and another should hold the end of the strap;	But if it does not go back thus, you must have ready a sturdy and powerful assistant to extend the leg from below, either with both his hands or with a wrapper bound upon the leg above the knee; while another assistant pulls from above by putting his hands under the patient's axillae; then you should bind a soft wrapper upon the root of the thigh, with a third assistant to hold the end of the bandage.	0.89514333
and they all extend, upwards and downwards, at the same time, until the patient is lifted off the ground at once, and remains hanging.	Let them all make their extension simultaneously so the patient is lifted up bodily and remains suspended.	0.7089466
This method of extension is common to the four types, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.	This kind of extension is common to all four kinds of dislocation. If the dislocation goes back by the way we have said, good.	0.87749755
If not, then a treatment appropriate to its type must be applied.	Otherwise, each kind must have the special treatment I shall describe.	0.6603466
When the dislocation is inwards, you should lay the patient on his healthy side, then place the strap on the root of the thigh, and the place that is below the groin, then extend the strap upwards towards the groin, and towards the navel;	When it is an internal dislocation then the special reduction is for the patient to lie upon his sound side; then apply a wrapper to the root of the hip in the space between the head of the femur and the part below the groin; then carry the bandage upward from the groin toward the upper part of the body, in the direction of the clavicle.	0.80251765
then have another assistant take his arms, and embrace the thick part of the injured thigh, and extend it outwards strongly: it will return to its place immediately;	Then another powerful and sturdy assistant is to take hold of his arms while the thick part of the afflicted thigh is clasped and strongly extended outward; then it will return to its place.	0.8349484
and this type of dislocation is easier than the others.	This kind of treatment is easier than the others for the reduction of this limb.	0.67307127
And if you cannot fix it in this way that we have described, then you must tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong soft strap on both heels, and on both knees, and the injured leg should be extended two fingers more than the other;	But if you find it refractory and it does not answer to this method of treatment, then the patient's two feet will have to be bound together with a strong soft bandage round his two ankles and his two knees. The distance from each to the next should be four fingers, and the injured leg should be stretched two fingers beyond the other.	0.7432426
then let him be hung by the top of a piece of wood, and be two arm-lengths above the ground;	Then the patient is to reach upward and grasp any beam that may be in the house; he should be about two cubits from the floor.	0.5617138
then order an assistant to grasp the top of the thigh, and let another assistant hang with the patient, who firmly grasps the thigh, for the joint will return to its place quickly and suddenly.	Then tell a powerful servant to clasp the head of the hip and another servant to hang from the patient; and the other servant, the one who is clasping the hip, should thrust powerfully; then the hip will speedily go back.	0.765283
And when the dislocation is in the nape of the neck, the patient should lie down as we have described for someone with gibbosity, and tighten a strap on the affected leg firmly, and on the weight as well;	The special method of reduction in the case of an external dislocation: it will be necessary for the patient to be lying on a bench after the manner described for the one with a curvature of the spine; but wrappers are to be tied only on the injured leg and the chest.	0.59826946
then place two firebrands, one at the head and the other at the feet, then insert a firebrand between the patient's thighs amidst the mold/support; and have wet cloths placed around it, so that it doesn't injure the patient, then each assistant should stretch towards him, and the physician should set the dislocation evenly with his hand.	Then the two spars are to be set in position, one at his feet and another at his head; and have an additional spar firmly fixed in the middle of the bench and wrapped in soft cloth so as not to injure the patient; this spar is to be between his thighs so that he will not be dragged down during extension. Then each assistant is to pull in his own direction while the doctor sets the hip with his hands.	0.8781588
If it returns (to its place), that is good.	And if it goes back, good.	0.7002329
If not, put (him) on a table, and press as we have described for gibbosity, and have the patient lie on their healthy side.	But if not, place the board upon it and put pressure upon it just as we prescribed for curvature, except that the patient will have to lie upon his sound side.	0.7594581
And when the dislocation is forward, one must extend the affected leg quickly, and according to what I have said; and the physician should put his effort on the diseased groin, then press with the other hand, and extend it downwards towards the knee.	When it is an anterior dislocation, extension will have to be applied forcefully to the patient's leg, on the bench, exactly as described; the doctor should place the palm of his right hand upon the injured groin and then apply pressure with the other hand, directing the pressure so as to make extension downward toward the knee.	0.8432976
And if the dislocation is backwards, one should not extend the patient downwards, nor lift them off the ground, but rather they should be as if the hip were dislocated backwards, as we have said about lying on both hips; and (the patient) should be on their face, and the limb extended as we have said previously, and one should press on the joint against the table;	If it is a posterior dislocation the patient must not be raised above the ground and extended downward; rather must he be placed upon something hard, in the manner that we prescribed for an external displacement of the hip: he is to lie prone on the bench with the bands tied as we said before. It will also be necessary to apply pressure with the board to the site to which the joint has been displaced.	0.82009196
then bring the thighs together, and apply the plaster, and bind it with a bandage, so that the hip does not move;	Then loosen the bandage and the plaster, and compare the leg with the other.	0.5786712
and (the patient) should rest for three or four days, then unbind it, and apply the plaster again; and if you see that they are even, bind it as before, and leave it for three days;	But if you see any slackening then repeat: replaster and rebandage as you did at first, and leave for another three days. Then unfasten.	0.665184
then unbind it, and have him walk gently, until the limb is strengthened.	Then unfasten. He should be cautious about walking on it for some days, until it is thoroughly strong, God willing.	0.62926817

chapter-3-subchapter-32.txt
of the dislocation of the knee	On dislocation of the knee.	0.6934056
The knee can be dislocated in three ways: namely, inwards and outwards, and backwards;	The knee is dislocated in three ways; it is dislocated interiorly and exteriorly and inferiorly, that is, posteriorly.	0.86225677
and it does not dislocate forwards.	It is never dislocated anteriorly.	0.65908587
And the sign is that you ask the patient to bend their leg at the thigh, and if it does not bend at the thigh, you know that it is dislocated;	The sign of dislocation is to bid the patient flex his leg on his thigh, and if it does not reach the thigh you may know the knee is dislocated.	0.7941055
and the restoration of all of them is that you have the patient sit upright, and extend their leg if they can, and put your back against their face, and put their foot on your feet;	The way of setting all the types of dislocation is to make the patient sit down with both legs extended, if he can, with an assistant sitting behind him to hold him by the middle and incline him slightly backward.	0.64524543
then take their knee in your palms, and pull between your fingers, then bend both sides of the knee strongly; and another assistant extends their foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that they can bend their leg at the thigh easily;	Then do you yourself sit on his thighs with your back to his front, and put his leg between yours; then the palms of your hands should be applied to his knee, and join them together by twining the fingers; then with the palms put strong pressure on both sides of his knee while another assistant extends his foot until the knee goes back to its place. The sign of its return is that the leg can be flexed back easily and without hindrance upon the thigh.	0.85714746
and apply the plaster, and bind the leg to the thigh, and tie them together tightly for three or four days, then untie it;	Then apply a plaster and flex the leg on to the thigh and bandage them together for three or four days; then loosen them.	0.85377586
and the patient should not exert themselves to walk, until the limb is strengthened.	He should do little walking for some days until it gains strength.	0.46249482
And if the limb is not aligned, then the assistant applies strong traction, as we have described in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.	But if you cannot effect reduction by this method, apply powerful extension by bandages as we have described above for the treatment of the hip, until it goes back.	0.6637039

chapter-3-subchapter-33.txt
of the dislocation of the heel	On the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.	0.51851606
The heel is sometimes sprained, and sometimes completely dislocated, both inwardly and outwardly.	The ankle is sometimes slightly displaced, sometimes fully dislocated, the dislocation being either internal or external.	0.8713349
And the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and leans forward on the side where it is dislocated:	The sign of its dislocation is that you will see the ankle swollen, and projecting on the side to which it is dislocated.	0.6973282
The reduction is easy, and one should extend it gently with one's hands when it is only sprained.	As to the treatment of its displacement, the reduction of it is easy: if it is gently extended with the hands and straightened, it will go back.	0.5330564
And when it is completely dislocated, you must have the patient sit upright, and an assistant hold him firmly by the leg, above the ankle;	As to treatment when it is dislocated completely, you should make the patient sit upright with a strong and sturdy assistant holding him about the middle from behind.	0.7079836
then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left twice, then stretch it upwards, and gently push the foot upwards;	Then hold the dorsum of the foot with your right hand, and with the left grasp the foot from below about the heel. Then draw the foot toward you with your right hand, then with the left, twice.	0.8161366
and do this twice, as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot;	Do this as we have described, twice. Then thrust the metatarsus toward the leg a third time while exerting traction at the heel.	0.6330276
if it returns, that's good;	If it goes back in one or two attempts thus, and you see the foot is straightened, well and good.	0.46823108
if not, repeat the procedure, because it will return;	If not, repeat the operation and it will go back.	0.7458025
and if it cannot return this way, have the patient lie on their back on the ground, and firmly fix a stake in the ground between their thighs, and tie cloths around it so that it does not injure the patient;	If you find it impossible to reduce it by what we have said, make the patient lie on his back on the ground and firmly fix in the ground between his thighs a stake wrapped in material so as not to hurt him.	0.7504295
then let the assistant hold the thigh, and another assistant extend the foot with their hands or a cord, that they tie above the ankle; then each assistant extends evenly, and the stake should always be between the patient's thighs to hold the patient steady when extending;	Then an assistant should grasp his thigh and another assistant should extend the foot, either manually or with a cord tied round the narrow part of it; the assistants should pull one against another, with the stake upright between the patient's thighs holding him so that his body will not be dragged down with the extension.	0.89182615
then the physician evenly reduces the dislocation with their hands, and another assistant holds the healthy leg underneath, and the dislocation will return quickly.	Then the doctor should straighten out the dislocation with both hands, while another assistant holds down the sound leg; then the dislocation will speedily go back.	0.84547615
And when it is in place, apply the plaster and padding on top, and tighten firmly, and tie the foot to the leg, and watch the nerves that are on the ankle behind, so that the bandage is not too tight;	Then when the dislocation is reduced and the soundness of the reduction is manifested to you, apply a plaster and packing, bandage firmly and bind the foot downwards. You will have to be careful of the tendon above the ankle at the back, not to bandage tightly over it so as to injure it.	0.79682875
then leave it for two or three days, and if the bandage loosens, tighten it;	Then leave him for two or three days; and if the binding works loose, tighten it up.	0.9033456
then untie it on the third or fourth day, and forbid the patient from walking for four days; and if he walks before that time, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.	Then on the third or fourth day loosen it, but the patient is to abstain from walking for forty days, for if he tries to walk before this lapse of time you cannot be sure that the dislocation will not collapse and corruption set in and thereafter be incurable.	0.8340192
And if hot abscesses develop there, you must treat them as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.	If an abscess occur you must allay it by the application of such dressings and embrocations as we have already described more than once, until it is gone.	0.5613246

chapter-3-subchapter-34.txt
of the fingers When the fingers are dislocated, they must be gently extended without force, and this is an easy thing.	On the treatment of dislocation of the toes. Any that are dislocated must be straightened by means of gentle extension, without violence; that is not hard but positively easy.	0.70302147
And if the dislocation is in any joint of the back of the foot, you must make the patient sit on a flat surface or on a table, completely upright, and place your foot on the part of the joint that sticks out, then press firmly with your foot, until it returns;	If the dislocation be in one of the joints of the dorsum of the foot, the patient must set his foot on level ground or upon a board, standing as though walking. Then you must stand and put your foot on what protrudes of those joints, and put strong pressure upon it with your foot until it goes back and you see that it is evened out and there is no prominence at the place.	0.8117394
and when it is even, and nothing sticks out, place a two-legged table under the sole of the foot, then bind it tightly, and leave it for three days, then untie it; and let him rest until he is healed.	Then put under the sole of his foot a flat splint with two heads to take the whole foot, and bind it on with a tight and secure bandage for three days; then loosen it; but keep him from walking for a good many days until it binds and you are sure it will not revert, God willing.	0.7689004

chapter-3-subchapter-35.txt
of wound and dislocation together	On the kinds of dislocation that accompany a wound or a fracture or both.	0.43038017
When a wound occurs with the dislocation, and one wants to treat it, it often happens that the patient dies:	When anything of this kind happens and you attempt treatment and restoration, death is a frequent sequel.	0.5189296
so do not be presumptuous in the treatment, unless you are wise in the art and you have practiced it for a long time, and unless you are compassionate and merciful and careful, not reckless;	Therefore such treatment should be undertaken only by a person that is skilled in the art, has long experience, is dexterous, sympathetic, cautious, and not reckless or over-bold.	0.6867672
and at the beginning, use soothing things for a hot abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you see no hope of health; and when you see hope, then immediately return the limb to its place, before a hot abscess develops there;	To begin with he should apply only remedies for the allaying of abscesses and then leave the patient to Divine providence, unless, of course, the injury is light enough to give some hope of his escaping death; in which case you should set out to reduce it at once before an abscess arise.	0.70179677
and when the limb is in place, then administer things that soothe a hot abscess, and treat the wound, as appropriate, with drying ointments;	If the part goes back as you wish, employ the treatment for allaying abscesses and dress the wound with suitable desiccant ointments.	0.6201403
and if along with the dislocation there is a fracture, and small bone fragments separated, remove them, and do what we have said about simple maladies;	If it be a dislocation with a fracture and there occur splintered fragments in the bone, try to remove them, following therein the instructions relating to the simple diseases we have mentioned before in their place.	0.75954664
and beware of entering the path of fear, according to what I have said, for this benefits you according to your Creator, and for the safety of your soul and your body.	Use your utmost diligence; keep clear of entering upon a course with a dangerous outcome, as I have enjoined on you before. For this will best ensure the continuance of your prestige and safeguard your good name, God willing.	0.5902422

