preface.txt
Oh, my very dear sons, I have completed for you this book which is the last of the science of medicine, along with its completion, and have made the end through its expositions and its declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I complete it for you with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".	AFTER finishing for you, my sons, this book which is the part of knowledge dealing with medicine in its entirety; and having made it as clear and explicit as possible, I thought it well to complete it for you by adding this treatise which concerns surgical operating.	0.76893353
And because the work of hands is neglected in our region and is completely foreign, the science is lost and fragmented, and there remains nothing of it except the short descriptions in the books of the ancients which hands have copied. And from this has come error and vanity, and understanding is obscured and knowledge is driven away.	For the skilled practitioner of operative surgery is totally lacking in our land and time; so that the knowledge of it is on the point of being blotted out and its remains lost; and there is nothing left of it except a few traces in the books of the Ancients; where, however, it has been so corrupted by the hands of scribes, and subjected to error and confusion, that its meaning has become obscured and its value diminished.	0.8002136
Now it seems to me that I want to revive it with the organization of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will include with it the forms of cautery irons, and of other instruments of the work with the addition of the description and preparation of them, as is necessary.	Therefore I decided to revive this art by expounding, elucidating, and epitomizing it in this treatise; and to present the forms of the cauterizing irons and other operative instruments, since this is an adjunct to explanation and a vital necessity.	0.8017312
And because no good master of hands is found in our time, the art of medicine is diminished. And whoever undertakes it must excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen said, so much that he knows the arrangement of the limbs, and their forms and connections and separations, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and arms and their number, and the movement of the moving and resting veins, and the place of their origin.	Now this is the reason why there is no skilful operator in our day: the art of medicine is long and it is necessary for its exponent, before he exercises it, to be trained in anatomy as Galen has described it, so that he may be fully acquainted with the uses, forms, and temperament of the limbs; also how they are jointed, and how they may be separated; that he should understand fully also the bones, tendons, and muscles, their numbers and their attachments; and also the bloodvessels, both arteries and veins, with their relations.	0.84099275
And therefore Hippocrates said that the name with the name is much, and with the work is little; and especially in the art of the hand.	And so Hippocrates said: 'Though many are doctors in name, few are in reality, particularly on the surgical side.'	0.6812434
We tell you in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned above, let him beware that he does not fall into error and that he does not kill people; so that I have often seen many of those who meddle in this science and thus abandon themselves without knowledge and without experience.	We have already spoken of this in the introduction to this book. For he who is not skilled in as much anatomy as we have mentioned is bound to fall into error that is destructive of life. Thus I have seen many laying claim to this knowledge and boasting of it, but having neither knowledge nor experience.	0.7771743
For I saw a foolish doctor who cut into a scrofulous abscess in the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries of the neck; so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in his hands.	I saw an ignorant doctor incise a scrofulous tumour in a woman's neck; and he cut certain arteries in the neck so that the woman bled until she fell dead before him.	0.8767668
And I saw another doctor who extracted a stone from an elderly man, and the stone was large; he took with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.	And I saw another doctor presume to take out a stone from a man of advanced age. The stone was large; he rushed blindly at the task and extracted the stone and with it a piece of the bladder itself; and the man was dead in about three days.	0.93456614
And I had already been called there to extract it, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and I knew well that if he were cut he would die from it.	I had myself been previously called in to extract the stone but from what I saw of the size of it and the condition of the patient I judged that the outcome would be so.	0.6930748
And I saw another doctor who took into his care a duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound; and the doctor, full of ignorance, tightened the break over the wound with splints by strong binding, and left no opening at all for the wound, and left it like that for a while; and he ordered him not to untie it; and it remained like that until the leg was completely swollen and the foot as well, and it came to ruin.	I saw another doctor who had a regular salary from one of the high officers of our country for medical treatment. There had occurred to a negro boy of his a fracture of the leg near the heel, together with a wound; the doctor rushed in, in his ignorance, and bound up the fracture, over the wound, very tightly, with pads and splints, not allowing the wound to breathe. He then let him go as he wished and then dismissed him for some days bidding him not to loose the bandage. Eventually his leg and foot swelled and he was close to death.	0.8608542
I was called to come to him, and I hastened to come and unbind the leg; and when I had unbound it, he was at peace and felt no pain.	Eventually his leg and foot swelled and he was close to death. I was called in and made haste to loose the bandage, upon which some ease and reduction of the pain followed.	0.6602051
But all the same the infection was already established in the limb, and I could not heal it; and the infection did not stop spreading through the limb until the limb was completely lost.	Nevertheless, gangrene had already taken hold on the limb and I could not hinder its progress; it. continued to extend in the limb until he perished.	0.74175334
And I saw another doctor who lanced a festering abscess, and then it became inflamed through the incompetence of his treatment.	And I saw another doctor incise a malignant tumour; after some days the place broke out in open ulceration, thereby adding to the misery of the patient.	0.7408076
For a canker, when it is full of melancholic humor, should not be touched with iron unless it is in such a place that all that is corrupted can be removed.	For a cancer that arises from a melancholic humour should never be touched by the knife unless it should happen to be in a part of the body which may be removed thoroughly and in its entirety.	0.6729127
And therefore, dear son, you need to know that manual work is divided into two parts: namely, work where there is danger in many forms; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.	Wherefore you must know, my sons, that operative surgery is divided into two parts, namely, where operation is associated with the health of the patient, and, on the other hand, where it is for the most part fraught with danger. Throughout the following book I point out wherever I have described an operation that is accompanied by fear and danger.	0.72040546
Galen said in some of his admonishments: "Do not undertake to treat a bad disease, lest you be called a foolish doctor.	For Galen once said in certain of his admonitions: 'Do not treat mischievous maladies lest you get the name of mischievous doctors.'	0.8787497
I have divided this treatise into three chapters.	I have divided this treatise into three books:	0.9002188
The first chapter is about fire cauteries and sharp medicinal cauteries, and the chapter is organized from the head down to the feet; and about the forms of the instruments, and the cautery irons, and everything that is necessary for the work.	BOOK ONE. Concerning the actual cautery; and cauterization by caustics. It is divided into chapters set in order from the head to the feet. The shapes of the instruments are shown and the iron cauteries and all things necessary for operating.	0.7928997
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and cupping glasses and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and the chapter is organized with the forms of the instruments.	BOOK TWO. Concerning incision and perforation; blood-letting and cupping; wounds and the extraction of arrows and the like. The whole is divided into chapters in order; and illustrations of instruments are given.	0.8048222
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and sprains, and similar things; and it is organized from the head down to the feet, and with the forms of the instruments.	BOOK THREE. Concerning the setting of bones; dislocations; the treatment of sprains and the like. This is similarly divided into chapters set in order from head to feet, with illustrations of instruments.	0.76789093

chapter-1.txt
Before we recall the work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of the help and the harm of each complexion.	Before we expatiate on the actual operation of cautery it is necessary to mention its advantages and disadvantages and the temperament upon which it is to be used.	0.55329794
I say that the qualities of help and harm are the longest discourse and subtle science and hidden secret; and many wise men have spoken of this, and agreed on it; and their words suffice little for me, for I fear the length.	I say that a discourse on the advantage and disadvantage of cautery is a long one, a subtle learning, a hidden secret. A great number of wise men have spoken on the subject with differing opinions. Lest I should be over long I have reduced their opinions to a summary.	0.76858133
I say that cautery helps universally every complexion where there is matter, except for two complexions: that is to say, a hot complexion without matter, and a dry complexion without matter.	Now I say that the cautery has universal application for every ill constitution, whether organic or functional, with the exception of two: the functional hot temperament and the functional dry temperament.	0.65502316
In a hot and dry complexion together with matter, some disagreed and said that cautery is a great help there; and others said the opposite: that cautery is not good for an illness that comes from heat and dryness.	About the organic dry temperament the Ancients differed, some saying that cautery helps in a constitution of this kind, while others said the opposite: that cautery is of no use in a disease caused by heat or dryness; for fire is naturally hot and dry and it is obviously absurd to treat a hot dry sickness with a hot dry remedy.	0.8044735
For the nature of fire is hot, and a hot illness should not be treated by heat, nor by dryness; and he who said the opposite said that cautery is a great help for a hot and dry illness that comes into the body of men. For when you compare the body of a man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.	But he who holds the opposite view says that actual cautery may help in the case of such hot dry illnesses as arise in the human body; for when you compare the human body, humid as it is, with the nature of fire you find the human body cold.	0.74924815
And I agree with this statement. For I have sometimes found it by experiment.	I myself from much experience agree with this last opinion.	0.60294574
And in any case, no one should interfere except those who have experience and who know, by long use, the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of human complexions, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the occurrences and the length of time; we have no fear of other complexions, especially with cold and moist illnesses. And all the physicians assembled and agreed on the cautery.	However, no one should attempt this operation unless he has had long training and practice in the use of the cautery, and is fully acquainted with the various human temperaments, and the character of the complaints in themselves; their causes, symptoms, and duration. Concerning the rest of the temperaments there is no reason for fear, particularly the cold and humid distempers; all medical men are agreed and none differs concerning the utility of the cautery in such cases.	0.86489654
And know, son, that cautery with fire is among the secrets of cures, and of greater benefit than cautery with burning medicine.	Now you should know, my sons, that the actual cautery and its superiority over cauterization with chemical caustics is one of the secrets of medicine.	0.70055556
For fire is simple, and does not go beyond the limb that is burned, and does not harm other limbs except a little.	For fire is a simple substance having no action except upon the actual part cauterized; nor does it do more than slightly harm any adjacent part.	0.7784377
Burning medicines spread from one limb to another, and cause illnesses in the limb that are difficult to heal; and perhaps kill the patient. Fire, because of its loftiness and the goodness of its substance, does not do this, unless there is excess.	But the effect of cauterization with caustic may spread to parts at a distance from that burnt; and also in the part cauterized it may give rise to a disease difficult to cure or even fatal. Whereas fire, on the other hand, on account of the nobility of its nature and its superiority has no such effect unless it is overdone.	0.7237612
And this I have found through experiment and the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it was based on the truth of things; and therefore I excuse myself for the length of the speech, for I do not want to deprive you of the secret that lies in fire, and the quality of the work, how it expels illnesses from the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating it; now receive it in your thoughts.	That has become clear to us by experience through length of service, devotion to the art, and acquaintance with the facts of the matter. So I need not prolong this discourse. Were it not inappropriate to this my book I should relate to you a deep secret concerning fire, the manner of its action on bodies and its expulsion of diseases; with a reasoned philosophical discourse too subtle for your understanding.	0.7511455
And know, son, that they agreed on what time cauterizations should be done, and they chose spring.	Know also, my sons, that the Ancients disagreed also as to the fit time for cautery, affirming that spring was the best.	0.6595832
And I say that cautery is suitable in all seasons, because the sudden harm is lessened by the help of the cautery; and especially if the cautery is for necessary, sudden and urgent pains that cannot wait for the time when a greater malady might come to the limb.	Myself, I say that the cautery is suitable at all times; for whatever harm may arise from the season of the operation is utterly outdone by the benefit deriving from the cauterization itself; especially if the cautery is applied to pains that are severe, grievous, and swift, brooking no delay, because of the fear that the consequences may be more grave than the slight harm from the season.	0.83916533
And do not ever think, dear son, as the foolish physicians do; for the illness that is healed by cautery does not return; and they say so; but it is not as they think, because cautery is nothing but a medicine that changes the complexion, and dries the humors that are the cause of the pain, and is worth more than medicine because of the speed of its effect, and because of the virtue of its work and its mastery.	Nor let enter your minds, my sons, the groundless notion of the laity and of ignorant doctors, that the complaint cured by the cautery never comes back later; do not cleave to this opinion. The fact is not as they think; for the cautery is homologous to the drug which alters the constitution and dries up the humidities that give rise to disorders. But the cautery excels the drug by the rapidity of its success, the strength of its action, and the potency of its powers.	0.83915305
And it is possible that the illness sometimes comes according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the illness and its nature; and superfluities are gathered in him by the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless cautery is administered in a place where there are few superfluities and moisture, such as cautery of teeth for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.	It may be that the disease will return at some time according to the temperament of the patient, and the persistence and virulence of the disease; and from the formation of a mass of superfluities in the body; from his neglect of himself in acquiring them from food; and from causes of a similar nature. Of course, if the disease to which the cautery is applied be a slight one, and in a part only slightly liable to superfluities and humidities, as, for example, the cauterization of a molar tooth for toothache, and the like, then it may happen that the pain does not return; but that happens rarely.	0.8844105
And many people do not understand why cautery is called the last of medicines, and it is true; but they do not believe that cautery is useful after medicine, but their understanding is false, and cautery is the last of medicines because when we administer kinds of treatments for some illness and they are not effective, then we administer cautery, and it works. Then it is clear that cautery is the last of medicines, not according to the understanding of the foolish physicians.	For they believe that after cauterization no treatment, either with or without medicine, will help. It means something precisely the opposite: after various treatments have been applied to a certain disorder without success, then last of all we apply cauterization and this proves effective; whence comes about the saying that the cautery is the final remedy—not in that sense in which it is popularly held by the laity and by many ignorant medical men.	0.8270449
The ancients said that cautery with a gold instrument is better than with iron, and they said this only because of the quality of gold and because of the excellence of its substance; and they said that the site of the cautery does not suppurate, but this is not true for I have tested it, and have found that it is true in some men; and gold cautery is better than iron, as they said.	The Ancients have stated that cauterization by gold is more effective than by iron. Now they said that on account of the temperateness of gold and its noble character. They also stated that the site of cauterization does not become purulent, but that is not absolutely so; for I myself have experience of that and have found that it happens in some cases and not in other cases.	0.84799993
And yet when you heat a gold instrument, you do not know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools down quickly; and if it is heated too much, it melts in the fire; and thus there is considerable impediment.	Cauterization by gold is indeed better and more successful than with iron, as they have stated; except that when you are heating the gold cautery in the fire you are uncertain, by reason of the redness of the gold, when it reaches the desired temperature. In addition to this it cools very quickly; and if you overheat it it melts in the fire, melts and runs, and the practitioner finds himself in difficulties.	0.7586317
And for this reason we use iron cautery because we have it better prepared for our work.	Therefore in our own opinion cauterization is swifter and more successful with iron.	0.48999128
Now I have arranged this chapter from head to toe, so that the way is easier to find.	Now I have arranged this book on cauterization by chapters, set in order from the head to the foot, to make it easy for the seeker to find what he wants.	0.7592875

chapter-1-subchapter-1.txt
This cautery is good for moisture and coldness on the brain, and there are two that are made for a disease called "soda", and for many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and for a multitude of dreams and toothache and sore throat, and especially for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis and lethargy and apoplexy and similar illnesses.	This cauterization helps against excessive humidity and coldness on the brain, which cause headache, abundance of defluxions from the head to the regions of the eyes and ears, excess of sleep, toothache, sore throat, and in general any sort of disorder arising from frigidity, such as palsy, fits, apoplexy, and diseases similar to these.	0.70099187
The method for this cautery is that the patient be purged by a dissolving medicine cleansing the head for three or four nights, according to what the strength, age and constitution of the patient can bear; and then shave the patient's head.	The manner of performing this operation is first to bid the patient open the bowels with an evacuant which will also clear his head, for three or four nights, according to the strength, age, and habits of the patient.	0.8531958
Then have him sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on his chest; then place the base of your palm on the bridge of his nose between his two eyes; and where your middle finger falls, bleed from there, then heat the cautery which is called "olive-shaped", of which this is the form:	Then tell him to have his head shaved; then seat him cross-legged before you, with his hands on his breast. Then place the lower part of your palm upon the root of his nose between his eyes; and where your middle finger reaches mark that place with ink. Then heat an olivary cautery.	0.83860433
And the ancients said that the longer the wound remains open, the more it is purged; and for this it helps to change dressings.	The Ancients said that the more a wound is kept open, discharging pus, the better and more efficacious.	0.68091893
And some of these said that one should leave the cautery until part of the bone is burned, and then cut away what is burned from the bone, and it should be treated.	Some said the skin was to be cauterized through to the bone and the cautery held until some of the thickness of the bone was burnt. Then the burnt bone was to be scraped out, then dressed.	0.77489734
And others say that one should leave the cautery on, and push so hard that one lowers the bone as wide as a whorl that women put on their spindles so that the humors come out more easily; and one should leave the wound open for a long time; then one should clean and solder it.	Then the burnt bone was to be scraped out, then dressed. Others said that the cautery should be carried through to burn a deep impression in the bone so that there should come out of the bone a piece shaped like a grain of a carob tree or a small spindle-whorl; they asserted that the vapours of the head would be exhaled through this place. The wound should be kept open a long while, then dressed until healed.	0.7219944
And these two ways of cauterizing do not seem to me to be good at all, except in some men where there is a way of fear; and it seems to me that I should leave it; for the head is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we witness in other limbs; and even when the patient's head is naturally weak, the first type of cautery is safer and better for me, and this one I use in all work, with salvation.	But these two methods of cauterization I do not consider right except on certain men; and I regard them as risky. In my opinion, to let the patient alone is preferable and safer, if it is to be. For the head is weakened when its natural continuity is broken, as we see in other parts, and particularly when the patient's head is weak by nature. In my opinion the first type of cauterization is safer and better; therefore use that and be safe.	0.83822155

chapter-1-subchapter-2.txt

chapter-1-subchapter-3.txt
of the cautery of the head When a sudden pain comes in one part of the head, and the illness extends to the eye, and the head has been purged by cleansing medicines, and the other treatments that I mentioned in the division of illnesses have been done, and all this is not effective: then make cauteries for him in two ways, that is to say with a sharp medicine and with iron.	When there occurs pain with headache in one side of the head and the pain extends to the eye; and the patient has cleared his head with purging drugs and there has been applied the other treatment that I have mentioned in the sections on diseases, but to no avail; in this disorder cauterization is of two sorts, either with caustic or with the actual cautery.	0.82707524
The cautery with sharp medicine is that you take a clove of garlic, and remove the skin and cut it a little at both ends, and then split the temple where the pain is in such a way that you can put the clove of garlic under the skin; and when it is put in, bind it and tighten it well and leave it like that for twelve hours; and then untie it and pull out the clove of garlic, and leave the wound like that for two or three days; then put on cotton dipped in butter until pus comes out.	This is the manner of cauterization with caustic: take one clove of garlic; peel it and cut both ends off; then cut open the site of the pain in the temple with a broad scalpel till there is room to contain the clove under the skin; then introduce it under the skin till it lies completely hidden. Then bind up the wound tightly over it with pads and leave for fifteen hours; then unbind it, remove the garlic, and leave the wound open for two or three days; then apply cotton wool soaked in butter till it suppurates.	0.8910179
Afterward treat it with ointment until it is healed; and if you wish, do this with some burning medicines that I have written about in the twelfth treatise on burning medicines.	Then dress with ointment till it heals. If you would rather, you may carry it out with one of the caustic drugs that I have included in the eighteenth treatise, on caustics.	0.8544863
The cautery with iron is in this manner. Heat the cautery, of which this is the shape:	The actual cauterization with iron should be done in this way: heat a cautery of this shape.	0.7073411
And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a nail where it has a little curvature, and in the middle has a small appearance; and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and turn the iron a little lightly, so that half the thickness of the skin is burned; and lift your hand so that the artery, which is outside, does not burn, and from which an abundance of blood flows.	It is called the claviform; the head is nailshaped in that there is a slight curvature with a small protuberance in the middle. Apply it then to the site of the pain, hold your hand steady and revolve it little by little. Let the thickness of skin burnt be about half; then remove your hand so as not to burn a subjacent artery, for thus a haemorrhage arises.	0.76668245
Afterward, put cotton in salt water, and place it on the spot for three days; then put cotton soaked in butter there, and then treat the area with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery that is called "cultellar", use just the tip, and be careful not to cut the artery in this migraine which is not old.	Then soak some cotton wool in saline, apply to the place, and leave three days; then apply cotton wool with butter; then treat with ointment till it heals. Or if you prefer you can cauterize this migraine with the knife-edge that juts out from the cautery; but be careful not to cut an artery, specially in this kind of migraine that is non-chronic.	0.8549292

chapter-1-subchapter-4.txt
of migraine	On the cauterization of chronic migraine.	0.46337217
And if you see that this cauterization is not sufficient for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you wish, administer the cautery that we mentioned in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two blades; and this cautery is better than the other and more helpful.	But if you see that this cautery is not enough for this disorder and you see that the patient is of bodily fitness for it, cauterize him in the middle of the head as we have described, and treat the wound till healed. If you prefer, employ that cauterization which we have described in the chapter on the extraction of an artery, with the cautery of two blades; for that is a cauterization better and more effective than this.	0.91360027

chapter-1-subchapter-5.txt
of ear pain from cold	On cauterization of pain in the ears.	0.5240457
When pain from cold occurs in the ear, and one has applied dissolving medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, and the pain does not change, then heat this cautery which is called "point," of which here is the form:	When the ear gets a pain from the cold and is treated with laxatives and other medicine as mentioned in its section and the pain nevertheless persists, heat the cautery termed 'punctate'.	0.79807055
Afterward, prick all around the affected ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and stay a little above the base of the ear after you have marked the spot with ink; and make ten pricks around each ear; then treat the area until it is healed.	Then after it has been heated prick with it in a circle right round the ear, or around both if there is pain in both, after the place has been marked with ink; the cauterizations being a little away from the ear. Let the cauterization be of ten punctures or thereabouts round each. Then dress the places till healed.	0.89201784

chapter-1-subchapter-6.txt
of the contortion/spasm of the mouth	Cauterization of the twisted mouth.	0.42356312
Contortion/spasm that should be treated with cautery is only that which arises from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of illness; and do not apply cautery to similar conditions that come from dryness and nerve spasm.	The twisting of the mouth which is curable with the cautery is of that nature which arises from phlegm, as we have already noticed in the sections on sicknesses. But cauterization is to be carefully avoided in that type which is due to dryness or spasm of the tendon.	0.7446888
When you treat this type of contortion/spasm that arises from phlegm with purges and head cleansings and gargles, and that is not effective, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the base of the ear, and another a little outside the temple, and the third at the joining of the two lips; and place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and make the cautery next to the top of the ear a little below the crown of the head, and another on the temple as long as a thumb; and leave the cautery in place until half of the core is burned; and this is the form of the cautery: And the appearance is like the small knife that we have described before, but it is a little more slender and the blade should be a little thicker; afterward treat the area as I have said before, until it is healed.	When this kind of deformity has been treated with electuaries, errhines, and gargles, and your treatment is ineffective, you should use three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear; the second a little below the temple; and the third at the junction of the lips. Let your cauterization be on the opposite side to the affected side, for the relaxation will arise in the side which seems normal. The form taken by the cauterization is that you burn him a little below the frontal prominence, on a level with the upper tip of the ear, and also on the temple the length of the thumb; carry the burning to a depth of about half the thickness of the skin. The shape of the cautery.	0.82870984

chapter-1-subchapter-7.txt
When apoplexy is chronic and you treat it as we have said, and it is not effective, and the patient does not have a fever, then make four cauteries: two on the two corners/temples of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one in the place that is called "vessels" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the pit of the stomach; and it should be treated as we have said before.	On the cauterization of a chronic apoplexy. When an apoplexy has lasted a long while and has been treated by those methods we have given and your treatment has been ineffective but the patient has no fever, then burn him with four cauterizations: one on each frontal prominence; one in the middle of his head as we have described; and one at the back of the head as has been said. The shape of the cauteries to be as before.	0.8162166

chapter-1-subchapter-8.txt
of lethargy	On cauterization for lethargy due to phlegm.	0.40648583
For this illness it is necessary to give the patient strong herbs and pills cleansing the brain; afterward shave the patient's entire head, and apply to the occiput a mustard plaster, which is described in the treatise on plasters; and this is the method of cauterization: apply it as I have said.	First, great electuaries should be given to the patient to drink; and pills to clear the head. Then let his whole head be shaved and apply a mustard plaster to the hinder part as described in the treatise on plasters. That should be applied several times as it is a kind of cauterization; do it in the very way described there.	0.79500353
If he is healed thus, good; and if not, then make three cauteries from the middle of the head descending down to the neck, and have a space between each cautery of one finger's width; and treat it like the others, and if you wish to add to it, and the patient is tolerant, make a cautery in the middle; and if necessary, two others on the two temples, and treat it until he is healed; and let the cautery be the one called "olive-shaped", as I have said before.	That should be applied several times as it is a kind of cauterization; do it in the very way described there. If he is cured, well and good; but if not, burn him with three cauterizations on the back of the head, arranging them in a row downward from the upper part of the head to the base of the neck; and make an interval between each pair of one finger's breadth. Then treat as aforesaid. If you wish to add to these cauterizations and the patient be fit to bear it, give him a burn in the middle; and if still more, then burn him on the two frontal prominences.	0.88005686

chapter-1-subchapter-9.txt

chapter-1-subchapter-10.txt
of epilepsy	On cauterizing for epilepsy.	0.49934477
The epileptic should not use cautery except for the one who is phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first cleanse the brain with herbs and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section when the patient is strong and able to tolerate medicine.	The epileptic who may be cauterized is he whose epilepsy arises from phlegm. When the patient is an adult and can stand taking the drugs, he should first purify his brain by great electuaries and the rest of the treatment mentioned in that section.	0.7489301
And if it is a child who cannot tolerate it, make him gargle and chew things that cleanse the brain often with good foods; afterward shave the middle of his head, and make a cautery there according to what we have said before, and a cautery on the forehead, and on each temple; and if the patient is strong and tolerant, make cauteries as I have said for the one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and the neck, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the manner I have described.	But if it be a boy unable to tolerate the drugs he should employ gargles and medicaments to chew, to clear his brain, for several days beforehand, with an improvement in his diet. Then let his head be shaved and burn him with the single cauterization on the middle of the head in the manner described before, and with one cauterization on the occiput, and one on each frontal prominence; and, if the patient be fit and able to bear it, add those additional cauterizations on the cervical and dorsal vertebrae that we have already described for paralysis and for flaccidity. The cautery should be olivary, the shape before described.	0.84967446
If the patient is a child, make a subtle cautery in this manner:	If the patient be a boy, use a fine cautery.	0.74083984

chapter-1-subchapter-11.txt
When because of melancholia the superfluities or the humors are corrupted and the phlegm is thick, then cauterize him with such cauteries as we have described for the one who has paralysis.	When the cause of the melancholy be corrupt humours and a thick phlegm, burn him with those cauterizations mentioned in the case of the paralytic.	0.755635
And if because of melancholia the superfluity tends towards melancholia, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him to drink something by which the brain is cleansed, according to what is stated previously in the section.	If the cause of the melancholy be a redundance of humour turning to black bile, and the patient's body be humid, make him drink that which will purge his head as described in a previous section.	0.8153498
Afterward shave the head of the patient; then make a well-made compress of linen, like a circle, and place it in the middle of the head; and let the patient be seated cross-legged, and be well held on all sides; then present the ointment, and aged sheep's butter is good; and warm it moderately over a fire, so that the finger, when placed in it, can bear it; then empty the circle inside the middle of the head, and let it cool; and do this to the patient every week once with other good treatment, until he is healed.	Then shave the patient's head and apply a compact ring-bandage of linen and put it round the middle of his head. Have him sit cross-legged, held firmly on all sides. Then take a pound of stale sheep's butter and warm it on the fire to a moderate heat so that a finger put in can bear it; then pour it out on the middle of the head inside the circle of the bandage and leave it till it has cooled. Do this once a week with other efficacious treatment till he is cured.	0.9082306
Or if you wish, cauterize him by making several points with the entire cautery.	If you wish, burn him with multiple small puncture cauterizations; nor press long on the cautery but let this cauterization be only just punctured.	0.48548394
This manner of cautery moistens the brain evenly; and then place on it cotton soaked in butter and chicken fat.	For this kind of cauterization will moderately moisten the brain. Then let cotton soaked in butter or hen's grease be applied.	0.7631719

chapter-1-subchapter-12.txt
of the water of the eyes When water first comes to the eyes, by the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink that cleanses the head, and protect him from all moisture, and make him sweat in a bath several times while fasting.	On cautery in cataract of the eye. When by those signs I have mentioned in the relevant section there is brought to your notice the beginning of a cataract of the eye, start with draughts for the patient such as shall cleanse his head; and guard him from all humidities. Make him also sweat for some days, fasting, in the bath.	0.75529826
Afterward, have him shave the back of his head, and make a cautery in the middle of the head, and make two cauteries on the two temples if the flow of water is in both eyes, or one if the flow is in one; and with the cautery burn all the veins and arteries that are below the heart, and let the cauteries be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, staunch it with such power as you have.	Make him also sweat for some days, fasting, in the bath. Then tell him to have his head shaved; and burn him with one cauterization in the middle of the head; then cauterize him with two burns on the temples if the cataract is beginning in both eyes; or on the one side only if it is in one eye. And with the cautery cut all the subcutaneous veins and arteries; and let the cauterizations be long, across the breadth of the temples. Beware of haemorrhage; if you see any, stanch it straight away with any means you can.	0.85966337
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision the precaution of how you will staunch it; and sometimes one makes a cautery or cauterization below the two bones behind.	We shall deal later on with the method of extraction and cutting out of arteries, and provision against haemorrhage. Two strong cauterizations are sometimes made on the back of the neck below the two bones.	0.7178833

chapter-1-subchapter-13.txt
When the tears of the eyes are long-standing and habitual and are on the veins, or near the arteries that are visible on the outside of the head; and one sees that it is from cold phlegmatic superfluities, then make the cautery that I mentioned at the beginning of the water descending to the eyes: one cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries or cauterizations below the two bones; and if there is more need, cauterize it carefully above the eyebrow with a small cautery.	When tears are constantly in the eye and arise on account of the arteries and veins visible on the outside of the head, and you are sure that they are from cold thick phlegmatic superfluities, burn him with the very cautery that I taught for the beginning of cataract, namely, a cauterization in the middle of the head and two on the temples, and two on the back of the neck below the two bones; and, if you are compelled to add more, one cauterization on the side of the outer corner of each eye at the end of the eyebrow, with a small cautery.	0.892012

chapter-1-subchapter-14.txt
When you treat it according to what we have said in the section, and it does not help, then give the patient to drink for three nights boiled things; afterwards shave the head, and make a cautery in the middle of the olive-shaped cautery; and make two cauteries of the cautery which is called "clavilis" on the two eyebrows, a little below the hair; and beware of the artery so that you do not cut it.	When you have treated foetor by those methods given in its section and your treatment is unsuccessful, give the patient laxative draughts for three days; then shave his head; and burn with a median cauterization with the olivary cautery; then cauterize him twice above the eyebrows a little below the hair with a claviform cautery. Beware of cutting the artery. The figure of the claviform cautery.	0.7704787

chapter-1-subchapter-15.txt
When the eyelid is softened by illness and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery, which is called "olivare". (or "olive-shaped")	When an eyelid droops either from disease or humidity, then burn the lid with a single cauterization with this crescent-shaped cautery.	0.5655012
And if you wish, make two cauteries on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are; and do not remove the hand until a third of the eyelid is burned, in the manner I have described.	And if you wish burn him also a little above the eyebrows with two cauterizations (; that is, one) on each side; but keep clear of the temples; and let each cauterization be of the length of the eyebrow. Nor let your hand apply the cautery longer than to burn a third of the way through the skin.	0.75042534

chapter-1-subchapter-16.txt
of the hair that pricks the eye Sometimes it happens that the eyelashes turn inwards and prick the eye, and for this, cauteries are made in two ways: namely with fire, or with a burning medicine.	On cauterization of the eyelid when the eyelashes are turned inwards, irritating the eye. The cauterization is of two kinds, by fire and by caustic.	0.6675111
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.	Cauterization by fire will be thus: tell the patient previously, if he is one of those who pluck the lashes, to let them grow till they are long and straight; and if during growth they irritate him, bind the eyes with a fillet so as not to move till they have grown.	0.74520934
When they grow and are even, then place the patient on your lap; then draw on the eyelid a figure like a myrtle leaf, and let the beginning of the mark be near the hairs; then put cotton moistened with egg white and psyllium mucilage on the eye, then heat the cautery which has this shape:	When they have grown and are straight, put the patient's head in your lap and mark upon the eyelid with ink the shape of a myrtle leaf, beginning near the lashes. Then apply cotton wool soaked in egg-white or mucilage of psyllium seeds. Then heat a cautery of this form.	0.8994157
Then cauterize the figure you have drawn little by little many times, so that the flesh is burned there; and the sign of the success of the procedure is that you see the eyelid retract, and the hairs raised at the edge of the eye; then remove your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then put cotton moistened with butter until the burn is healed; then treat it with ointment until it is healthy.	Then burn over the shape marked out, slowly, with many small strokes, till the whole surface of the skin marked out to the shape of the myrtle leaf be cauterized, specially the outer part of it. It will show the correctness of your work if you see the eyelid contracted and the lashes risen away from the white of the eye. Then remove your hand and let him be for three days. Then apply cotton wool soaked in butter till the scab falls off; then treat the place with ointment till healed.	0.8495969
And if after this the hairs return and the eyelid is softened, then repeat the cautery on the same spot, as you did the first time; and if the hairs are destroyed, cauterize it until the eyelid is raised to its natural position, and is even, and the hairs do not prick the eye.	But if after an interval there be a return of the same condition of the eyelash and of drooping of the eyelid, repeat the cauterization in the same place just as you did before. And if it be in the lower lid cauterize this also till it falls back to its normal position and the hairs do not irritate the eye.	0.8086286
When you have done this for a while, remove the medicine with your finger. And when the burning sensation has passed, lift the spot with water, and look to see if you see the eyelid raised as if it had been raised by the force of fire or by incision; and if it is so, it is good.	While the stinging lasts, let the caustic remain on and move it about with your finger; and when the stinging dies down take away the caustic and wash the eye with water; then look, and if you see the eyelid raised up as by a blepharoplasty, either by fire or by incision, good.	0.8139702
If not, then apply more medicine to the place where the medicine has not worked, until your work is even and your eyes are aligned; then apply cotton moistened with butter until the burned skin falls off, afterwards treat the area with the ointment called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.	If not, repeat the caustic application in the place that the drug has not affected and which has not gone black, until your operation is complete and the eyelid draws together. Then apply cotton wool with butter till the crust of the burn falls away; then treat with Palm ointment or the like till it be healed.	0.7686229
And you must take great care in your work, being very careful that none of the medicine falls into the eyes.	But in your operative procedure take the utmost care lest the least bit of caustic get into the eye.	0.6735014
And if the eyelid becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick the eye, reapply the medicine to the softened area of the eyelid, just as you did before; then treat it until it is healed; and this is the shape of the myrtle leaf:	And if, after some days, the eyelid be relaxed and some eyelash irritate the eye, then repeat the application, particularly in that part of the lid that has dropped, in the same manner as before; and treat till cured. This is the shape of the myrtle leaf.	0.82501143
And know that people's eyes are different in size, and your restraints should be adjusted accordingly; and the right way is not revealed to one who is studying this art.	You should know that the human eye varies in size; so let your contracture be in proportion to this. The right procedure is well known to him who has experience in this art.	0.7642338

chapter-1-subchapter-17.txt
on the treatment of fistula by cautery	On cauterization of a fistula in the angle of the eye.	0.5220345
When you treat a fistula as we have described in the sections on diseases, and your treatments are not effective, then you must cauterize it in this way.	When you have treated a fistula in those ways mentioned in the sections on diseases, without success, it should be cauterized after this manner.	0.87603366
Then squeeze the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus, and dry it; and if it is closed, open it, and draw out the matter; then apply the very hot cautery, and hold your hand on the cautery on the side of the nose above the eye, so that your hand does not make a mistake; and place the cautery in the fatty tissue of the eye, and destroy it.	Then press on the fistula if it be open and get the matter out of it and wipe it away; or if it is not open, then open it. Then apply to it the cautery, which should be very hot, and press it in with your hand till it reaches the bone. While you are burning keep the hand away from the eye slightly toward the nasal side, lest your hand slip or the patient draw away so that you put the cautery into the ball of the eye and destroy it.	0.85755515
If you reach the bone at the beginning of the cauterization, that would be good. If not, repeat the cauterization once more, and again if needed, and leave it for three days; then apply cotton soaked in butter, and treat it with the desiccative ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, apply a sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and treat it according to what is appropriate in its chapter.	And if you reach the bone at the first cauterization, good; if not, repeat the cauterization if necessary. Leave it a few days, then put on cotton wool with butter and treat with hygroscopic ointment till it heals. And should forty days have passed and it does not heal, apply a sharp corrosive ointment so as to expose the bone, and strip it as will be explained in the appropriate chapter.	0.89158916
And there is a method of cauterizing a fistula that some of the ancients described. Make an incision in the fistula, and split the area; then put in the incision a thin reed whose form is as follows: and make it the size of a lead weight of 3 [units]; and hold your hand or the reed firmly, and the patient should not move at all, so that the melted lead does not run into his eye; and it is necessary to place over the patient's eye cotton soaked in egg white or water: the lead burns the fistula site, and heals it with marvelous efficacy.	Another method of cauterizing a fistula is that which some of the Ancients mentioned: apply yourself to the site of the fistula and incise it; then insert into the incision a fine funnel, this being the figure of it, and pour into it a drachm of molten lead; and keep your hand on the funnel, holding it firm all the time, and do not let the patient move at all, lest the molten lead run into his eyes. Then you should put cotton wool soaked in egg-white or water upon the patient's eye. For the lead cauterizes the site of the fistula and acts as a marvellous cure.	0.8855047
And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization we have described, that is good. If not, then it is necessary to administer medication through the syringe and return the fistula to the body of the syringe as appropriate to its proper place.	If the fistula heals by the cauterization and medication we have described, well and good; otherwise perforation of the nose will undoubtedly have to be undertaken to lead the fistula into the meatus of the nose, by the technique that will come in its own place.	0.79283416

chapter-1-subchapter-18.txt
of cracks in the lips Very often cracks occur in the lips, which are called "poil" (hair), and especially in the lips of children.	There often occur fissures in the lip to which are given the name 'hairs'; they are particularly common in the lips of boys.	0.78792924
When you treat these cracks with what we have described in the sections, and the treatment is not effective, then heat a small knife-shaped cautery as follows:	When you have ineffectually treated these clefts with those things that we have mentioned in their section, then heat a small edged cautery of this shape. The hollow should be as sharp as a knife.	0.79515874
And place it quickly into those cracks until it reaches the bottom; afterward treat the area with a cerate until it is healed.	Then quickly place it, hot, right on the fissure till the burning has reached the depth of the lip. Then treat with wax plaster till healed.	0.7491603

chapter-1-subchapter-19.txt

chapter-1-subchapter-20.txt
And in this way the tooth that was loose is strengthened, and the softened gum tightened, and the corrupted moisture dried.	Then the loose tooth will be made firm, the relaxed gum will be tightened, and the corrupt humidity will be dried up.	0.7948111

chapter-1-subchapter-21.txt
of the pain of the teeth	On cauterization for toothache.	0.41346213
When toothache comes from cold, where there is cold or a worm, and medicinal treatments are ineffective, then cautery is necessary in two ways: cautery with butter and cautery with fire.	When the toothache arises on account of cold, or if there be a worm in the tooth, and medical treatment does not avail, then cauterization should be undertaken. There are two ways of doing this, one with butter, the other with the cautery.	0.8401722
Cautery with butter is such that you take cow's butter, and melt it in an iron or brass spoon; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, and soak it in boiling butter, and apply it quickly to the aching tooth and hold it there until it cools; and do this often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you wish also soak wool and cotton in cold butter, and place it on the aching tooth, and apply a hot iron until the heat reaches the end of the tooth.	Cauterization with butter is done thus: take cows' butter and let it boil in an iron ladle or pan; then take cotton wool, wind it round the top of a probe, and dip it in the boiling butter and quickly apply it to the aching tooth and hold it there till cold. Repeat this a number of times till the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth. If you prefer, dip wool or cotton in cold butter and put it on the aching tooth, then on top of that apply the hot iron until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.	0.92961335
The cautery with fire is as follows: you take a rod of iron or brass, thick enough so that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth; then heat the cautery, the shape of which will come later, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand there until the cautery cools; do this often, for the pain will be removed that same day or the next.	The actual cautery is administered thus: take a tube of bronze or iron with some thickness in the body of it so that the intensity of the fire does not reach the patient's mouth. Then heat a cautery whose figure will be given shortly, and apply it to the tooth itself and hold your hand until the cautery gets cold. Do this several times over; the pain will certainly depart the same day or the next.	0.9035784
And the patient must fill his mouth with good butter immediately after this cautery, and then spit it out; and this is the shape of the cautery:	After this cauterization the patient is to fill his mouth with good butter and keep it in for a while, then spit it out. This is the figure of the cautery.	0.78659284

chapter-1-subchapter-22.txt

chapter-1-subchapter-23.txt
When the humors overcome the bronchial tubes of the lung, and especially when this comes from a cold complexion, then the patient must first be purged by laxative medicines; then cauterize him at the base of the throat, and be careful not to go down to the throat itself, and do not burn the heart but only a little.	When humidities prevail over the windpipe, and especially when there is a frigid temperament, the patient should first have his bowels opened with a laxative. Then cauterize him once in the hollow of the jugular fossa at the root of the throat in the hollow part. Take care that the cautery does not pierce through to the gullet, and burn no more than half of the thickness of the skin.	0.7602451
Then make another cauterization at the joint of the neck at the top of the spine, and let the cautery be the one called "clavile," of which we have the form before; and treat the area as we have said before until it is healed.	Then cauterize him once more, strongly, at the junction of the neck with its last vertebra, the cautery being claviform as described above. Then treat as prescribed before till healed.	0.73165596

chapter-1-subchapter-24.txt
of the cough When a cough and lung disease are from cold humors, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the illness is chronic, then make two cauterizations on the chest in empty places; and another cauterization in the middle of the chest between the two nipples; and let the cautery be the one called "clavile" according to the form previously described.	When the cough and pulmonary disease arise from cold humidities and the patient suffers from no fever or wasting but the disease is chronic, sear him with two cauterizations over the two clavicles, in the soft depressions ; and with another cauterization in the mid-line of the chest between the breasts. Let the cautery be claviform as described above.	0.883888
And if you wish, make a cauterization by pricking with the entire cautery which is called "points," of which the form is found earlier in the discussion of ear ailments; and let there be up to 30 pricks, or thereabouts.	And if you prefer, make punctate cauterizations with the cautery called 'punctate'; its shape has already been described under pricking for earache. The punctures should number upwards of thirty.	0.77074397
Afterwards treat the area according to what has been said before, and let the cautery have three prongs according to this form:	Then treat as aforesaid until healed.	0.433393
And because of this the cauteries are easier, because you make three at once.	Sometimes also a trident cautery is prepared, in this manner, with which you can burn more speedily; for with this you can apply three cauterizations at once.	0.5892794

chapter-1-subchapter-25.txt
On the dislocation of the shoulder	On cauterization of the axilla.	0.52044123
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After, the patient should be laid on their back and on their side; then lift the core which is within the armpit with the fingers of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inwards, heat the cautery which has two prongs of which here is the form:	When the head of the humerus is dislocated on account of the synovial fluid or when it does not remain in the correct position after the dislocation has been set, so that this becomes a regular occurrence—it is set and then dislocates with the least movement, as we have ourselves seen; you must first set the luxation, then make the patient lie down on his back or on his sound side; then with the fingers of the left hand lift up the skin of the axilla if the joint has dislocated downwards. Then heat a cautery provided with two spits in this manner.	0.84578156
and cauterize the core until it pierces through to the rib, and the mark of the cautery would resemble four cauteries; and therefore, cauterize with the cautery which has three prongs, whereby the marks of cauterization are six cauteries; and the prongs are the thickness of a tent and this is the form of the cautery which has three prongs:	Then with that burn through the fold of skin till you have perforated to the other side, getting four cauterizations. The cautery may be of three prongs and then the form of the cauterization will be six burns. The prongs should be of the fineness of a probe. This is the figure of the cautery with three prongs.	0.77724826
And sometimes another prong is added to this, whereby there are eight cauteries.	Sometimes there is added yet one more so there will be eight burns.	0.76046133
Then apply crushed leeks with salt onto the cautery; then let the patient rest, and the limb should not be moved for a long time until it is well strengthened.	Put on the burns leeks well pounded with salt; then keep the patient absolutely quiet so as not to move the joint for a time till it gains strength.	0.8912732
And if it is dislocated upwards, which happens rarely, then apply cautery on the thick part of the collarbone, with many cauterizations by pricking.	If the dislocation has gone upwards, which very rarely happens, then cauterize him above the shoulder with one good claviform cautery or with multiple punctured cauterizations.	0.72947687
For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.	Thus the joint will gain strength and the humidity will disappear and the patient will be cured.	0.7286101

chapter-1-subchapter-26.txt
When coldness and much moisture enter the stomach, so much so that it draws it to its complexion, and catarrh increases in it, and customary treatments are used and they are not effective, then the patient should be laid on their back, and extend their legs and arms. After this, make three cauteries: one below the hollow of the chest by the width of a finger, with the whole cautery instrument; and two cauteries outside on both sides, so that the shape of the cauteries forms a triangle, and there is such a space between one and the other that they are not joined together when they discharge pus; and let the cauteries be so deep that they reach two parts of the heart, and the shape of the cauteries be according to this form without addition:	When cold and many humidities get into the stomach, so that its constitution is disturbed and much fluxion has come to it, and a variety of treatment has been tried to no effect, the patient must be put on his back with legs and arms outstretched; then give him a threefold cauterization: one a finger's breadth below the hollow of the chest with the claviform cautery; and two below and to the sides of the first cauterization, so that it has a triangular appearance; but there should be some distance between each lest they run together when suppuration sets in. Let the depth of the burning be two-thirds of the depth of the skin. Let the shape of the cauterizations be thus and of no more than this size.	0.91234523
And if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this shape; and for he who is afraid of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and mark a point on the stomach according to the amount of ink you wish; then cauterize it with the whole cautery which is called "pointed".	If you wish, make a single large cauterization in the middle of the stomach, thus. The cautery for this single cauterization is circular, thus. The stomach may be cauterized with punctures in the case of a person who fears this operation. You will have marked the points with ink on the stomach, as many as you wish; then sear with a punctate cautery.	0.7633712
After the treatment of the ailment that we discussed before, until he is healed.	Then treat as previously described until he be healed.	0.74442005

chapter-1-subchapter-27.txt
And if you wish, cauterize these cauteries with the lancet, if you are skilled and wise in the art, and be careful not to burn the entire core, because you would dry out the whole body; and do not let it come to a boil, for the core is very delicate there, and know this for certain.	You will also be able to do these cauterizations with the edged cautery when you have craft and facility in the art. Be careful lest you go too deep with the cautery and burn the whole thickness of the skin and the abdomen and penetrate to the intestine, for the skin there is thin; bear this in mind.	0.7406163

chapter-1-subchapter-28.txt
When there is an abscess on the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain, but not too strong; and if it is in the membrane, he feels intense pain.	When there is an abscess in the liver and you are anxious to know if the tumour is in the body of the liver or in its capsule: if it is in the substance of the liver, the patient will be suffering from a feeling of heaviness and no very acute pain.	0.88134
And then when this treatment requires the doctors, it is necessary that the patient be laid on his head; and then mark with ink the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which is similar to a ray, of which here is the form:	But if it is in the capsule of the liver there will be the sharpest intensity of pain and you will see that it has baffled the doctors. Then the patient should lie back on his neck; then mark the place of the swelling with ink.	0.6933966
And cauterize one cautery so that the core is burned, and it comes to suppuration, so that all the pus is out; afterward treat according to the treatment of issues until he is healed; and no one should use this cautery except someone who has studied long in the art of medicine, and through whose hands these illnesses have passed sometime.	Then heat the cautery in the fire, this being the cautery resembling a probe, of this form, and with that make one cauterization till the whole thickness of the skin is burnt through, finishing up at the capsule so that all the purulent matter comes out. Then apply the treatment for wounds. This kind of cauterization should not be employed except by one who has a long experience of the medical art and who has frequent practice at dealing with this kind of disease.	0.76017994
Then he can operate boldly, and yet it seems to me that it is better to leave it alone.	Then he can undertake this kind of operation. But in my opinion it would be better to pass it by.	0.7064718

chapter-1-subchapter-29.txt
of the cautery for pleurisy	On cauterization for pleurisy.	0.64999026
And some ancients said that some men use a cautery of iron resembling a razor, and they heat it and put it between the ribs, until it comes to that abscess; and the pain leaps out, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.	Now one of the Ancients mentioned that there were some people who used an iron cautery shaped like a probe, and introduced it red hot into the intercostal space until it reached the abscess itself and evacuated the pus, as we have mentioned under tumour of the liver.	0.7988807
But in this procedure, there is fear that the patient will die immediately, or a fistula will develop that cannot be healed.	But in this perforation with the cautery there is a danger either that the patient may die on the spot or that an incurable fistula may arise at the place.	0.79481125

chapter-1-subchapter-30.txt
When you treat the lamprey disease using what we have mentioned in the divisions of treatments, and it does not help, then there are three appropriate types of cautery that are all good.	When you have treated disease of the spleen by the means that we have mentioned in the section and your treatment is ineffectual, there will be three ways of cauterization, each of which will be correct.	0.7462978
Then put the two heated prongs in until the skin is pierced on the other side, and then pull out the cautery, and thus there will be four. And if you want, cauterize using the three-pronged cautery.	Then push in the two prongs, well heated, till you have pierced the skin from side to side. Then take out the cautery; and there are four cauterizations. Or if you prefer you can burn with the other cautery, of three prongs.	0.8725893
Use this treatment after the patient has expelled pus for a long time, and this is better than the other treatments mentioned before.	Then dress the site of cauterization after you have allowed pus to run therefrom for many days. This is more effective than any of the preceding treatments.	0.6817306

chapter-1-subchapter-31.txt
Cautery is not useful for dropsy, except in the manner which is called "ascites".	The cautery is particularly effective in ascites.	0.50246835
When you treat it according to the methods we have described in divisions, and your treatment is not effective, then you must make four cauteries around the groin, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one near the chest; and the cautery should be very close to the thickness of the skin.	When you have, without effect, treated a dropsical person with the various measures mentioned in the section on diseases, you should sear with four cauterizations around the umbilicus, and one over the stomach, another over the liver, and another over the spleen, and two behind his back between the vertebrae, one at the level of the breast and one at the level of the stomach; and let the burn be almost skin-deep.	0.8318237
Afterwards, leave the cautery open to drain pus for a long time, and do not abandon the treatment of the patient after the cautery; and healing will be hastened, and the two intentions will be combined with God's help.	Then keep the burn open so that it suppurates for a long while. Do not let the patient, after cauterization, be without the necessary treatment, so that you combine both methods for him, and a cure will speedily come to him.	0.7515553
The shape of the cautery for the belly should be the key-shaped one that we have previously shown; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what has been stated before.	The cautery with which his belly is cauterized should be claviform like the figure previously given; while the one with which his back is cauterized should be olivary.	0.8455392

chapter-1-subchapter-32.txt
of the swelling of the feet When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsical, and are full of citrine-colored water, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring toe; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning.	On cauterization of the legs and feet. When, in the sufferer from dropsy, these swell and become full of yellowish fluid, you should cauterize the upper surface of the feet in the depression between the little and fourth toes; hold your hand upright with the cautery; do not let it slant.	0.83034647
And do not go in too deep, thus the citrine water will come out, and the cautery should be of this shape:	Then remove your hand and do no more cauterization whatever; for the yellowish fluid will exude. The cautery should be of this type.	0.5779381
Afterward, make two cauteries on each leg, on the shin bone; and the cautery should be long, one below the knee in front and the other outside, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries open for a long time without treatment, so that the water comes out; after, treat them like the other treatments that we have mentioned.	Then sear the legs with two cauterizations on each leg; cauterize with the bladed end of the cautery, and let it be along the length of the leg: one under the knee, the other lower than that, about the middle of the leg; and two more cauterizations over each femur. Leave the burns open without treatment for a long while during which the fluid will exude from them. Then dress with all that we have described.	0.887132

chapter-1-subchapter-33.txt
When diarrhea comes from cold and moisture, so much so that the retentive and digestive power which is in the stomach and in the intestine is weakened, and cannot be treated by any means of treatment; and you see the patient suffering greatly and of strong constitution, make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been discussed previously on cautery of the stomach, with the circular cautery; and four cauteries around the navel, small, with a small key-shaped cautery, and two cauteries on the hips.	When the diarrhoea is due to frigidity and humidities so that the capacity of the stomach and intestines to hold and to digest is impaired, and this has been treated by various methods and is not cured; if you see that the patient is able to endure the cautery and is of unimpaired strength, make a big cauterization on his stomach according to the preceding instructions for cauterization of the stomach with a circular cautery; and four narrow cauterizations round his navel with the thin claviform cautery; and one or two big cauterizations in the lumbar region over the coccyx.	0.9038588
And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the wrist, and a cautery on each flank, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, because the treatment is beneficial when there is good assistance.	And if you see that the humidities are superabundant, and the patient fit to tolerate it, then make one cauterization over the groin and one over the hypochondrium. You may also add two small ones over the stomach near the big one. This is an effective treatment that does not fail to help.	0.766577

chapter-1-subchapter-34.txt
of the treatment of hemorrhoids	On cauterization for anal haemorrhoids.	0.4807195
After, treat the area until it is healed.	Keep the burn open a long while; then dress till healed.	0.5157337

chapter-1-subchapter-35.txt
When you cut the fleshy growth, heat the cautery which resembles a razor, and then place it, burning hot, on the cut fleshy growth; and keep your hand there until the cautery reaches the base of the vein from which the blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there are many fleshy growths, cauterize each one as we have said; afterwards treat them with beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the ischium, it will be more helpful.	When you excise warts, heat a spike-shaped cautery and bring it, hot, to the site of the excised wart, and press down till the cautery reaches the mouth of the vessel whence the blood comes. Do this once or twice over. If the warts be more than one, sear each one separately as we have described ; then dress with suitable ointments till healed. And if you burn the patient with one big cauterization over the lumbar region that will add to the effect.	0.8592938

chapter-1-subchapter-36.txt
When the patient cannot bear cutting or opening, which we will discuss in its place, such an illness arises that can only be healed by cautery.	When the patient will not submit to the cutting operation we have described in its own place, and is afraid of it, he may perhaps be cured with the cautery.	0.6714604
When someone develops a fistula, and it is aged and emits pus and corrupted fluids, you should probe it fully with a thin tent, and make sure you know, using the whole tent, how deep it is.	So when somebody gets a fistula, and pus and foul humidities have for a long while been running from it, you must first explore it with a fine probe and judge of its depth by the probe.	0.76344734
Then heat the cautery that resembles a razor, and insert it into the fistula to the depth the tent entered, and repeat the cautery until the rotten and corrupted flesh is burned, once, twice or thrice, according to the need; and be careful not to burn the nerves that are nearby, and the large veins.	Then heat a spike-shaped cautery and introduce it, hot, into the fistula, in the direction of the bottom of the fistula and to the depth to which the probe entered. And repeat the cauterization till all those corrupt bodies are burnt away; once or twice or three times over, as you have need. But beware of burning a nerve should one be there, or a big blood-vessel.	0.88120914

chapter-1-subchapter-37.txt
Of the disease of the kidneys	On cauterization of the kidneys.	0.46703646
When pain from cold comes to the kidneys, and from great flatulence, and there is no desire for women, then you must cauterize him on the kidneys on one side and the other with the key-shaped cautery that we have mentioned before; and if we cauterize him in the middle, he will have three cauteries in a line, and they will do more good.	When pain strikes the kidneys from chill or heavy vapour, and the patient's sexual vigour is impaired thereby, you should burn him right over the kidneys, once on each kidney, with the claviform cautery mentioned before. I have often burnt him with a third cauterization on the flat of the back, making three cauterizations in a line, which is most effective.	0.69038385

chapter-1-subchapter-38.txt
Of the bladder	On cauterization of the urinary bladder.	0.43921077
When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then cauterize him on the outside above the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, one on the right and one on the left, and let each cautery be as long as the joint of a thumb; and make a cautery on the outside of the back, or two if you need to; and let the cautery be key-shaped according to the aforementioned form.	When there occurs in the urinary bladder a weakness and relaxation due to chill and humidities, so that the patient cannot retain his water, sear him once below his navel, on the bladder, where the pubic hair begins; burn him once also on the right side and once on the left side of the navel; and let the distance of the burn from either side be the length of the joint of the thumb. Cauterize him also once on the lower part of the back, or twice if you need. The cautery should be claviform, as described.	0.8353484

chapter-1-subchapter-39.txt
Of the womb/uterus	On cauterization of the womb.	0.4116783
When the womb is cold and moist, and yet does not fail to conceive, and the menses are corrupted and their periods delayed; and when they come, she feels great pain: then it is necessary to make three cauteries around the vulva, as we have said for the cauterization of the bladder, and two cauteries on the outside of the back; and let the cautery be key-shaped, as we have said.	When matter arises in the womb from chill or humidities and she is thereby prevented from conceiving and her menses are upset; their flow fails or, as they pass, pain accompanies them; then you must cauterize her three times around the navel, as we have mentioned in cauterization of the bladder; and once or twice in the lumbar region in the lower part of the back over the hips. The cautery should be claviform.	0.80368054

chapter-1-subchapter-40.txt
Of the hip	at the hip].	0.43050325
And if this cautery is not available, make three large olive-shaped cauteries, and let the cautery be as deep as the skin; and treat it until it is healed.	But if you have not this cautery by you, give him three cauterizations with the larger size olivary cautery. The burn should be to the depth of the whole thickness of the skin. Then dress till healed.	0.7781022

chapter-1-subchapter-41.txt
Of the pain of the hip When pain comes in the hip socket, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is treated as we have said in the section [on dislocations] and the treatment is not effective, and the illness is old: then you must purge the patient of the thick humors with foul-smelling pills, or other similar good pills.	On cauterization for sciatica. When pain occurs in the hip joint and is due to cold and humidities, and the patient has been treated by those means mentioned in the section, and the treatment is ineffectual, and the pain becomes chronic, the patient should be purged of the heavy humours with foetid pills or pills of tamarind or the like; then cauterize him.	0.76444125
Afterwards, make a cautery; and the method of cautery is according to two methods: that is to say, with burning medicines together, and fire cautery.	The means of cauterization in this case is twofold: either with caustic chemicals or with fire. The actual cautery will serve for several methods.	0.6566285
Fire cautery is of many kinds, one of which is as follows: that you cauterize on the hip socket three triangular cauteries in this shape, and make them good and deep, and have between each cautery a space the width of a finger, and let the cautery be olive-shaped; sometimes one makes a cautery in the middle on top of the hip, which makes four in this shape:	The actual cautery will serve for several methods. One of them is to make three cauterizations over the femoral joint itself in a triangular manner ; and let them be of a fair depth; and the space between them a finger's breadth. The cautery should be an olivary one. Sometimes there will also be one cauterization in the middle over the actual head of the femur, making four cauterizations in all.	0.8152082
And if you wish, cauterize it with the circular cautery that we mentioned earlier in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circle contains the whole hip, and all the thickness of the flesh is burned.	The burning may be done with the circular cautery which has been mentioned under cauterization of a dislocated hip; a single cauterization so that the circle embrace the whole joint. Burn through the whole thickness of the skin.	0.6789346
And this is the method used in sciatica, when the pain is in the hip, and does not reach down to the thigh or the leg.	This is the form of cauterization for sciatica when the pain is localized in the hip joint and does not extend to the femur and the leg.	0.7720303
And if it reaches the thigh and leg, make two cauteries where the patient says the pain is, and one cautery above the ankle by four fingers, slightly to the left side; and let the cautery be knife-shaped, and let the thickness of the flesh be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to the toes of the foot or almost there, cauterize it where they feel the pain, three or four points with the cautery called "points".	But if it extends to the femur and the leg, cauterize him over the thigh with two burns at the place where the patient indicates the pain to be; and one burn four fingers above the great tendon of the heel, a little to the outer side. The cautery should be edged, and the depth of the burn only to the thickness of the skin. But if the patient points out that the pain reaches to the toes, then cauterize where he has indicated to you, with a punctate cautery, three or four or more perforations if he needs it.	0.8514252
And if necessary, make more; and if it is known that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, make a cautery with the knife-shaped or circular cautery, and take good care in all your cauteries not to leave the cautery so long that you burn the nerves and the large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient further harm and contraction.	The cautery should be edged, and the depth of the burn only to the thickness of the skin. But if the patient points out that the pain reaches to the toes, then cauterize where he has indicated to you, with a punctate cautery, three or four or more perforations if he needs it. If he indicates that the pain is under the knee towards the shank, give him one burn there with the edged cautery. Be careful in all your cauterizing not to carry the cautery so far as to burn a nerve or a large artery; for thence arises grave harm, or crippling, to the patient.	0.7981044
And I myself have seen several who have made a cautery on the ankle of the foot, and left it so long that the leg was all swollen, and the foot too, and the whole foot was pierced and corrupted. After a bowel movement from which he died.	I myself have seen more than one person cauterizing over the tendon of Achilles, the cauterization being excessive, and the leg was affected with a defluxion of humours which eventually reached the foot and the whole was riddled; after that came diarrhoea, and, after that, death.	0.7872668
And if the pain is in two places together, make a cautery in one and the other, in this manner.	If there is pain in two places, cauterize both in this way.	0.786858
And the wise men said, regarding the cautery of the hip, of which here is the method: make such an iron, and let it be at the tip as thick as a fingernail, or a little less, and let it be between notches, and from one notch to the other the distance of a thumb joint; and let the notches be open on two sides, and be like knots, and let there be a well-made iron handle; and this is the form:	Certain learned doctors have mentioned a cauterization applicable to the hip in this manner: make a bowl of iron with a diameter of half a span; the thickness of the edge of its mouth should be that of a date-stone or a little less. Another bowl is introduced into this, and a third into that; and there is a distance between the bowls of a thumb-joint. The bowls are open on both sides; and the depth of them should be a thumb-joint or two. Make an iron handle for them firmly fitted to the bowls.	0.7989594
And let it be heated until it is all red and throws sparks, and then place it on the joint of the diseased hip, and turn it toward the healthy side; and cauterize once in a round cautery and leave it for three days; and then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound open a long time; then treat with ointment until healed.	Then heat this cautery in the fire until it is hot and sends out sparks; and so let it be applied to the hip, the patient lying on his sound side; and thus three circular cauterizations will be produced at a time. Afterwards let it be for three days; then smear with butter and leave the wound open for a while; then treat with ointment till it heals.	0.889325
Albucasis says that we use this cautery little because of fear of its appearance, and we see few who use it; and yet it is one of the good cauteries, for those who can bear it, and where it is appropriate.	The author of this book says that we very rarely employ this method of cauterization on account of the ugliness and dread appearance of it, and because we find few patients who will endure it. Nevertheless, it is one of the best cauteries for him who can endure it and is correctly treated by it.	0.7120193
The cautery of burning medicine is that you make an instrument with notches into which the lip of the opening descends, and it should be of brass or iron with a long side, and at the top have two knots, and between each the distance of the thickness of a finger; and let them be open below and above, and join together according to this form:	Cauterization with caustics is thus: make two bowls like the ring into which a door-hinge descends, either of bronze or iron. The height of their sides should be two thumb-joints or thereabouts, and they should be separated about a finger's breadth; they should be open above and below, and joined one to another thus.	0.8367183
Then place it on the hip joint of the patient lying on his healthy side, and press your hand firmly on the hip joint; then pour between the two circles hot water that has been heated a little on the fire, and leave it for an hour, and let the patient endure the heat and the burning from it.	Then place them over the capsule of the hip joint, the patient lying upon his sound side, and press down hard; then pour caustic fluid between the two rings—it should have been heated slightly—and keep it there for the space of one hour by the sand-clock.	0.8374357
For it will find there a bite as if from fire; and when the burning has passed, remove your hand with the instrument and wash the hip with fresh water, and leave it thus for three days, and apply butter until what is black from the burn is removed; and leave it three days so that the rot comes out; and this should be the last resort after treatment with ointments until healed.	The patient must endure the sting and heat of it (for he will find it stings like fire) till the causticity diminishes. Then remove your hand with the instrument and wash away the caustic from the whole capsule with pure water. Let be for three days and apply butter to it till the eschar comes away; and let the pus flow from it for a few days, for that will be more conducive to healing. Then treat with ointment till it heals.	0.84229326
And if the pain extends down to the thigh or to the leg, make an instrument for it that holds water just as you made for the hip; and this is the method of hot water, and I have written it in the treatise on the correction of medicine.	Then treat with ointment till it heals. If the pain extends to the hip joint or the leg, make a form in some material that will hold the fluid for that, just as you did for the capsule of the femur.	0.6534251
Take alkali and quicklime, equal amounts of each, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.	Now this is the description of the caustic; I have already put it in my treatise on the improvement of drugs: take of the salt of potash and quicklime, equal parts, and beat them both up well and put them into a new earthen pot, in the bottom of which you have made a small hole of a size to take a probe.	0.43925822
where there is a small hole below so that the point of a razor can enter; and place on top of this pot another well-sealed pot, and put alkali and lime and fresh water on top, until there is a finger's width above the powders when you have pressed it well with your hand; and leave it thus until sharp water descends and falls into the sealed pot, then take all this water, and pour it over lime and alkali as before.	Place under that pot another one, glazed. Pour enough water on the quicklime and potash to cover them to a finger's breadth after you have pressed them well together with your hand; and leave the pot until the caustic fluid has passed down into the bottom of the glazed pot. Then collect all that fluid and pour it upon a fresh lot of lime and potash.	0.81916845
And then it will be very sharp and is administered in many medical procedures and in cauterizations of other limbs. For it acts like fire, and there are other medicines with which one cauterizes the hip well, such as copper sulfate and anacardic honey and lime with soap, all these things mixed together.	Thus will the water be very caustic indeed. This is used for many medical procedures and for the cauterization of all members, as it has the very same action as fire itself. There are other drugs too with which the capsule of the femur is cauterized, such as Thapsia and Mel Anacardinum and inunction of lime with soap.	0.8383029
And Galen tells us of a cure by which a man was cured of hip pain and sciatica, and praises it highly, and says that no other treatment was done, and that he was healed at once when this cure was performed, and he had bathed as he instructs below.	Galen, quoting one of the men of old, mentions a treatment for pain in the thigh and sciatica and he makes much of it, asserting that no other treatment was necessary, and that it would heal on one application, so much so that the patient would be carried into the bath and would go out completely cured.	0.8250113
And he says in this way that you take fresh, dry green litharge, and grind it well with a little grease, and put it on the hip and on the thigh and on the leg where the pain is, and bind it; and leave it for three hours or for as long as the patient no longer feels the burning.	The method is as follows: take fresh green water-cress or new dry water-cress if fresh is not to be had; beat it up well with some fat and apply it to the hip where it hurts, or to the leg or thigh, and bind up. Then let be for three hours or until the patient feels a diminishing of the caustic; and then let him be taken to the bath.	0.7592811
And then have him enter the bath until his body is a little moistened, and have him go to bed, and the pain will go away completely and he will be healed.	When his body is bedewed with sweat, get him into the pool; then the pain will vanish and he will be cured.	0.72135675
And know that no one should use cautery with such medicines, unless it is after purging the body.	But you must know that no one should have cauterization with these drugs except after evacuation of the bowel.	0.8017342
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat dung, it helps a lot; and the cautery should be done in this way.	Dioscorides has said that cauterization with goats' dung is beneficial for sciatica.	0.69878626
Take wool and soak it in old oil, and put it on the hollow that is between the big toe and the next one which is called foscile.	The cauterization is carried out in this manner: take wool soaked in old oil and put it into the cleft which is between the thumb and the forearm but nearer to the forearm.	0.47545487
Then take dry goat dung, and light it on fire until it becomes coals, and put it on the wool, and leave it until it is extinguished; and do it again like this, and do not stop doing this until you think by reason that it reaches the hip, and that the pain has ceased; and this type of cautery is called "goat cautery".	Then take the dried dung of a goat and expose it to fire until it glows like a coal. Place it on the piece of wool, and leave till it cools, then replace it with another, and so on until the sensation has reached the hip joint by way of the forearm, and the pain stops. This kind of cautery is called 'the dung cautery'.	0.8752691

chapter-1-subchapter-42.txt
of back pain	On cauterization for pain in the back.	0.5125172
When pain comes to the back, either by falling or by a blow, or by too great an evacuation, or by some spread of cold matter, for none of these cases is cautery useful, except for the one that comes from the infusion of cold matter.	Many different causes give pain in the back. Sometimes it happens from a fall or a blow, or from excessive evacuation or the like. It may also be due to an influx of humid matter. Cauterization is only to be employed in this last case, which arises from an influx of cold matter.	0.71833503
It is necessary after the patient has been purged with foul-smelling pills or other such, that three lines marked with ink be made on his back where the pain is, and on each line five cauteries or more according to the strength and amount that the patient can bear; and let the cautery be done according to the cautery which is called "points"; and if you wish, make three or four cauteries with a medium key cautery according to this form:	When the patient has been purged with foetid pills or the like, he should be cauterized in his back where the pain is, over the breadth of the flat of the back, after the place has been marked with ink, with three rows of cauterizations, five in each, or more, in proportion to what you see of the patient's endurance and strength. Use the punctate cautery. If you like, you may give him three or four cauterizations with the middle-sized claviform cautery.	0.83887416

chapter-1-subchapter-43.txt
Many times this disease comes to small children, and the sign of the beginning is that they have restricted breathing when they stand up, and fear; and you find on the last spinal process of the back and around it the appearance that comes on the other spinal processes.	This disease often occurs in small children. The sign of the beginning of the disease in a child is that he suffers shortness of breath when standing or moving, and you will find that at the end of his dorsal vertebrae there is one visibly projecting above the other vertebrae.	0.808909
When you see this and you want to treat it, cauterize it with a circular cautery in this form. So that the cautery affects each part of the spinal process equally.	So when you see this and you wish to stop it, cauterize him with a cautery that should be circular so that the cauterization takes in equally all sides of the vertebra.	0.8057327
And if you wish, cauterize around the spinal process with the point cautery, two or three lines, and let the points be close to each other.	If you wish, you can cauterize two or three lines around the vertebra with the punctate cautery; let the punctures be close to one another.	0.8300257
Afterward, treat the area until it is healed according to what we have said, and be careful not to apply cautery to a gibbosity which is in a spasm of the nerve.	Then dress the place with those remedies we have mentioned, till healed. But beware of using the cautery in the deformity arising from a nervous spasm.	0.7379569

chapter-1-subchapter-44.txt
of the pain of the joints	On cauterization of gout and pain in the joints.	0.5294833
When joint pain is from moistures that are spread to each limb of the body, and when the pain comes in the feet, which physicians properly call "podagra" (gout), and when it is from a cold cause and medicinal treatments cannot cure it, it is cured by cauteries in this way: make many cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form: And if it is necessary that you prick on the surface of the foot, then make a cautery with the entire cautery that is called "point". (or "pointed")	When there are pains in the joints from cold humidities flowing into whatever part of the body it may be, and specially when there are pains in the feet, doctors are in the habit of calling that 'gout'. When gout due to chill has been treated with the various treatments mentioned in its section, and the pains remain, the cautery will remove them. That is, you cauterize the patient with multiple burns around the joint of the foot, after he has been purged. The cautery should be a middle-sized olivary one, thus.	0.77630365
And if the pains reach the knees and other joints, and this happens often, make three or four cauteries on each knee, on each side, with the olive-shaped cautery; and if you need more, make more, but do not hold your hand there longer than it takes for the thickness of the skin to be burned.	If you need to make punctate cauterizations round the front of the foot, use the punctate cautery; and if the pains go up to the knee or other joints, which often happens, burn each knee with three or four cauterizations on every side with the same olivary cautery. And if you require to cauterize him more than this, do it, but do not go deeply but only about the thickness of the skin.	0.85335016
And if the pains descend to the knee and to the back, administer the cautery that we have described in its chapter.	If the pains go up to the hip joints or the back, employ those cauterizations that we have mentioned in their own chapter.	0.7839112
And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the wrist in two lines; and if any pain remains in the fingers, make points on each joint and on the back of the hand; and if the pains reach the elbows or up to the shoulders, cauterize each part, and ensure the patient has good care and takes medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands only, pierce a double line all around the wrists. If the pains remain in the fingers, pierce them once over each joint and once on the metacarpus. And if after some days the pains go up to the elbows or shoulders then cauterize both on each side.	0.8356905
For if you give him good care and you purge the phlegm, he will be healed with God's help.	And keep the patient to good habits and taking of medicine; for if his regimen be good and the phlegm got rid of, he will be cured with this cautery.	0.53873956

chapter-1-subchapter-45.txt
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worthless.	You must understand that if you do not bring the cauterization down to the bone your operation will not be successful.	0.63119763
And after forty days, when he wants to get up, provide him with a well-made bandage, and he should wear it for another forty days; and he should have good rest, and work little and avoid overfilling himself with drink and food, and shouting too loudly; and when he follows these instructions he will be completely healed.	Then when he wants to get up after the forty days, employ a tight bandage and keep this on another forty days. He should be moderate in his exertion, his eating, drinking, and shouting. Thus under these rules he will be completely cured.	0.8502146
And I will discuss the treatment of cutting in its own chapter.	I shall speak of the treatment of rupture by scission in the appropriate chapter.	0.74295217
When ruptures appear in other bellies and are recognizable, and you see that they are not growing larger, make a round cautery burn according to its size, and let a third of the core be burned; afterwards treat it as we have described; and some of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with a three-angled cautery in this way:	When a rupture occurs elsewhere in the belly and is at its inception and you wish it not to grow, cauterize the rupture with a round cautery in proportion to its size; burn about two-thirds through the thickness of the skin and treat as we have said; he will be cured and the rupture will not grow. One of the Ancients said that ruptures were to be cauterized with a three-armed cautery like this.	0.8216436
But first mark the place with ink and make a line across the width above the rupture, and another outside it, and hold your hand in the middle with the heated cautery.	First mark the rupture with ink; put the transverse line on the upper margin of the rupture and the other towards the lower, and apply a single claviform cautery in the middle.	0.7133868
But the first cauterization is lighter and gentler.	But the first cauterization is easier and better.	0.8934564

chapter-1-subchapter-46.txt
of old pain in any limb When pain comes in a limb, either from a fall or a blow, and this pain lasts a long time, and medical treatment is of no use, then it must be cauterized with the cautery which is called "points," and the cauterization should be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and its strength and location of the twisting pain.	When pain occurs in some limb due to a fall or a blow and the pain becomes chronic and medical treatment has no effect upon it, you should cauterize it with the punctate cautery. In each case the cauterization should be in proportion to the size of the limb, its strength or weakness, and the chronicity of the pain and contusion in it.	0.8128482
If he is healed from the first cauterization, that's good; if not, repeat another cauterization over it, because it is customary that it should move to the limb that is nearest to it, so you must do the cauterizations until the patient is healed.	If it is cured at the first cauterization, good; otherwise repeat the cauterization. For it is customary for these pains to move from one part to a neighbouring part, and you must follow them with the cautery till the patient is cured.	0.8601777

chapter-1-subchapter-47.txt
of leprosy Lepers are sometimes helped greatly by cautery, and especially the illness that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.	Those suffering from elephantiasis are sometimes greatly helped by the cautery; especially that kind that arises from corruption of the phlegm and black bile.	0.7962064
And know that the more cauterizations you make, the more help you give, and the more it benefits the patient; and know that the sick person does not feel pain from the cautery like healthy people feel it, because the body is already corrupted.	You should know that the more you cauterize the more beneficial and effective it will be. You should know also that the patient will not find the cautery painful as a sound man would, since his body is benumbed.	0.81036204
And the cauterizations must be large and small according to the limbs and joints, as you will find it in the forms of the irons.	The cauteries should be of the types of instrument mentioned earlier, larger or smaller in proportion to the size of the limb or joint.	0.4910025
Afterwards, treat the area with vetch flour with honey and other treatments until it is healed.	Then treat the cauterization with powder of bitter vetch with honey, together with the other treatments, till healed.	0.82703114

chapter-1-subchapter-48.txt
When a swelling appears on a limb and is treated with medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then cauterize it on the limb according to the size of the limb; and let the cauterization go a little deep into the flesh; then treat it with ointments until it is healed.	When some limb is affected with numbness and it is treated with drugs and ointments and plasters, but is not cured, burn the benumbed limb itself with cauterizations proportionate to its bigness or smallness. Let the cauterization somewhat penetrate the thickness of the skin; then dress with ointments till healed.	0.8419359
And sometimes cauterization is done on the hand and on the foot and on the back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus the swelling is removed; however, no one should undertake this unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the nerves that move the body.	For numbness that occurs in the hand or foot it is possible to cauterize over the dorsal vertebrae at the exit of the nerve activating that part; and the numbness will go. This should not be attempted except by one who has a good knowledge of the anatomy of the limbs and of the exits of the nerves that move the body.	0.76446986

chapter-1-subchapter-49.txt
When the disease called "albaras" is chronic, and medical remedies are of no use, then cauterize it with a somewhat deep cautery, according to the thickness of the flesh, until the whiteness is removed, and its color is changed; then treat it with vetch flour and lentil flour with rose oil and plantain leaves, and dove's blood and lark's blood, one part of each; and let it all be mixed together, and bound with a cloth, and applied to the area until it is healed.	When leprosy is of long standing and no device of medicine has any effect upon it, make a cauterization over it to a slight depth according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness has gone and the colour of the skin altered. Then treat with lentil flour, oil of roses, arnoglossa leaves, and pigeons' or swallows' blood, of each equal parts mixed all together and spread on lint; let this stick to the place till healed.	0.80754495

chapter-1-subchapter-50.txt
The treatment of canker sores by cauterization	On cauterization for cancer.	0.44995213
When a canker sore first appears, and you want to stop it, cauterize it with a cautery that resembles a circle, all the way around the canker sore.	When the cancer is in its initial stage and you wish to arrest it, burn all round the circumference of the cancer with the circular cautery.	0.7614734
And yet, the wise say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the canker sore; however, this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen this happen sometimes; and it is more appropriate that it be cauterized around it, with the cautery called "circular," as we have said regarding cauteries.	Some doctors have said that it may be cauterized with one extensive cauterization in the middle. This hardly seems right to me, for I should expect it to ulcerate out; which I have several times seen. So it is correct to burn around the circumference with a circular cautery as we have said, or with multiple cauterizations.	0.6799592

chapter-1-subchapter-51.txt
When someone has a condition called "adubelati," and it is slow to mature or come to a head, either because of excess matter it produces or the age of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say, very old) and he has little blood, or because of the weather; and you wish to hasten its maturation: then cauterize around it with many small cauteries, pricking; afterwards leave it alone. For it will hasten to mature/come to a head.	When a person gets a boil which is slow in coming to a head, either because of the superfluity causing it, or because of the patient's age if he be an elderly man lacking in blood, or because of the season, and you wish to hasten the ripening of the boil, then make a punctate burn around it with multiple small cauterizations, and then let be; it will speedily come to a head.	0.8297781
And if you want to pierce it completely with the cautery, then heat the cautery which has this shape:	If you wish to perforate it with cauterization, heat the cautery of this type.	0.6179298
Afterwards treat it until it is completely healed.	Then dress till cured.	0.6828781

chapter-1-subchapter-52.txt
There is another type of disease which is called "corrodens," and it is nothing other than a consumption of the limb, for it eats away at the limbs as fire does dry wood.	Gangrene is a creeping corruption of a limb, consuming it as fire consumes dry wood.	0.47249848
If you see this disease in a place that can tolerate cautery with fire, then heat cauteries, both small and large nails, according to what is suitable for the place where the disease is; then cauterize it on all sides until you eradicate all the corruption, and nothing of it remains, so that all that is corrupted is removed.	If you see gangrene in a part which can tolerate the actual cautery, heat a number of claviform cauteries, small or large to suit the site of the gangrene. Then cauterize it all over till the whole corruption is eradicated and none remains.	0.740523
And then leave it for three days, and apply on the cauterized areas ground sulfur with oil until the burns from the fire are removed, and all the corruption.	Then let be for three days, applying to the cauterized site sulphur beaten up with oil, until the whole eschar comes away, and all the corruption.	0.8830722
Afterwards treat it with ointments that generate flesh.	Then treat with stimulating ointments.	0.7295399
And if you see after three days that healthy flesh is not growing, that's good; and if not, then repeat the cautery on what remains of the corrupted areas.	If after three days you see the flesh growing healthily and no corruption in it, good. Otherwise repeat the cauterization over whatever corrupt parts are left.	0.8708086
And this affliction has sometimes been treated with sharp medicine instead of fire cautery; but nevertheless fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already explained the treatment with the sharp medicine in the section: take it when you need it.	Gangrene is also sometimes cured with caustic, for that takes the place of fire; but the actual cautery acts more speedily. I have already spoken of the treatment of it by caustic in its section, so take it from there when you have need of it.	0.7665534

chapter-1-subchapter-53.txt
of the chilblains that come on the feet Very often it happens that on the outside of the feet a malady arises which is called "corn" according to our understanding, and it is a large, misshapen thing that injures the foot.	On the cauterization of corns, inverted and otherwise. This disease, which is something hard paining the foot, very often occurs in the soles of the feet.	0.5461665
And the cauterization of this malady is done in two ways.	The cauterization in this case is twofold, actual or caustic.	0.4385755
Fire cautery is done by heating a cautery iron like a vaulting rib, and it should be made of good iron of a size that it can enclose the corn on all sides, and that it has thin edges; then place it hot upon the corn, and turn your hand all around the corn until it reaches the bottom of the corn; and leave it thus for three days until it begins to discharge pus; then make a poultice of wild mallows ground with salt, and leave the poultice on all night, and the corn will fall off and be uprooted.	The actual cautery is to heat a hollow cautery like a vulture's quill, made of iron, narrow of edge, of such a size as to surround the corn all round. Then put it, hot, on the corn and rotate it till the cautery reaches the root of the corn; and let be for three days to draw the pus; then apply a plaster of wild mallows ground up with salt, and leave the plaster on one night; then it may be drawn out with its root.	0.9051728
Then treat the area with an ointment that generates flesh until it is healed.	Then treat the site of the wound with stimulating salve till it heals.	0.82269347
Do this one after the other, until you have extracted all those that are on the body, then treat them with ointments that generate flesh.	Treat them in this manner one after another till you have accounted for all of them. Then treat the site of them, after eradication, with stimulating ointments.	0.72556484

chapter-1-subchapter-54.txt
When someone trembles from coldness of the nerves, or from quartan fever or other, then you must make four cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one cautery between each vertebra; and one cautery on the feet, and one on the stomach with olive cautery; thus the trembling will cease, and the health of the cold illness will hasten.	When someone has a tremor, either from chill in a nerve or quartan fever, or from some other cause, you should cauterize him four or five times over the vertebrae of the back, one between each vertebra, and one on his breast and one on his stomach, with an olivary cautery. Thus the tremor will be stilled and the dispersal of the cold distemper will be hastened.	0.8954288

chapter-1-subchapter-55.txt
Of/about stinking pustules/boils/sores	On the cauterization of pustules occurring on the body.	0.4487862
Sometimes swellings or stinking pustules appear outside the body, which come from large corrupted matters.	Foul pustules sometimes arise on the body, caused by heavy corrupt frigid matter.	0.715106
So it is necessary, at first when they appear, to make a cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery of myrtle wood, the tip of which is set on fire, or of long birthwort root, or with a lenticular cautery.	When they first appear you should cauterize the head of each one lightly with myrtle wood whose tip has been lighted in the fire; or with the root of the long birthwort; or with the lenticular cautery.	0.76996344
And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and they cannot grow from then on, but the superfluity from which they come is broken, and they are healed; but this must be done after bloodletting.	Sometimes furuncles also are cauterized in the same manner when they first arise; then they get no bigger and the superfluity originating them is dispersed and the patient is cured of them. But before you cauterize these, the patient must be depleted by bleeding.	0.7168311

chapter-1-subchapter-56.txt
Many times large flows of blood occur from the artery which is cut in a wound that comes to the surface, or in the incision of an abscess, or in the cautery of a limb, and in similar things; and it is a very difficult thing to stop.	Very often there occurs bleeding from an artery which has been cut either by an external wound or in opening an abscess or in cauterizing a part of the body and so on, and it is difficult to stem.	0.82688046
And nevertheless, when this happens to someone, hurry to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and press it hard until the blood is calmed under your finger, and no more drops come out; then put several small and large olive-shaped cauteries in the fire until they are all red; then take one, either large or small depending on the wound and the place where the artery is broken, and put the cautery on the vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery there until the blood is stopped.	When this happens to anyone, quickly apply your hand to the mouth of the artery, putting your forefinger to it and closing it properly till the bleeding ceases under your fingers and nothing comes out. Then put in the fire several olivary cauteries, small and large, and blow on them to make them very hot. Then take one, small or large according to the size of the wound and the site of the opening of the artery, and bring the cautery down right on the artery itself, after promptly removing your finger, and hold the cautery upon it till the blood ceases.	0.91597587
And if it spurts out when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, quickly take another of the cauteries that are in the fire.	But if it bursts out after you have removed your finger from the mouth of the artery, and the cautery has cooled, promptly take another of the cauteries which you have ready in the fire.	0.85007024
And do not cease to do this one after the other until the blood is stopped; and be careful not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient; and know that when blood flows from the artery, it cannot be easily stopped, especially when the artery is large, unless it is by one of the four ways that we have mentioned: either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not severed, or by tight tying with thread, or by medicines applied that have the power to stop blood; and let it be tied and constricted properly.	Continue doing this, with one after another, till the haemorrhage is stanched. Mind you do not burn any nerve which may be there, so that another calamity afflicts the patient. You should know that when there is arterial haemorrhage it is impossible to stop it, especially when the vessel is big, except in one of four ways, to wit: by the cautery as we have said; or by division of the vessel when it is not completely divided, for when it is cut through the ends of it contract and the bleeding is stopped; or by a strong thread ligature; or by the application of styptics with tight bandaging.	0.9106356
Whoever would attempt to stop it by tightly binding with cloths or by putting burning things on it, or other similar things, will benefit little if at all.	But those who try to stop bleeding with ligatures or cloths, or by the application of caustics and the like, never stanch it by these means, or at least very rarely.	0.63135636
And if this happens to someone and they do not have a doctor or medicine present, they should put their index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and press firmly until it is stopped over the wound and over the vein; and do not move the finger, but wet it with cold water, very cold water, often until the blood is congealed and thickened and stopped; and from then on do what is necessary with cauteries and medicines.	And if this happen to anyone and there are available neither doctor nor remedies, let him at once apply his forefinger to the mouth of the vessel as we have bidden and close it firmly till the blood is stanched; and pour over the wound and over the artery, without removing the finger, water as cold as possible till the blood thickens and congeals and ceases to flow. And meanwhile one should be considering what kind of cautery or medicine is indicated.	0.9071678

chapter-2.txt
We have told you in the first chapter every illness in which cautery by fire, or burning medicine, is necessary, and the reasons and the causes and the instruments and the forms of cauteries; and I have arranged this chapter from head to foot, and I will go in this chapter by this same path so that one finds more easily what one wants.	IN the first book I spoke of all those diseases for which cauterization is of value, either the actual cautery or that done with caustic medicines; and of their reasons and causes; also the instruments and the shapes of the cauteries. This I set out in chapters, from head to heel. In this book I shall proceed along the same route so that it will be easy for the inquirer to find what he is looking for.	0.8365493
And before I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first on cauteries, and therefore greater caution is required.	But before I begin this you ought first to know, my sons, that in this book there is more risk than in the first, which treats of cauterization. Wherefore in this matter there should be greater circumspection.	0.8456825
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.	For in the course of the work of which this book treats there often occurs an effusion of the blood upon which life depends, in the opening of a blood-vessel or the incision of a tumour or the perforation of an abscess or the treatment of a wound or the extraction of an arrow, or in the incising for a calculus or similar cases; all of which are accompanied by uncertainty and fear; and in most death will supervene.	0.84318274
And I warn you not to undertake folly. For many kinds of people come for treatment. Some come who are so angry with their illness that they die easily from the fury they find in their disease, and from the greatness of its malice; and of these one must be wary.	So I warn you against undertaking any case in which there is any element of doubt to you; for in the exercise of the art you will be mobbed by all kinds of persons with all manner of afflictions; some being so weary of their sickness that death itself is a relief on account of the extent of their sufferings and the length of their miseries, their illness being so settled as to presage death.	0.7313488
And of these there are some who deceive you, saying, "Wait, I am cured"; and the illness is treacherous.	Some will lavish their wealth on you and enrich you, in the hope that they may be curable, when their disease is mortal.	0.46618807
You must not agree with those who come to you with this attitude, but put more emphasis on your honor than on your greed, and do not act foolishly but wisely in what you are certain of, and from which you can gain reward and praise; and use prognostication and indication in the treatment of your patients, to whom health is restored; and this will help you to acquire a good reputation, and glory, and a memory of praise.	You should not assist any of this kind who approach you; let your caution be stronger than your greed and desire for gain; and do not embark upon anything of this kind unless you have positive knowledge, which you judge adequate, about the way of bringing the patient a good outcome. In treating every patient be prescient and foretell the means whereby health may be restored to him. That will help you to obtain renown, glory, fame, and praise.	0.8501253
Very dear son, May Our Lord give you good understanding and righteousness, and may he inspire you with the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.	May God inspire you, my sons, with His guidance, and grant that you hit the mark and succeed; for it is in His hand; there is no God but He.	0.53216255
Now I have arranged this chapter by dividing it into chapters, according to what is before in the chapter on cauteries, which I have described to you from head to toe, so that you can more easily find what you need.	I have arranged this book in sections as I did with the previous book on cauterizations, from head to heel; so you will the easier find in it what you seek.	0.84321773

chapter-2-subchapter-1.txt
Know that this disease often comes to children at birth, and when the midwife squeezes the child's head too hard; and sometimes it comes from a hidden cause that is unknown.	This disease occurs most commonly in infants upon delivery when the midwife grasps the child's head roughly. It also sometimes happens from some hidden and unknown cause.	0.85315406
And I have never seen this disease except in children, and in all those I have seen death came quickly; and therefore it seems to me that it is better for me to abandon the work in such treatments.	I have never seen this disease except in very small children; and death very quickly overtook all those that I have seen; therefore I have preferred not to undertake operation in these cases.	0.88374686
If the fluid is more abundant, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:	This is the form of the scalpel. If the humidity is more copious and the swelling greater, make two intersecting incisions to this pattern.	0.67544675
And if the fluid is under the bone, and the sign that you see is the sutures of the head open on each side, and the water spurts out when you press it with your hand inside, and this is not hidden from you: then you must make three incisions in the middle of the head in this way:	But if the humidity is beneath the bone—and the sign of that is that you will see the sutures of the skull gaping on all sides, the water manifestly yielding when you press in with your fingers—you should make three incisions in the middle of the head, in this pattern.	0.77627397
And after the incision, draw out all the fluid. After, bind the incisions with cloths and powders, and put in wine and oil, and leave it thus until the fifth day; then unbind it, and treat the wound with tents and ointments, and keep the head evenly bound, and give the patient dry food with little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.	After incising, draw out all the humidity; then bind up the incisions with pads and bandages; and over the bandages foment with wine and oil till the fifth day. Then loose the bandage and dress the wound with lint and ointments. And do not forget to bandage the head lightly; and feed the patient with a dry diet with little fluid, until the part is strengthened and healed.	0.93531585
And another method of incision is that you look where the size of the abscess and the collection of fluid appears; for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.	Another pattern of incision is to see where the tumefaction and collection of fluid is apparent. For sometimes it is greater in the posterior or anterior part of the head, or to the right or to the left.	0.81137085
Then cut there where the abscess appears, and where the fluid is collected, and make the incision according to what you are able to do; and be careful not to cut the artery; lest a flow of blood come, so that the patient dies from the loss of blood and the evacuation of fluid.	Therefore make your incision where the tumefaction and dropsy are apparent; incise that place in whatever way you can. Be careful not to cut an artery lest you cause haemorrhage and the patient die of that haemorrhage at the same time that the humidity is evacuated.	0.86884844

chapter-2-subchapter-2.txt
When someone experiences an illness called "catarrh" in the eyes or chest, and the illness is chronic, and medical treatment is not effective, then the last resort is cautery, along with cutting the two arteries.	When a person gets painful defluxions into the eyes or chest which become chronic, and medical treatment is ineffectual in this case, then section of these arteries will be the most efficacious treatment.	0.6414497
It is necessary, then, when you intend to cut them, that the patient tilt their head back; then rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then have the patient tighten their neck with a cloth; then look where the vein lies, and the location of both are behind the ears, and a little recessed; then mark the places with ink, then cut both with a sharp scalpel in two places, so that the cut goes down to the bone, and this should be across the width of the head.	When you decide on section, you should shave the patient's head with a razor; then rub the place with a rough cloth to show up the artery; then bind the patient's neck with an end of his garment; then you will observe where the artery is pulsating (the sites of both are the depressions behind the ears) for it is uncommon for them to remain hidden, except in a few persons. Then do you mark with ink over both; then cut with a hooked scalpel, cutting down to the bone; the incision should be lateral to the head.	0.8747046
And if you wish, put the scalpel under the artery and cut it from above, cutting as you should, across.	Or if you prefer, introduce the scalpel beneath the artery and make a thrusting cut up at it.	0.73877585
And when the vein is cut, the blood spurts upwards continuously.	When cut, the artery gives out a pulsating jet of blood spurting intermittently.	0.6522881
And if the artery is not apparent to the touch, then you must measure the distance of three fingers, then mark with ink and cut to the bone; and the necessary amount of blood to let out is six ounces, and perhaps a little more or less, depending on what the patient can tolerate, and the fullness of the artery; then examine the wound: if any membrane remains on the bone, cut it so that no abscess forms there, then bind and dress the wound, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.	If the artery is not discernible, you should measure three fingers' breadth from the ear, than mark with ink, and cut down to the bone. The quantity of blood that should be let is six ounces on the average, but often more blood, or less, is withdrawn; all in proportion to the strength of the patient and the fullness of the arteries as they appear to you. Then examine the wound and if there remains on the bone any part of the membrane cut it off to avoid a haematoma. Then bind up the wound with a bandage of linen cloth and dress with ointments till healed.	0.88656676

chapter-2-subchapter-3.txt
When a chronic migraine occurs, and acute catarrh, due to the moisture of tears and heat in the temples and chronic raging dizziness and similar things, and it is treated by various medical treatments and all this is of no benefit, we should then open the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.	When a man has a chronic migraine or acute catarrh, on account of acrid humidities and heat in the temporal muscles, or a violent chronic headache, or the like, and he has been treated with various medical treatments without success, we have sometimes in these diseases tried extraction of the arteries from the temples or cauterization of them, already described.	0.74035573
And the method of their extraction is that the patient should shave back the hair from his temples, and locate the artery that is visible in the temple, for it is easily visible by its pulsation, and is rarely hidden except in some people who are excessively cold; and if it is hidden, the patient should tighten his neck with some cloth, then rub the area with some rough cloth, and sprinkle the area with hot water until the artery appears clearly; then take the scalpel which has this shape:	The manner of extraction is for the patient to shave the temporal hair; then you press upon the artery appearing on the temple; for it will be manifest to you by its pulsation, and is rarely invisible save in a few people or on account of severe cold.	0.7591437
then lightly score the skin until you reach the artery, then pull it up with forceps, and separate it well from the tissues that are underneath it on each side; and if the artery is thin, turn it with the point of a hook, then cut it from that side to the length of two grains of wheat.	But if it is not plain to you then let the patient bind his neck with the end of his garment; then do you rub the place with a piece of cloth or foment with hot water, till the artery is obvious to you; then take a scalpel shaped thus; then with it gently scrape away the skin till you come to the artery, then stick a hook in it and draw it upward till you extract it from the skin and free it all round from the membranes that are beneath it.	0.62908
For if it is not cut, the blood will not completely flow out.	But if the artery be thin, twist it with the tip of the hook and cut out enough of it for the two ends to be well separated from one another and contract so that no haemorrhage occurs; for if it is not divided and cut it will not let blood flow at all.	0.5565202
And draw from six hundred to three hundred drops of blood; and if the artery is large, you must tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread, so that putrefaction does not occur before the wound heals, and bleeding occurs; then cut the excess between the two ties at that very moment, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with a bladed cautery down to the bone until the ends are cauterized; and this is the better practice, if the patient does not have a fever and he has a warm complexion.	Then let blood, from six to three ounces. If the artery be large it should be ligated in two places with a strong double thread; the threads should be either silken or lute-string, lest corruption attack them before the wound is healed, and haemorrhage occur. Then cut away what remains between the two ligatures; do that immediately or later. If you wish, you may cauterize it down to the bone with an edged cautery so that the ends of the artery be divided; for this will replace that operation.	0.8777565
For when the instrument is too thin, it holds its heat less well. And there should be a finger's width of space between the two blades, and then when you have marked the two places with ink, you put the burning iron on it until it reaches the bone, and cut the vessel in two places; and let there be space between the two ends for it is not completely sealed with this cautery; and this is the form of the cautery:	Less serious and easier than excising the artery is to cauterize the vessel with this cautery provided with two blades, having first marked both places with ink. Bring it down, very hot, till it reaches the bone and the artery is cut in two places, so as to put some distance between the two ends, for it will certainly not unite after this cauterization. This is the form of the cautery. It should have two sharp blades like two small paring-knives, but they should be much less sharp than a knife, for if they are as sharp as a knife they will quickly lose their heat and the flesh will be slow in cutting.	0.75841063

chapter-2-subchapter-4.txt
of tears When the tears of the eyes are descending from the vessels that are on top of the head from heat, and the medical treatment applied is not effective, and you see the patient's face redden, and feel a throbbing in the forehead like a tremor; and his eyes are weak and watery so that the hairs of the eyelids have fallen out, and the eyelids are heated and chafed by the burning of the tears, then this treatment is needed.	On the treatment of a chronic flux of bitter tears into the eyes. When lachrymation is chronic and arises from the external vessels on the cranium, nor does treatment by any kind of medical remedy have any effect, and you see the patient's features flushed, and he feels a creeping in his forehead like that of an ant, and his eyes are wasted and moist, and the roots of the lashes itch, and the eyelids are burned by the bitterness of the tears, the Ancients were compelled to treat it by this operation which they called 'treatment by the sword'.	0.7958322
And the ancients called it "cure contuse," and it is that you shave the hair from the forehead of the patient who has this illness, then make three incisions in the forehead equally along the length of the forehead; and let one of the incisions be about two fingers wide in the middle of the forehead, going down to the nose, and the other two at the sides above the eyelids, and beware of incising the arteries that are on the two sides above the eyelids; and keep your hand away from the juncture of the two mandibles, and let each wound be the width of three fingers joined together across; and have ready a piece of sponge and plenty of cloths to wipe the blood, then insert the pointed spatula on both sides, of which this is the form: from the incision that is towards the temple to the second incision; and scrape all the flesh that is between the two incisions with the rasp that is on the bone, then do the same from the middle incision to the other second one, and then remove this spatula.	You bid the patient shave the hair of his forehead; then you make three parallel incisions across his forehead a little apart; and let the length of each incision be two fingers' breadths; the first incision continuing the line of the nose in the middle of the forehead; and the second at a little distance from the temporal muscle; and the third incision on the other side of the forehead. Beware of cutting the two arteries which are at the sides, and keep your hand away from the mandibular joint; and let there be a distance between each incision as of three fingers joined. Have ready by you some pieces of sponge or a number of linen towels to wipe away the blood.	0.875265
Then insert into the first incision the instrument which is called "cultellaire", and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side it is smooth, not sharp, and this is its form:	Then introduce the double-edged scalpel shaped thus through the incision near the temple to the middle incision, and with it pare off all the skin between the two incisions with the periosteum; then do the same from the middle incision to the third one; then draw out this scalpel and introduce into the first incision another instrument which is known as 'the knife-shaped': sharp on one side, smooth and blunt on the other, thus.	0.5754564
And place the cutting edge towards the raw flesh of the body, and the smooth side towards the bone, and insert it until it reaches the middle incision.	The sharp edge of it should be turned upward to the subcutaneous tissue and the smooth edge toward the bone; then push it on to reach the middle incision and with it cut all the vessels passing from the head down toward the eyes, without letting the incision come through the outer skin.	0.6195372

chapter-2-subchapter-5.txt
When someone experiences acute catarrh habitually, and you see the eyes dim and small, and weakened vision, and the eyelids burned; and the hair falls out, and there is a sharp pain deep in the head, and the patient sneezes; then know by these symptoms that these matters and this catarrh comes only from many veins, and the best treatment there is, is this one.	When anyone has a quantity of painful defluxions, acrid and continuous, and you see the eyes wasted and sunken and their sight is weakened and the eyelids are ulcerated and lose their eyelashes; while deep in the head there may be a vehement and grievous pain with incessant sneezing, then you may know from these occurrences that those humours and catarrhs arise from many deep blood-vessels.	0.82397294
And it is that you instruct the patient to shave their forehead, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another about an inch wide. And begin from the incision at the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision be down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move during eating; and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, and then separate between the two lips of the incision and put there old cotton, and linen tents; then tie over it cloths soaked in wine and oil, and beware of a hot abscess; when it is removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow there, then treat it with drying things, which make flesh regenerate.	The best treatment in this case is that which follows: you bid the patient shave his forehead; then you make one incision in the middle of his forehead or a little above, crosswise (begin the incision from the left temple going toward the right temple; the incision should be down to bone; and avoid the temporal muscles that move during mastication) until the bone is laid bare. Wipe away all the blood with a sponge and separate the edges of the incision with teased-out cotton wool or with rolls of linen; then bind up with pads over; the pads should be soaked in wine and oil to guard against an effusion. When you undo it, if you see that an effusion has erupted, you should scrape the bone until a growth of flesh begins in it; then treat with a drying treatment which generates flesh.	0.8544993
In this way: take two parts wheat flour, and four parts rosin, and make a plaster; and apply it to these wounds to regenerate flesh everywhere.	For example, two parts of wheat flour are taken and of colophonia four parts, and of them a salve is made which may be used to encourage the growth of flesh in wounds of this sort.	0.6600785

chapter-2-subchapter-6.txt
On the blockage of the ears	On the treatment of things that fall into the ear.	0.47464988
Everything that falls into the ears is one of four things: either grains, or an insect, or mineral stone or similar things like iron; or seeds, such as oats, beans, peas; or flowing things like water and vinegar and similar things.	All that falls into the ear comes under four categories: mineral stone, or what resembles stone, such as iron or glass; vegetable grain such as pea or date-stone or the like; or liquid such as water or vinegar; or animal.	0.8906022
When a stone or other kind of thing falls into the ear that does not adhere to the ear, nor grow in the ear, put the ear in the sun.	When a stone or something of that sort that does not grow gets into the ear, turn the ear toward the sun.	0.87575686
If you see the stone, then instill a little violet oil or sesame oil, then use extraction; and make him sneeze with condiments, and block his nostrils when the sneeze comes, and put pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and stretch the ear upwards.	If you see the stone, pour upon it a little oil of violets or sesame; then try to get it out by moving the head or by inducing sneezing with ptarmica and keeping the nose closed at the onset of sneezing, having first made round the ear a circle of pieces of cloth or wool and drawn the ear upwards.	0.845191
Often it comes out by this treatment; and if it does not come out, then use extraction with fine tweezers, of which this is the form:	This treatment will usually bring it out. But if it does not come out, try to get it out with a fine pair of tweezers shaped thus.	0.7709198
If it comes out with the tweezers, that is good; if not, then use extraction with a fine hook with a small bend; and if it does not come out by this, then make a tube of brass and push the end of the tube into the opening of the ear firmly, and block what is around the tube with soft wax so that the wind cannot enter with the tube; then pull it out strongly, for often it comes out as we have said; and if it does not come out in this way, then take birdlime, and put some on the tip of an instrument that is suitable for this purpose, and put a little cotton around it; then press the birdlime onto the stone or whatever it is, and pull it out. And if it does not come out by all these things that we have said, then hasten to cut the ear before a hot abscess comes, and spasm; and the manner of the cutting is that you first bleed the patient from the cephalic vein, and draw blood according to his strength, then have the patient sit between your hands and turn his ear upwards, and make a small incision in the base of the ear at the fat or the adjacent area; and let the incision be like a crescent moon, until you reach the stone, then remove it according to your ability, and suck it quickly with your mouth; and treat it until he is healed. And if it is a grain that is inside and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer a thin spatula according to this form:	And if this does not bring it out, make a bronze tube and introduce the end of the tube well into the meatus of the ear and fill in round with wax softened with oil so that there may be no outlet save through the tube; then suck it out with all your breath; it will often come out with this. But if it does not come out with these means we have described, take turpentine resin or bird-lime, a very little; twist some compact cotton wool on the end of a probe and put this on the tip; then introduce it gently into the ear after you have dried out all the moisture from the ear. But if your treatment so far is unavailing, then be quick and incise before an abscess or spasm supervene. Now this is the way to incise: first, the patient's cephalic vein should be cut and blood drawn, in proportion to his strength; then seat the patient in front of you and turn his ear upwards; make a small incision at the lobule of the ear in the depression there (the incision should be crescent-shaped) until you reach the stone; then extract it with whatever instrument you may.	0.9245535
But do not do this when you think that the grain is moist because of the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces of it; then extract it with fine tweezers and by sucking, as we have said, so that the extraction is complete.	You should not do this except when you are sure that this grain has become moist by reason of the vapours of the ear, so that you may cut up the grain into several small pieces. Then you may extract them with a blunt hook or fine-headed tweezers, or by suction, as we have mentioned; for their extraction will be easy.	0.7644201
In the case of water that falls into the ear, the patient should use sneezing powders first, and plug the ear with old cotton.	As for water getting into the ear, the patient should first employ sneezing excited by ptarmica, his ear having been plugged with a piece of teased-out cotton; he should lie upon that ear in which the water is; and if it so come out, well and good.	0.6287453
And lie on the same ear where the water is.	But if not, take a number of small stones about a finger's length, thin and smooth, and warm them a little in the fire; and have the patient put one of them into the meatus of the ear and let him hop on that one foot on that side; and, with another stone, tap upon the one put into the ear; he should keep this up with stone after stone till all the water has come out.	0.45253903
In the extraction of the creature, if it is small-bodied, like a flea or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the section; but if it is large-bodied so that it can be felt, then use forceps for extraction; and this is the easiest thing to remove that is in the ear.	As for the extraction of a creature getting into the ear, look to see if it is small of body, such as a flea or the like, in which case treat by those means mentioned in the section. But if it has a large body, conspicuous to the touch, try to get it out with tweezers and hooks; for of all things that stick in the ear this is the easiest to extract.	0.88621885
In the extraction of worms generated in the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the section and in the treatise on distillations, and the treatment is not effective, you must look at the ear in the sunlight: if you see any worms, pull them out with fine forceps, and if they are not visible, take the cannula, of which this is the form:	As for the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you have unavailingly treated it by those methods mentioned in the section in the treatise on instillations, you will need to examine the ear in the sunlight; and if you can see any worms, extract with tweezers or fine hooks.	0.8234918
And it should be narrow below and wide above. And put the narrowest end in the ear according to the degree of the patient's suffering, then suck strongly with the cannula; do this often until all the worms come out.	But if you cannot see any, then take a cannula of this form narrow in its lower part, broad above; and introduce the narrow part into the ear as far as the patient can bear it; then make strong suction through it, repeatedly, till all the worms are extracted.	0.7316451
And if they do not come out, pack cotton around the cannula as I have described for stones; and if they still do not jump out as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven effective in killing worms, and you will find them in the treatise on distillations; and distill your oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, of which this is the form, as you see:	But if they do not come out in response to your treatment, plug all round the cannula with wax as bidden in treating for a stone. If nothing will bring them out, employ the instillations which I mentioned as having been tried by the Ancients for killing worms; you will find that in the treatise on instillations.	0.830696

chapter-2-subchapter-7.txt
On the blockage of ears	On the treatment of obstructions in the ear.	0.6676754
Some children are born without any openings in their ears; and this same thing happens to men by blockage from a wound, or from flesh born inside the ear, and this blockage sometimes occurs deep in the ear, so that it cannot be seen; and sometimes the opening is slightly closed, and it can be clearly seen.	Infants sometimes are born with an imperforated auditory meatus. Some people also get an obstruction in the passage of the ear, either from an injury or from flesh growing in it. Sometimes this obstruction is at the bottom of the ear out of sight, but sometimes it occurs a little outside the passage and is invisible.	0.8544009
The one that occurs deep inside, so that it cannot be seen, is difficult to heal in many cases, and in the one that can be seen, you should place the patient's ear in the sun; and look inside: if you see the apparent obstruction, open it with this spatula, of which this is the form:	The sort which occurs in the depths of the ear and is invisible is, in general, difficult to cure. As for that which is within sight, set the patient's ear in the sun and examine it; and if you see that the object is something external you should make an opening with a fine scalpel like this.	0.8310262
And it should be sharp and cutting at the front and back, completely smooth, so that it does not injure the ear; if the blockage is from flesh born in the ear canal, hold it with fine forceps, and cut it lightly, until all that flesh is removed.	Let its extremity be slightly broad, with a sharp point; while the rest of the scalpel should be smooth on both sides so as not to harm the ear. But if the obstruction be from flesh growing in the auditory meatus, catch it with a fine hook and cut it, with the utmost gentleness, till all the flesh is gone.	0.8075999
And if the blockage is deep in the ear, take a thin, light razor and heat it slightly in the fire, then place it in the ear canal.	If the obstruction be in the depth of the ear, take a fine smooth probe and warm it a little in the fire; then push it into the meatus.	0.8256224
If you feel the blockage which causes the patient difficulty hearing, pierce it lightly, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear; then put a tent in the ear according to the width of the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.	If you feel the obstruction (what time the patient will experience hardness of hearing), seek to perforate it gently, being careful not to injure the nerve of the ear. Then put in a plug the width of the meatus, which you will have anointed with Egyptian ointment; do this for some days till you are sure that the wound is healing.	0.8122388
Do this every day until the wound is healed, or take a tent and soak it in rose water, and powder it with ground vitriol; and if you see the ear swollen, you should remove the tent and replace it with another tent soaked in cerate made with rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then treat it until it is healed.	Or take a plug and dip it into water and sprinkle it with powdered vitriol and use that. If you perceive the ear swelling with an abscess you should remove the plug and put in its place another previously prepared by soaking in wax made with oil of roses, till the abscess has subsided; then dress till it is healed.	0.80488396
And if bleeding occurs, soak a sponge and cloths in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding which are in the treatise on distillations.	If a haemorrhage occur, dip a sponge or piece of material in cold water and put it on the ear, and apply the rest of the treatment to stop haemorrhage mentioned in the treatise on instillations.	0.85322154

chapter-2-subchapter-8.txt
about the flesh of eyelids	On the treatment of warts on the eyelids.	0.40312696
These little swellings that come on the eyelids when they are moist and dry, you should stretch them with forceps and tweezers, and cut them from their roots with a spatula; then put ground vitriol on the place.	These warts which occur on the eyelids are sometimes humid, sometimes dry. You should hold them with forceps or a hook, and cut them away from the roots with a scalpel; then put powdered vitriol on the place.	0.8127682
And if blood flows, cauterize it with a fine lenticular cautery, and cauterizing after incision is worth more; and they often return, when something remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.	If there is bleeding from them, cauterize them with a fine lenticular cautery. Cauterization of them after excision is best, for they often return when a part of their roots is left behind; but when they are cauterized the roots are burnt and they will not come back.	0.81604475

chapter-2-subchapter-9.txt
of hail (or possibly: about hail) Often there appear on the eyelids things that resemble hail in their shape and hardness, and because of this this disease is called "grandine" (hailstone), and it is a collection of thick moisture in the eyelid above and below; the procedure is as follows: see if the hailstone moves from one side to the other, and this is easy to determine; then cut it widely, then peel it from each side gently, then take it with tweezers, and cut it.	There often occurs in the eyelids a thing resembling a hailstone in its strength and hardness, and therefore called 'hail'. It is actually a collection of thick humours in the upper or lower lid. The operative treatment for it is thus: examine; and if the stone is external on the outer aspect of the lid, and mobile in all directions, dealing with it is simple. You make above it a transverse incision; then scrape gently around it till it is free; then catch it up with a hook and cut it away.	0.7764906
If you cannot cut it without piercing the eyelid a little, it does not harm the patient; and if the cut is large, join it with a suture, and treat it until it is healed; and if it is small, do not force it, for the ointment will soon restore it and generate flesh.	If it is in such a position that you cannot excise it without cutting through the lid, that will not harm the patient at all. If the incision be big, gather it up with a suture and dress it till it heals. If it be small, it will be no trouble, for ointment will restore it and heal it.	0.82292837
And if the hailstone descends inside the ear towards the upper part, turn the eyelid inside out, and stretch the hailstone with tweezers, and cut and press from one side and the other; and if the eyelid is separated by the incision, it does not matter; and when the hailstone is cut, wash the eye with salt water, and treat the area with that which generates flesh until the patient is healed.	If the stone is rather toward the inner aspect of the eyelid, then invert the lid and catch up the stone with a hook—you will not need to incise the lid—and cut it all round. If the lid is pierced in the cutting, it will do no harm at all. Then, after cutting away the stone, wash the eye with salt water; then treat with cicatrizing medicines till healed.	0.77540624

chapter-2-subchapter-10.txt
Exinach is a fat that is generated in the tissues of the upper eyelids, and this happens more to children than to any other people, and it greatly bothers their eyes, and rheum comes to them in the mornings, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because tears hurry to their eyes; and because of this they constantly lie on their faces, and sleep like that, and their eyelids under their eyebrows are moist, which the swelling and appearance have covered with the exinach that appears in the eye. And when you press the place with your fingers and feel the exinach between them.	Hydatid is fat which arises in the folds of the upper lid. It is a disease chiefly occurring in children, irritating their eyes, giving them morning catarrh; they are unable to look full into the light of the sun, since they get an immediate secretion of tears. And for that reason you will find them lying always on their faces, and they also sleep on their faces; and the eyelids below the eyebrows are moist and covered with swellings, while the hydatid stands out prominently; and when you press upon the place with your finger you can feel the fat beneath it.	0.86636794
Then extract it all in one piece with a cloth grasped between your fingers next to the fire, and turn your hand to the right and to the left until it is removed; and be careful not to insert anything into the slit, that you do not go all the way with the scalpel down to the eye, that you do not injure it.	Draw it out with a cloth rolled between your fingers, turning your hand to right and to left till it is separated. Be careful not to go so deep with your scalpel that it sticks in the eye and injures it.	0.7692896
And if the exinach does not appear at the beginning of the slit, then enlarge the slit slightly until it appears; then extract it as we have said, then moisten cloths in vinegar and water, and put them on the area, and bind with bandages.	If you do not see the hydatid at the first incision, you must gently cut a little deeper till it comes forth, then draw it out as described. Then dip some cloth in vinegar and water, apply to the place and bind it up with pads.	0.7640493
And there are some men who grind salt and put it on to dissolve the moisture that remains.	There are some who grind up salt and put it in the hollow of the incision to liquefy thereby the remains of the humidity.	0.7859112
Then treat it until it is healed.	Then dress till healed.	0.7957501
And if a hot abscess forms in the area, treat it with soothing plasters until it is healed.	If an effusion occur in the place, treat with sedative plasters till healed.	0.73666

chapter-2-subchapter-11.txt
of the hairs of the eyelids When hairs grow on the eyelids in addition to the natural ones, and they become irritating, they harm the eyes, and cause various ailments such as habitual tears and softening of the eyelids and albugo, so much so that it causes the destruction of the eyes; and the treatment is according to four methods: either by cautery with fire, or by sharp medicine according to what is described above in the chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by small tubes, as I will explain.	When superfluous lashes grow on the eyelid outside their natural place, below the natural lashes, and continue, they injure the eye and give rise to many kinds of disease, such as chronic lachrymation, dropping of the eyelids (ptosis), and whiteness and opacity, eventually resulting in the destruction of the eye. The plastic operation on the eye is carried out in four ways: by the actual cautery; by caustic in the way mentioned above in the book on cauterization; by incision and suture; or with canes, as I shall describe.	0.81957895
then cut what is left over with small, even strokes, according to the form which is here:	Then cut away the superfluous lid with a small pair of scissors with an even incision. The scissors are of this pattern.	0.61486167
The treatment of the sloughs is as follows: you must turn the eyelid and cut it inside as I have said, and then make two sloughs artificially, and two thin ligatures as long as the eyelid and the width of the spatumile (spatula/scalpel); and cut at the two ends on the two sides where you hold the threads; then join one and the other subtly over what remains of the eyelid, and tighten the two sloughs on both sides firmly; and leave it like that for a few days, and the skin that was tightened will die and blacken and rot, until it falls off by itself.	Trimming the lid by means of canes is done as follows: you invert the eyelid and cut the inner slit as I have described; then you prepare two slender canes or rods of a length equal to that of the eyelid and a breadth less than that of a scalpel; and at either end of each you make a notch to hold the threads. Then gently put them together over the superfluous part of the eyelid and tie them firmly together at both ends and leave for a few days; for the ligated flesh will necrose and turn black and putrefy and eventually fall away spontaneously.	0.8920831
If it is slow, cut it with forceps, then treat it until it is healed; and when the wound is healed, the eyelid will be raised, and the hairs will no longer prick; and this is the form of the two sloughs that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:	But if it is slow in sloughing, cut off with shears; then dress till healed. And when it is healed the eyelid will be raised and the lashes will no longer irritate the eye. Now this is the figure of the canes; you should prepare them exactly in this shape and of this length and breadth.	0.80379826

chapter-2-subchapter-12.txt

chapter-2-subchapter-13.txt
Of the rotting of the eye (or eyelid)	The eye that suffers this inversion of the lid is called 'leporine' (i.e.	0.5535422
And it occurs suddenly from a wound, or a cut or a cautery, and similar things.	It is acquired either from the cicatrization of an injury, or an incision, or cauterization, or the like.	0.69350743
And the way to work on it is that you split this seam/adhesion, and separate the lips/edges of it, and put inside tents of linen, and bind it until it is healed; and you should not use in its treatment things that dry and constrict.	The idea of the operation is to excise the scar, separate the edges of the wound, pack linen between them, and bandage up till healed. In the treatment of it you should not use anything styptic or drying, for if you do the inversion will return worse than ever before.	0.7122306
For if you do that, the illness returns worse than the first; but work with softening things, such as fenugreek; and bathe it with water in which althea and linseed are cooked, and ointments of melted diachylon in some oil, and wrap a tent in it, and treat it with that.	Employ relaxing substances such as fenugreek; and fomentation with water in which mallows and linseed have been boiled; and diachylon plaster which has been previously softened with one of the oils and spread on the packs; and treat it with this. The main thing in the treatment is to use every device to prevent the healing up of the place as it was before.	0.74062157
And the key to your treatment is that you take care that it does not heal in the same way it was before; and this work that we have described is nothing other than the correction of this illness, that it does not return in the form it was before.	The main thing in the treatment is to use every device to prevent the healing up of the place as it was before. This operation which we have described is but some correction of the inversion, not that the appearance of the place will necessarily revert to what it was.	0.7128368

chapter-2-subchapter-14.txt
This illness which is below, which is truly called "axacrati," and is natural and accidental.	This inversion in the lower lid is that which is truly called entropion; and it is either congenital or acquired.	0.44948626
The accidental comes from wounds and fissures and cauterization and similar things; and the method of working on it is that you take a needle, which has a double thread, and stick it in the flesh, and make it pierce from the left tear duct to the right, so that the thread comes out on both sides of the flesh; then stretch the flesh above with the needle, and cut it with a wide spatula.	It is acquired by injury or incision or cautery or something like that. This is the method of operating for it: you take a needle through which has been passed a double thread and you run it into the flesh, making it penetrate from the left angle of the eye to the right angle so that the thread is fixed in flesh both ends. Then with the needle stretch the flesh upwards and make an incision with a broad scalpel; and if the eyelid returns to its proper shape, well and good.	0.8420886

chapter-2-subchapter-15.txt

chapter-2-subchapter-16.txt
Know that the nail (pterygium) is of two kinds: one is fibrous and resembles a hard wen, and the other is not fibrous, but resembles a frozen white moisture, so that when one touches it with iron and tries to grasp it with tweezers, one cannot; and both kinds begin near the tear duct, and grow little by little until they cover all the sight and all the light and the movement of the eye.	Ungula occurs in two forms: either the nervous, which resembles a fine hard membrane; or the non-nervous, like a white congealed humidity; which, when the iron touches it or you try to pick it up with a hook, is cut through and the hook has no hold on it. Both kinds grow from the greater angle of the eye, whence they spread little by little until they cover the pupil and block both the vision and the movements of the eye.	0.70465213
And be careful that the spatula does not touch the fleshy membrane and tear it, and that the pupil is not pierced; and after the incision throw a little crushed salt into the eye, and some eyewash made of litharge, and leave it until the next day; then treat it with what is necessary until it is healed.	But beware lest the scalpel touch the corneal covering and cause a fissure in it and the pupil protrude. Then after the incision put into the eye a little powdered salt or an eye-lotion of verdigris, and leave it till the following day; then treat as may be necessary till it heals.	0.81374174
And if the nail (pterygium) is not fibrous, and you cannot push the needle in, and the hook cannot enter, this kind of nail (pterygium) is often treated with medicines; and they arise as I have described in the division, and if you wish to cut it, open the eye of the patient, and take a light, slightly sharp spatula of this shape:	If the ungula is non-nervous in origin and you cannot transfix it with a needle nor get a hook to hold fast in it, this sort is often successfully treated by medical means. So treat as described in the section.	0.6665044
And scrape the nail (pterygium) off subtly, and if you see that it diminishes a little and the scraping is effective, then drip from your mouth into the eye an eyewash made of litharge and red eyewash and crushed salt, and cover the eye until the next day; then resume the other work according to this same method, until it is all removed.	So treat as described in the section. But if you prefer to cut it, open the patient's eye, and take a fine smooth scalpel, rather blunt, like this and with this gently scrape away the ungula from above; and if you see that it is crumbling away and breaking down under the scraping, then immediately instil into the eye some eye-lotion of verdigris, or the red eye-lotion, or a little powdered salt, and bind the eye up till next day.	0.7546582
If something is wrong in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then leave it, and first treat the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.	Then repeat the operation on it till you have removed it all, unless an abscess forms in the eye, in which case cease the operation and treat the abscess till cured. Then repeat the treatment with the same scraping till healed.	0.69033694
And if the appearance of the flesh of the caruncle hinders the eye significantly, then lift it with a hook, and cut a part of it and not all, so that a flow of tears does not occur; then instill into the eye a red eyewash which is made of litharge.	As for a protuberance of flesh in the angle, if it causes great hurt pick it up with a hook and cut part of it away, with not too big an incision lest there be a flux of tears. Then into the canthus instil red eye-lotion or lotion of verdigris till healed.	0.74389094

chapter-2-subchapter-17.txt
But nevertheless, you must alleviate the treatment of every weak eye in a natural way; and in the case of an accidental cause, by working with iron; and do not put your hand to any of these procedures until you see that this member is able to tolerate that procedure.	So must you do with superfluous flesh that arises in the eye. But you must avoid treating surgically any eye that is weak, whether congenitally or by acquired disease. Never set your hand to an operation of this kind till you have seen if the organ can endure such an operation.	0.739427

chapter-2-subchapter-18.txt
of the veins of the eyes Specks are red veins that cover the eye, and impede vision and constantly weaken the eye.	Pannus is a network of blood-vessels spreading over the eye so as to interfere with the function of sight and, in the course of time, weakening the eye.	0.6175835
It is therefore necessary first that you see if the eye, in which the speck is, is strong, and there is no other disease besides the speck; then lift it in this way: instruct the patient to put his head in your lap, then lift these veins with the hook according to your skill, and let the hook be a fine double hook according to this form:	You must first examine, and if the eye with the pannus be strong, with no fault other than the pannus, then the pannus should be gathered up. This is done by bidding the patient put his head in your lap; then, as skilfully as you may, pick up those blood-vessels with one or two hooks. The hooks should be of a gentle curve, like this.	0.81286454
And let there be two hooks of different sizes on one handle in this form:	Or there can be two hooks joined together on one handle, thus.	0.5842525
then lift these veins carefully with the hooks, and release the blood little by little, until you see these veins recede from the eye; and be careful not to injure the eye with the points of the hooks, and do this work at midday in the sun, and be very careful in your work so that you only cut these veins; and when you have done this, instill green and red collyrium into the eye to destroy what remains of the speck.	Then take up the blood-vessels gently with the fine scissors, and wipe away the blood constantly, till you see all those blood-vessels removed from the eye, and the blood wells forth. But be careful of the eye lest you damage it with the points of the scissors. Let your work be done in broad sunlight at midday; and be very steady in your action so as to cut nothing beside the bloodvessels. When you have finished, instil the red or green lotion into the eye to destroy by its caustic action the remnants of the pannus.	0.8705835
And if you cannot remove it all at that time, apply a plaster on the eye of things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave it for a few days until the pain subsides and be sure of a warm abscess, then start again in the same way as before until it is healed; and this is the form of the hooks:	If you are unable to gather it all up at that one time, apply a plaster to the eye such as will allay the pain, and leave him* for a few days till* the pain be eased and there is no danger of an abscess. Then repeat the operation in the same manner till it is healed.	0.8188598

chapter-2-subchapter-19.txt
Doctors call a fistula "arissati": when you treat it with cautery and with a sharp burning medicine as I have said before, and it is not healed, then the trick is to cut open the abscess, where it has settled, and draw out all the moisture that is there, until the bone is exposed.	Doctors give the name 'fistula' to what laymen call 'a quill'. When you have treated it with the cautery or with caustic according to the instructions given previously, and it is not healed, there is no clear method of treatment except to cut down on the tumour at its ripening and let out all the humidity or pus therein, till you reach the bone.	0.7154948
And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, then scrape it with the instrument whose form is shown here; and it is called "rough head," and let it be made of Indian steel with a round head, and be pointed like a file as it is in the present form:	When bone is reached and you see necrosis or blackness, scrape it with an instrument like this. It is called 'rough-head' and is made of Indian iron. Its head is round like a button but is engraved with markings finely engraved, like those of a file or a rasp.	0.7396809
And place it on the site of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a little so that you know that the corruption is scraped; and do this a few times, then restore the area with drying medicines.	Place it on the site of the diseased bone and spin it between your fingers, pressing down a little with your hand, till you are sure all the diseased bone has been scraped away. Do this several times. Then let the place be dressed with stanching and styptic remedies.	0.8111803
Then place it on the bone near the tear duct, and move your hand slightly away from the eye, then turn the drill until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it because the air comes out if he holds his hand over his nose; and then restore the place with dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows and the place hardens, the matter goes to the nose; so it is an easier thing for the patient.	Then put it to the bone itself near the canthus; but keep your hand a little away from the eye; then with your hand rotate the drill till the bone is perforated; and the patient will have the sensation of this, since, if he holds his hands over his nose he will find the breath coming out through the hole. And then dress the place with styptic and stanching remedies as I have taught you. And when the flesh begins to grow and the place gets hard, the matter which before was coming outward will be turned into the nose; and this will be easier for the patient.	0.91486335

chapter-2-subchapter-20.txt

chapter-2-subchapter-21.txt
And if the eye shows great prominence, pierce it with a fine spatula that reaches deep into the eye, and drain the albuginous humour and lower the eye, and enter it immediately; then drain it until it is healed.	Then you perforate it with a fine scalpel going to the depth of the eye; and an albuminous humour will flow out and the eye will shrink and return at once. Then bandage till healed.	0.7870745

chapter-2-subchapter-22.txt
have the patient sit between your hands, then take the fine spatula and make a small hole on the cornea through the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea and the corona, so that the swelling comes out; and when it has come out, instill into the eye warm water mixed with honey, or water in which fenugreek has been boiled and honey, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.	But if the pus is not ready to be brought down by this method, then seat the patient in front of you; then take a fine scalpel and cut a little above the corneal tunic near the coronal junction of conjunctiva and cornea, till the pus comes out. When it comes out, instil warm water mixed with honey, or water boiled with fenugreek and honey. Then treat as usual till healed.	0.7642946

chapter-2-subchapter-23.txt
of the waters of the eye We have already discussed the characteristics of the waters in the division, and what is necessary for piercing; so proceed according to the method.	On the couching of cataract. We have already mentioned in the appropriate section the varieties of cataract and those in which depression is useful, in full detail; so you may take it accurately from there.	0.5273066
If the water descends immediately, the patient sees in front of him and the instrument in his eye.	If the humour comes down at once, the patient will at once see whatever his vision is opened upon while the needle is still in his eye.	0.6317549
Afterwards rest a little, and if the water rises again the second time, place the cautery with the instrument, and when it is inserted and it does not rise, then withdraw the almagda gently by turning your hand little by little; and then put a little rock salt in water, and bathe the eye with it inside.	Then let him rest a little while; and if the humour goes back up again depress it a second time without taking the needle out. When it stays down firmly and does not come back again, gently draw the needle out, twisting it ever so slowly with your hand.	0.7452783
Then immediately place over the eye tow or wool soaked in rose oil and egg white, and tie it with the healthy eye.	Then dissolve a little pure rock-salt in water and wash the eyeball with the solution; then apply all over the outer aspect of the eye carded linen or wool moistened with oil of roses and egg-white, and bandage it up together with the sound eye.	0.6411605
We, and those who are of our time, apply ground cumin with egg white.	Now we and our contemporaries apply pounded cumin with the egg-white.	0.8381352
And if the almagda cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are such men who have very hard eyes, you must take the instrument that is called "alberit", of which this is the form:	But if the couching needle does not serve, failing to enter the eye on account of its hardness (for there are some whose eyes are hard indeed), you should take the scalpel called al-baridl figured thus.	0.6946881
If hot abscesses occur, unbind the eye before the seventh day, and treat it with that which soothes abscesses; and when it is soothed, uncover the sight and place a small pad on his face to cover it for some days, and let him remain in that dark room.	But if an abscess occur you should unbandage the eye before the seventh day and restore it to health by those methods that allay swelling. When it has subsided, allow him free sight, putting over his face a dark veil beneath which his vision may be exercised for a few days while he is still in the dark room.	0.8161183
And then leave the room little by little, and return to his affairs; and know that no disciple should interfere in this case.	Then let him come out of the room gradually and take up the exercise of his business. But you should know that in the case of a depression of a cataract the student cannot manage without having seen that operation performed several times; then he may perform it himself.	0.58885825
And one came to us who was from Iraq, who told us that in his country they made a pierced almagda, with which they sucked the fluid, but nevertheless I never saw any in our land, nor did I ever read it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.	I have heard that a certain Iraqi has said that in Iraq he makes a hollow needle by which the humour is sucked out. In our land I have never seen anyone do it in this fashion, nor have I read of it described in any of the books of the Ancients; perhaps it is newly invented.	0.7839448
And let their ends be of this same fineness, and the last with three sharp angles.	They are mostly made of brass; and their extremities should be of this very fineness, triangular at the tip and sharp.	0.5970827

chapter-2-subchapter-24.txt
Sometimes there grow in the nose diverse fleshy additions, some of which resemble scorpions with many feet; and there are some such that there is flesh ingrained with a pale colour, and some have soft flesh of good colour.	Sometimes there arise in the nose various superfluous fleshy growths. One of these is a thing resembling a centipede; another, a cancerous growth, stony, hard, and pale in colour; another again is a soft growth, not pale.	0.74515593
In this case, for those fleshy growths which are soft, and not ingrained, you must make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and open their nostrils, and cast the hook at those fleshy growths, and pull them out; then cut what you can hold with the fine, sharp spatula on one side, until you know that the flesh is entirely removed.	Any of these growths that is soft is not malignant or cancerous. You should make the patient sit before you, facing the sun, and dilate his nose and introduce a hook into these polyps and draw them out; then amputate what you can take hold of, with a fine scalpel sharp on one side, till you know that all the growth is gone.	0.78254235
And if any part remains that cannot be cut, then open it with one of the fine instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and if the blood overcomes you, or a hot abscess forms, treat it as needed; and if it is a malignant abscess, hurry and cauterize it until the blood is stanched and all the flesh removed, then put a mixture of water and vinegar or wine into the nose.	And if there be anything of them left behind that you cannot cut away, then gently scrape away with any fine instrument till nothing of them remains; and if the bleeding be too much for you, or an abscess occur, then combat it by suitable means. If it be a malignant swelling, then speedily cauterize till the bleeding stops and all the polypi are gone. Then introduce into the nose, after the incision, vinegar and water, or wine; and if the nose be free and fluid flow into the throat from it, then know that he is cured.	0.9125511
And let it be of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, like a tube, and the conduit likewise; and if you wish, make a closed tube, and let the instrument be full for cleansing the head; and let it have a handle at the end for holding it when heating the oil or some liquid.	It should be made of silver or bronze like a small lamp, its oil-container open, and with its channel likewise. If you like you may make its spout closed like a reed; and the oil-container of the instrument can be made covered over. It has a handle at the end, as you see, to hold it when heating the oil or whatever juice or other liquid you wish.	0.8912811

chapter-2-subchapter-25.txt
of the flesh on the nose	On warts growing on the end of the nose.	0.40057698

chapter-2-subchapter-26.txt
Know that when a break in continuity occurs in one of these cartilage structures, little benefits, except in some men.	You should know that when discontinuity occurs in one of these cartilages, treatment of them rarely does any good, except in a few people.	0.8268707
The method of suturing is that you bring together the break: either with needles, as we have said in the suturing of the abdomen; or with thread, as I have explained to you.	Now the manner of suturing is to close the discontinuity, either with a needle, as we describe for suture of the belly, or with a thread as we tell you there.	0.78852665

chapter-2-subchapter-27.txt
of abscesses of the lips	On the extraction of nodules occurring on the lip.	0.41811368
In many men, hard abscesses appear inside the lips, resembling vetch grains, both smaller and larger; then you must turn the lips, and cut open each knot, and take it with tweezers and cut it on each side; then fill the place after the incision with ground vitriol, until the blood is stanched; and then wash it with vinegar, and treat the area with drying agents until it is healed.	A good many people sometimes get little hard swellings inside their lips, some resembling the vetch grain; some larger, some smaller. You should invert the lip, incise all along each nodule, catch it up with a hook, and cut it away all round. Then after incising rub pounded vitriol into the places until the bleeding stops. Then let him rinse with vinegar and salt, and dress the place with styptic drugs till the wounds heal.	0.89765376

chapter-2-subchapter-28.txt
Often extra flesh grows on the gums, which the ancients call "albulus"; so you must hold it with forceps, and cut it at its root, and let the pus or blood flow; then put on the area ground vitriol, or other astringent and drying powders; and if this flesh returns after the incision, and it often does, then cut it a second time, and cauterize it: it will not return after cauterization; and these are the shapes of the instruments for cutting.	There often grows on the gum superfluous flesh which the Ancients call 'epulis'. You should take it up with a hook or grasp it with forceps and cut it at its root and let the pus or blood flow out. Then put on the place either pounded vitriol or one of the absorbent styptic powders. And if the growth returns after treatment—for they often return—excise a second time and cauterize; it will not come back after cauterization.	0.86883444

chapter-2-subchapter-29.txt

chapter-2-subchapter-30.txt
It is necessary when you treat a toothache that you delay pulling it as long as you can, for one should not do this; for it is a very important substance until one has no excuse to scrape it.	You should treat toothache with every device and be reluctant to extract; nothing can replace the tooth when it is extracted, for it is a noble substance—until there is no means of avoiding extraction.	0.71010053
Then when the patient is compelled to have it extracted, you must be certain of the aching tooth. Many times the pain deceives the patient, and he thinks it is in a healthy tooth, and has the good tooth pulled; and yet the pain does not leave because of that, until the bad one is extracted, for we have already seen this done to these lords; and when you are quite certain of the aching tooth, then you must scrape around the tooth with a strong spatula to protect the gums on all sides; then loosen it with your fingers or with fine tongs at first, little by little, until it is well loosened, then firmly grasp it with the tongs; and let the patient's head be in your lap between your knees, and hold him well so that he does not move.	When the patient is determined to have it out, act with deliberation till you are sure which is the painful tooth; for often the pain deceives the patient and he thinks the pain is in a tooth that is sound, so he has that one extracted; but the pain does not abate until the diseased tooth is removed. We have frequently seen this happen in the practice of the barber-surgeons. When you are quite sure which is actually the painful tooth you should cut away all round the tooth with a scalpel having a certain measure of strength, until the gum is separated all round. Then, with your fingers, or with a pair of fine forceps, first move the tooth slowly and gently till you stir it; then get a good grip on it with a pair of large forceps, holding the patient's head between your knees so that it does not move.	0.9172461
Then extract the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it will not come out, then take one of these instruments and insert it gently on each side, and move it as you did before.	Then draw the tooth straight out so as not to splinter it. And if it will not come out, then take one of these following instruments and gradually introduce it beneath the tooth all round; then try to move it as you did before.	0.85796237
And if the tooth is perforated and decayed, you must fill it with cloth, there where the holes are; and grasp it delicately with the tongs, so that it does not break upon extraction; and it is necessary to work very carefully around the gum to loosen the tooth.	If the tooth has a hole in it or is decayed, you should plug the hole with a rag, forcing it in with the tip of a fine probe so that it will not break when you grip it with the forceps. You must completely scarify all round the gum.	0.7972065
And take good care that you do not break it, and a piece remains, and the patient suffers even greater pain than the first due to the harmful root.	Take the utmost care not to splinter the tooth lest a piece should remain behind and arouse the patient's ills afresh, causing greater pain than before.	0.7075056
The shapes of the instruments, with which one moves the teeth first, should be with long points and thick handles, so that they do not bend when you pull the tooth; and these are the shapes:	The shape of the fine forceps with which you first move the tooth should be with long jaws and a short handle, thick, lest they bend when you take hold of the tooth. And this is the shape of the large forceps.	0.8301792
And they should be of thick parts so that they do not bend upon pulling, and be of well-made Indian steel, and be toothed to hold firmly.	They should be of Indian iron or of steel, strongly made, the jaws tempered and having teeth fitting into each other so that a sure and firm grip may be obtained. Sometimes the jaws are made like a file, also to give a strong grip.	0.73237246

chapter-2-subchapter-31.txt
of the roots of the teeth When the root remains after pulling, you must put on the area cotton moistened with butter for one or two days,	When, in extracting a tooth, a broken-off root remains behind, you should apply to the place cotton wool soaked in butter for one or two days to soften it; then insert the tongs or forceps with stork-bill jaws; this is the figure of the forceps.	0.7389887
And if the roots do not want to come out with these forceps, you must uncover the flesh all around the root, and put there the instrument which is called "althali", that is to say, a lever, of which this is the shape:	If it does not respond to your attempt to extract it with these forceps, you must dig down over the root and remove all the flesh, and then insert the instrument that resembles a small crowbar; this is its figure.	0.6716799
And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out because of this, that is good; if not, help yourself with all the instruments, whose shapes come below:	It has a short rather thick extremity, and should not be tempered lest it fracture. If the root comes out, good; if not, get assistance from the other instruments figured here.	0.7111275
And also one uses this instrument which has two prongs, of which this is the shape: and other tools that are earlier in the section on teeth, and this instrument that resembles large forceps, of which this is the shape:	Another, triangular and slender. Sometimes also we get help from this forked instrument and beside this, from other instruments and appliances mentioned above under scraping of teeth. Sometimes also recourse may be had to this instrument resembling a large hook, figured thus.	0.65216506
And let this instrument be strong so that it cannot break, and know that there are many dental instruments; and also other instruments, which are not mentioned; and the wise and subtle master finds for himself his instrument, according to what his work and the illness show him, for there are such illnesses where the ancients did not teach any instrument because of the diversity of bones, and if the cartilage or other bones don't break, where it rots, look for the instruments which are needed, as I have told you, and help yourself with the gestures, of which this is the shape: And let them be large and gripping to hold the bone, so that it does not escape, but can be held and removed; and then restore the place with medicines appropriate to this, and if there is rot in the bone, and it is small, then scrape it with this instrument:	You should know that dental instruments are very numerous, as are the other instruments, almost beyond reckoning. And the experienced worker with a knowledge of his craft may devise fresh instruments according as his work on actual cases suggests them to him. For there are certain diseases for which the Ancients did not mention any instruments, on account of the variety of them. Now if the mandible or one of the bones of the mouth be broken or decayed, explore the site with some instrument that is suitable for it, namely one of the instruments or forceps mentioned for extraction of roots.	0.78428805

chapter-2-subchapter-32.txt
When the tooth does not appear according to the natural body, and the shape is ugly, and especially in young women, so you must know if the tooth has grown in next to the tooth, and is not in the right place, and one cannot file it or polish it: then file it; and if it is higher than the tooth, take this instrument of which this is the shape, and it looks like a small beak, and let it be of Indian steel, sharp at the tip:	When teeth grow in other than their natural place the appearance is very bad, specially when it occurs in women or slaves. So you should examine; if the tooth has grown out behind another tooth and it is impossible either to saw or file it down, then extract it. But if it be attached to another tooth, cut it down with an instrument of this kind. It resembles a small chisel and should be of Indian steel with a well-sharpened end.	0.7880978
And cut it little by little over several days because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it is visible so that it can be filed, then file it with such a file as this is the shape:	You should file the tooth with it very slowly and gently over a period of many days so as not to shift the tooth and cause it to fall out; then finally smooth it and scrape it with one of the scrapers.	0.5689372
and it is like the file with which needles are made; and file the tooth little by little over several days lightly, so that it does not move until it falls; then smooth it at the end with a scraper, and if the tooth is too sharp and it injures the tongue, it is necessary to file the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not injure the tongue nor corrupt speech.	If it be a tooth of which part has broken off and it hurts the tongue in speaking, file it down till you have disposed of the roughness of the break and the tooth is smooth and neither injures the tongue nor hinders speech.	0.64158213

chapter-2-subchapter-33.txt
Then cut the ends of the thread with pliers, and join them, and fold them back between the healthy tooth, and place it so that it does not injure the tongue; and then leave it tightened as long as it can stay, and if it comes loose, or the thread breaks, tighten it with another thread; it will remain and serve thus for all its time, and this is the shape of the teeth and the figure of the straightening of the two healthy teeth, and of the two loose ones, as you see:	Then with the scissors cut off the two ends of the wire remaining over, and bring them together and twist them with forceps and hide them between a sound tooth and a loose tooth so as to not injure the tongue; then for the future leave them thus bound. But if it comes undone or breaks, bind them with another wire; so may he have the use of them all his life. This is a figure of the teeth and the manner of interlacing two sound and two loose teeth, as you see. After one or two teeth have fallen out they may be restored to their place and bound in as instructed, and become permanent.	0.90503526
And when the tooth falls out, it is put back in its place, immediately, as we have said; and let no one interfere who is not wise and experienced, and sometimes a tooth is made from cow bone, and it is put in the place where the defect is, and it is secured as we have said, and remains and serves thus for a long time.	This can be done only by an expert and gentle practitioner. Sometimes a piece of ox-bone may be carved and made into the shape of a tooth, and placed in the site where a tooth was lost, and fastened as we have said, and it will last and he will get long service from it.	0.736237

chapter-2-subchapter-34.txt
to cut the frenulum of the tongue Sometimes this frenulum that comes from under the tongue is either natural, that one is born with it; or by accident from a healed wound; and the procedure is such that you open the patient's mouth, and have their head in your lap, and lift the tongue; then cut the sinewy frenulum widely, so that the tongue is freed from its attachment, and if there is hardness or a knot, and it is from the healing of a wound, put the hook there and cut that ligament widely; and be careful that the incision is not too deep, because of the artery that is underneath; and when you have done this, wash the area with rose water and vinegar, or with cold water, then put a linen tent under the tongue; and let the patient hold it there every night, so that the area cannot heal closed.	Sometimes this ligament that occurs under the tongue is natural and congenital; or it may be accidental, owing to scarring from an injury. The operation for it is to open the patient's mouth, having his head in your lap, and lift his tongue; then cut that sinew-like ligament transversely till the tongue is freed from its hold. If it is hard and nodular, arising from scarring after an injury, catch it with a hook and slit it transversely until the ligament is severed and the knots undone. Beware of making the incision deeply into the flesh, or you may cut an artery there and haemorrhage may occur.	0.8574923
And if bleeding occurs, apply ground vitriol to the area; and if the blood overcomes you, cauterize it with a lentil-shaped cautery, which is good for this; then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.	If there should be haemorrhage, put pounded vitriol on the place; and if bleeding still prevails burn the spot with a lenticular cautery of suitable size and treat in the usual way till healed.	0.7927555

chapter-2-subchapter-35.txt

chapter-2-subchapter-36.txt
of abscesses of the throat Sometimes lumps come inside the throat, which are called "godath," and they are properly called the two tonsils, and when you treat them, as we have said in the section, and they are not healed, then take note: if it is a hard abscess with little feeling and dark color, do not touch it with iron (a surgical instrument).	On the treatment of swelling of the tonsils and other swellings in the throat. Sometimes there occur in the throat buboes called 'tonsils', which resemble the buboes occurring externally. When you have employed the remedies described in their own place, without effect, examine, and if the tumour be hard, dark coloured, and devoid of sensation, do not touch it with an instrument.	0.67710173
And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also because of the bleeding; but leave it until it is ripe, and then you will open it, or it will rupture by itself; and if it is a round white color, and the root is thin, have the instrument prepared for cutting, but first see if the hot abscess rests and is calmed.	If it be of a red colour, with a thick root, do not touch this with an instrument either, for fear of a haemorrhage; but let it be till it come to a head; then you may perforate it or let it burst of its own accord. But if it be pale coloured, round, with a slender pedicle, this is the kind that should be cut. The operation for this is first to see, before operating, whether his inflamed tumour has already completely subsided or to some extent diminished.	0.80354106
Then have the patient sit facing the sun, with his head in your lap, and open his mouth and have the assistant hold it between his hands, and press the tongue down with the instrument, of which here is the form; and let it be of silver or fine brass like a knife:	Then make the patient sit down in the full light of the sun with his head in your lap; open his mouth; and have an assistant before you to press back the tongue with an instrument like this. It should be made of bronze or silver, and slender like a knife.	0.9144372
When you press down the tongue with this instrument, and you see the abscess, take the hook and insert it into the tonsil, and pull it out as much as you can; and pull some of the tissues with it, then cut it with the instrument, of which here is the form, which resembles scissors; however, the tips are curved, and one towards the other, and are very sharp, and it is made of Indian steel or fine steel:	And when the tongue is depressed with its help, the tumour will be made manifest to you and your direct vision will fall upon it. Then take a hook and fix it in one tonsil and pull it forward as far as it will go; but be careful to not pull away with it any of the mucosa. Then cut it with an instrument of this form; it is like scissors except that its extremities are curved, the beak of each meeting the other, and very sharp. It should be made of Indian iron or Damascene steel.	0.84772694
And if you do not have this instrument at hand, then cut it with pliers, of which here is the form:	If you have not this kind of instrument, cut it with a scalpel of this form, on the one side sharp, on the other quite blunt.	0.5859771
And I treated a woman with an abscess that had grown inside her throat, that is to say, an abscess with little feeling; and it had almost completely closed off her throat, so that the woman could not breathe because the passage was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained like that for a day or two.	I once treated a woman for a tumour that had grown in her throat and was rather dark in colour and had little sensation. It had almost blocked the throat and the woman had only a narrow opening to breathe through, and was quite prevented from eating or drinking, so that she was at death's door, if she had so remained for a day or two.	0.8176984
And the abscess had risen so much that it had pushed out two lines through the two nostrils.	From the tumour there arose two offshoots, which had eventually emerged through the nostrils.	0.53909266

chapter-2-subchapter-37.txt
of the uvula	On removal of the tumour of the uvula that is called 'uva'.	0.5208545
When a cold descends to the uvula, and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is large and round underneath, it is called "uvula.	When a flux descends to the uvula and it swells and the uvula becomes white and elongated, then it is called 'columella*. And if it should be swollen below and rounded then it is called 'uva'.	0.80363256
When it is treated as we have said in the section, and the treatment is not effective, and you see that the hot abscess has subsided, and it is thin, then you must cut it; and the one that is round and compact and not long; and it is blood-red or dark-colored or black, then you must avoid cutting it. For there is great danger to the patient.	When it has been treated as mentioned in its section, and the treatment is unavailing, and you see the inflamed tumour subsiding and the uvula becoming thin, you should amputate it. Now those of them that are bunched up and rounded and not elongated, full of blood, or of a dark colour or black, and without sensation, these you should avoid incising; for this course is dangerous for the patient.	0.88683844
It is therefore necessary, when you see it, according to the manner I have described, its paleness and its length, that you have the patient sit facing the sun, and depress the tongue with the instrument we mentioned earlier; then insert the hook into the uvula, and pull it down, and cut it with one of the two instruments I mentioned for the incision of the tonsils.	But when you see them as I have described, somewhat pale and elongated, get the patient to sit in the sunlight and depress his tongue with the instrument described above; then take hold of the uva with a hook and draw it down and cut it off with one of the two instruments described for excision of the tonsils.	0.84052414
And you must not cut more than the excess that is beyond the natural limit; for if you cut more, it harms the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said regarding the incision of the tonsils, and treat it until it is healed.	You should not cut away more than up to the natural limit. For if you cut more off you cause injury to the voice and speech. Then, after excising, carry on the treatment on the lines described under removal of the tonsils, and treat till healed.	0.8558878
And if the patient is afraid of being cut, then you must use ingenuity to cauterize it without fear.	But if the patient flinch from operation, then you must contrive to cauterize it, fearlessly and boldly.	0.6762333
And the patient should put their head in your lap, and then you depress the tongue with the instrument we mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and smear it with hot quicklime, ensuring that it is neither too thick nor too thin; and apply the tip of this instrument, which has the following shape:	The method is to employ a caustic; you put the patient's head in your lap; then, having depressed the tongue with the instrument described above, take some of the corrosive fluid mentioned in the book on cauterization, make it up with quicklime to a medium consistency, and fill with it the hollow in this instrument, whose form is thus.	0.7544644
This treatment is safer than incision, even safer than cautery; if it is treated with fumigation in the following manner: take calamint, hyssop, oregano, rue, chamomile, southernwood, and similar herbs, and combine them all, or some of them, in a pot, and add vinegar, and boil it; and the pot should be well-sealed with strong clay, and in the middle of the pot there should be a hollow instrument shaped like this:	This kind of treatment is safer than incision and less to be feared. Sometimes uva is cured by a method milder than either incision or cautery, namely by means of vapour in the following manner: take pennyroyal and artemisia absinthium and organy and rue and wormwood and chamomile and southernwood and similar herbs and put them all, or some of them, in a pot, cover them with vinegar, and boil them.	0.7850179
And it should be made of silver or brass, and one end should be placed in the patient's mouth so that the vapor rises to the uvula through the mouth, until the uvula is cauterized; then repeat it often, until the uvula dries up. And be careful not to do this at the beginning of the development of a hot abscess, because several complications can occur; and do not apply this fire until the decline of the hot abscess.	The pot should be luted with clay; and there is to be a hole in the middle of the lid to which is fitted a hollow instrument like this, made of silver or bronze, and the end in which is the protuberance should be put in the patient's mouth so that the vapour passes up the tube to the uvula, which becomes of a very dark colour. Do this repeatedly till it sloughs away. Be careful not to apply this treatment at the first appearance of the tumour, for often you will aggravate the tumour; but you should do it at the decline of the inflammation.	0.8169881
And if this instrument is not available, then take a cane and place an eggshell inside the end, so that the patient's mouth is not too hot; because the eggshell prevents the vapor from irritating the mouth, and this is a good and safe treatment.	If you do not have this instrument, take a reed and fit an egg-shell on the end so that the patient's mouth is not burned; for the egg-shell will prevent the heat of the vapour from burning the mouth. This is a really good and safe treatment.	0.91632205

chapter-2-subchapter-38.txt
And the instrument should be curved at the end so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the end raised upwards; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, lest choking occur, and do not push the bone further in; and it is better that the patient inserts the instrument, because they know better where the object is stuck; then they swallow it, or pull it out with the same instrument, until it is removed.	The patient himself should introduce it into his own throat gently; he should raise the head backwards and take care not to touch the larynx lest coughing be aroused. And let him remove therewith the bone or sharp body. Or else let the doctor introduce it with his hand (although it is better if the patient himself introduce it, since he knows the site of the obstruction) and push it down and then draw up his hand with the instrument; all this according to the way it presents itself to him, till it is removed.	0.81542754

chapter-2-subchapter-39.txt
of the leech in the throat	On the removal of a leech sticking in the throat.	0.44611597
Sometimes the leech is treated, as I have said in the section, by the application of medicines; and when this is not effective, then look in the patient's throat in the sunlight, after you have pressed down their tongue with the instrument I told you about.	When you treat a leech by the medical means spoken of in the appropriate section, with no effect, then inspect the patient's throat in full sunlight after depressing the tongue with the instrument I have described.	0.7702908
And if you see the leech, pull it out with a small hook, or with fine forceps that are suitable for this.	If your gaze falls upon the leech, pull it out at once with a small hook or a fine pair of forceps.	0.68261045
And if this is not effective, then take a horsehair rope and put it in the patient's throat, then place a hot iron on the end of the rope, and do this often. And have the patient abstain from water all day.	But if you cannot get hold of it, take a cannula and introduce it into the patient's mouth near the leech, then pass through the cannula a red-hot iron; do this repeatedly; while the patient must not drink at all that day.	0.74496686
Then take a glass full of cold water, and open the mouth, and pour it in without swallowing, and move it around with your hand often; and as soon as the leech feels the water, it will fall off.	Then let him take a vessel full of cold water, open his mouth in it and rinse out with it, but let him not swallow a drop of it; and he should keep the movement of the water going by hand time after time; for the leech straightway falls off when it feels the water.	0.85126644
And if it does not fall off as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafoetida, with the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the uvula; do this many times, for it will fall off without delay.	If it does not come away by these means, fumigate the patient's throat with urine or with the juice of asafoetida, using the instrument described for fumigating the uvula. Do this several times, for then it will fall away.	0.7502076
And the form of the instrument with which one extracts the leech, is, when one can see it, similar to curved tongs designed to enter the throat; and it should resemble the beak of a heron, and have a roughened surface from a file, so that what it grips, it cannot let go; and here is the form:	This is the figure of an instrument for extracting the leech from the throat when visible. It resembles forceps, as you see, except that it has this bend for entry into the throat; and the two extremities are shaped like a bird's bill, with the roughness of a file. When they have hold of a thing they do not let go.	0.78471357

chapter-2-subchapter-40.txt
There are many kinds of abscesses, according to what is recalled later in this book, and they differ in perforation and in size; and this is in two ways, one of which is in its appearance, and in the moisture it contains.	The kinds of tumour are many and various, as will be mentioned in order in this book. They differ in the way they are to be perforated or incised, according to two criteria. One is the kind of tumour it is in itself and the humidities it contains.	0.81635064
And the second way is due to the places on the body where they are located.	The other is the part of the body where it occurs.	0.63698685
For an abscess of the head is different from one of the anus, and an abscess in fleshy areas is different from one that occurs in the joints, and each has its own treatment in practice.	For the tumour occurring in the head is different from the tumour occurring on the posterior, and a tumour occurring in a fleshy part differs from one on the joints; each having its separate category of operation.	0.82933885
And there are abscesses that one should not pierce, until the pus is ripe according to its maturation; and there are some that must be pierced when they are grown, and do not ripen according to their maturation, such as abscesses that are near joints.	There are some tumours that should not be opened till after the pus in them is matured and ripe. But others should be opened when still raw and immature, such as a tumour near the joints.	0.74012804
For when an abscess develops near a joint, and it is left until it rots around it, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which causes contraction in that limb.	For when a tumour occurring near a joint lasts long enough to putrefy its surroundings, it often breaks down the ligaments or the tendons of the joint and causes paralysis in the limb.	0.81691086
Or if the abscess is near a principal limb, and you delay the perforation until it is ripe, it will harm the principal limb; or if it is near the anus, it is pierced before it is ripe; and you should not pierce a raw abscess without complete digestion, except for one near the anus, so that it does not rot deeply inside and extend within, and a fistula develops there; and cannot heal for a long time.	Or if the tumour be near a major organ, if you delay the opening of it until it ripens you will damage that major organ. In the same way, if it be near the anus you must open it, although unripe for opening. The reason why you must open an abscess near the anus while still unripe, before it is brought to a head, is to prevent it from putrefying the cleft and penetrating to the inner part of the anus and becoming a fistula, and incurable.	0.866196
And when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said.	But when the swelling is in the fleshy parts it is best to leave the perforation, as we have said, until it is fully matured.	0.80440366
For if you pierce it before that, the body of the venom from it will spread, and be full of much filth; and perhaps the edges and the depths of it will harden.	For if you perforate it prematurely the sanious discharge will go on longer and will be excessively foul; and often both the edges and the depths of the opening will become indurated.	0.7229703
And there are some abscesses that are pierced across the width of the body, according to the needs of the limb.	Some swellings are perforated latitudinally if necessary, or having regard to the requirement of the part.	0.5097338
Those that have no head, such as a soft superficial abscess, you must pierce it completely; and when the abscess is large, and it has collected much pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus at that time, but draw out a part; then plug the abscess until the next day, then draw out some again; do this many times, little by little, until all the pus comes out; especially if the patient is of weak constitution, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or a decrepit old man.	Those that have no head, such as the smooth and flat ones, should be incised with only a simple perforation. When a swelling is large and has collected a large quantity of pus, and you perforate it, do not be in a hurry to get it all out at once; but get some of it out and then bandage it till another day; then again remove part of the pus; and so do, again and again, gradually, till it is all got out.	0.85060036
For the spirit sometimes leaps with the exit of the pus, so that perhaps the patient dies, and you don't perceive it. Therefore, approach this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, wipe the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a full incision, apply tents of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, you must put a tent in each one so that they touch each other; and if you have cut a part of the skin in the abscess, and you have shaved around it, you must fill it with old cotton or lint from linen cloths without moisture, and bind it until the third day; then remove it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.	This particularly applies if the patient be in a weak state, or a pregnant woman, or a baby, or a decrepit old man; for the animal spirit is very often dissolved with the sudden evacuation of the pus, and the patient dies unexpectedly. Be very careful therefore, with this sort. Then, after you have opened the tumour, you should cleanse the wound and consider: if the tumour has only a small opening, or it is one simple incision, employ swabs of lint or cotton wool; but if it is a large tumour with multiple incisions, introduce a swab into each incision so that they meet. And if the tumour was such that you cut away a part of the skin, or sliced the tumour, you will need to pack it with cotton wool or plucked linen, dry; and bandage until the third day.	0.88378274
And if bleeding occurs in your work, apply cold water and vinegar, and wet a cloth, and place it on the bleeding area many times.	If a haemorrhage occurs while you are operating, use cold water and vinegar, soaking a lint rag in both and frequently applying it to the place.	0.78914165
And if the bleeding persists, apply treatment and care, and the powders that I have mentioned in many places in this book, and if it is in winter, and the place where the abscess is is very sensitive, then you must put on tents and cloths soaked in warm wine and oil; and if it is in summer, and the area is fleshy, then you must put on cloths soaked in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said; and then unbind the abscess and wipe it and treat it, as appropriate, until it is healed.	And if the bleeding still persists then it is necessary to employ the method and the treatment and the powders that we have prescribed in many parts of this book and in their own sections. Now if this should be in winter and the site of the tumour abound in nerves, you should have some pads soaked in hot wine and oil and then apply to the place. But if it be in summer and the parts be fleshy, apply the pads soaked in water and oil, or wine and oil, all being cold, till the third day, as we have said. Then unbandage the tumour and wipe it and give it the treatment suitable to it, until cured.	0.90542483
And this should be known universally in the treatment of abscesses: now I have told you how one should proceed in the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.	This is the information you need about the treatment of tumours in general. As for the particulars, I now review the way to treat each tumour, by chapters, in detail.	0.64715993

chapter-2-subchapter-41.txt
In the middle of the head, small abscesses appear, and they are like knots that are in clusters, like the wattles of a hen, and there are many similar ones.	Small swellings form in the scalp, which are of the various kinds of cyst, contained within membranes which form a capsule to them like the crop of a chicken. There are many kinds of these.	0.7182754
There are some that are fatty and some where there is moisture like pus; and there are some that are hard and stony when cut, and there is no danger unless an artery is involved.	There are fatty ones, there are those containing a liquid resembling black slime, there are those containing a liquid resembling porridge and gruel and the like, while others are stony hard. It is not dangerous to open and extract any of them, so long as you do not encounter an artery in excising them.	0.7832265
And the work of cutting is such that you examine with an instrument called a "probe," whose form comes later, what it contains.	The operation for incising them begins by exploring them with the instrument called an explorer, figured lower down, so as to get to know what sort of contents they have.	0.60197926
For if it contains moisture, it is lanced lengthwise.	If they are the sort that contain fluid, incise them with a simple longitudinal incision, thus.	0.5259441
And when the moisture is emptied, scrape without leaving any of the skin that contains that moisture, because it returns as soon as something is left; then soak cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is available; if not, in water and salt, and fill the wound, and leave it until the next day; and this will consume what remains of the core.	Begin your incision at the letter b, to letter g; and when the humidity is emptied dissect away the capsule containing it, whole, not leaving the least remnant. For often it comes back if any has been left behind. Then dip some cotton wool in Egyptian ointment if you have some; if not, in saline; and pack it in the wound and leave till next day, for that will destroy the remains of the capsule.	0.8197817
And then repeat with the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you are sure that none of the core remains; then treat the wound with a suitable ointment until it is healed.	Then repeat the cotton wool with Egyptian ointment a second time, or a third if need be, till it is certain there is nothing of the cyst left. Then treat the wound with ointments until healed.	0.7584461
And if the abscess holds a fatty core, cut it lengthwise in this way; and throw in your hooks, and scrape it on all sides, and put all your effort into pulling out the sac where it lies; and if the artery opposes you, do what I told you later.	If the tumour contains a fatty cyst, incise thus, a cruciform incision; then hook up the edges of the incision, dissect away every direction, and strive to extract the containing capsule. If you should come across an artery, deal with it in the manner already described.	0.77802074
And do the same with the abscess if it is stony, both in cutting and in treating it as I have told you.	Carry out the same manner of incision and treatment for a stony tumour, just as I have described.	0.66964245
And the cut on a stony or moist abscess is slighter, because they contain little blood.	It is easier to open a hard tumour, for it has little blood and humidity; and sometimes these tumours on some people's heads have no humidity at all.	0.58582807
And some of these abscesses have a head where there is no moisture, and among these was an abscess I cut on the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess like a rough stone, hard and white, and it could not be broken; and if one had struck it, one would have wounded it as if it were a stone.	I myself cut down upon a tumour in the head of an elderly woman and I found the tumour as hard as a stone, rough and white, which it was impossible to break, and which if thrown at anyone would have injured him.	0.68482256
In other abscesses appearing on the head, except for those that appear on the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, the opening should always be at the most dependent place, to allow the pus to drain; and treat them as appropriate.	For all tumours arising in the head other than these, such as those which occur in children's heads and those at the root of the ear, make a simple incision. You should always begin your incision from below to allow an easy downward flow for the pus. Then treat with suitable after-treatment.	0.68599534

chapter-2-subchapter-42.txt
Many times these abscesses occur on the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes they appear elsewhere on the body, and are numerous, and are connected to each other.	Tumours of this kind often occur in the neck and in the axilla and in the groin; and sometimes in other parts of the body.	0.7858139
And each scrophulous swelling is properly within its membrane, like the node and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrophulous swellings are many.	Those occurring in the neck are sometimes single and sometimes multiple, one arising from another; and each scrofula is contained in a capsule of its own, like the cysts and tumours of the head that we have described.	0.7005685
There are some that contain moisture, and there are also malignant ones that do not respond to healing.	There are many kinds of these glands; some are stony, some contain humidities, some are malignant and do not respond to treatment.	0.67635703
And if you cut the vein or the artery, and this prevents you from working, put ground vitriol in the wound, or some powders that staunch blood, and compress the wound; and leave it until the abscess is calmed, and the wound is softened, and begins to suppurate.	If you cut a vein or artery and be thus hindered in your operating, apply powdered vitriol or some styptic powder to the wound, and bandage the wound and let be till the worst of the swelling has subsided and the opening is relaxed and threatens to turn purulent; for then the bleeding will stop.	0.8560053
And when the blood is stanched, then return to your work, until you have completed it; then search with your index finger if there remain any small scrophulous swellings, then cut and clean them.	Then return to your operation and finish it. Then feel with your forefinger to see if there are any small glands left, in which case dissect and clean them away.	0.74534476
And if at the root of the scrophulous swelling there is a large vein, you should not cut this swelling at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it fall off by itself, without harm; then fill the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then treat it.	If there is a large blood-vessel at the root of the gland, then you should not cut that gland at its root but should ligature it with a strong double ligature and leave it till it sloughs away of its own accord without harm. Then pack the wound with cotton wool previously soaked in Egyptian ointment; then continue dressing.	0.81087565
And if you cut the whole scrophulous swelling, then you must bring the two edges of the wound together, and sew them immediately, since nothing superfluous has remained due to the size of the swelling. you must therefore aim to cut the root of it, and pull it out, and sew it as we have said.	If you excise the whole gland, you should at once draw together the two edges of the wound and suture them, when you are absolutely certain there is nothing of it left. But if you see that, on account of the size of the scrofula, there is still some superfluity left behind, you should carry the incision to the root and base of it, and employ suturing and the rest of the remedies mentioned.	0.771593
you must therefore aim to cut the root of it, and pull it out, and sew it as we have said. Those scrophulous swellings which contain excess fluid, pierce them where they appear ripe; and pierce them like the aforementioned one, downwards, then administer tents with ointment and similar things, so that it dissolves what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, treat it with flesh-generating ointment, until it is healed.	But if you see that, on account of the size of the scrofula, there is still some superfluity left behind, you should carry the incision to the root and base of it, and employ suturing and the rest of the remedies mentioned. The glands that contain humidities you should open with a single perforation where they seem to have matured; make your perforation from below, as we have said. Then after opening use swabs soaked in Egyptian and similar ointments to do away with the unhealthy remains, till you see that the wound is clean; then dress with nourishing ointments until healed.	0.816958

chapter-2-subchapter-43.txt
The ancients spoke and wrote about cutting the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their words.	The Ancients mentioned this laryngeal incision, but I have not seen anyone in our parts who has done it. Now here is the gist of what they say.	0.7857674
For those who have quinsy, it is necessary that the flap of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be avoided; and that one does not provide help through this, because all the veins and the lungs of the patient are close to those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or in the throat, or in the tonsils.	Incision should be avoided in those suffering from quinsy, for they will not benefit from it, since all the passages and the lung will be diseased.	0.6241076
When the illness is in the trachea of the lung, it is necessary to cut the epiglottis to avoid the death which comes from strangulation.	But in those with an abscess in the mouth, throat, or tonsils, and when there is no disease in the windpipe itself, you must employ laryngotomy to avoid the mischief of suffocation.	0.43587315
It is necessary then, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it below three or four rings, a small incision across, between two rings or about the size of the incision for a syfac, not into the cartilage; and this place is suitable for the incision of the epiglottis because there is no flesh there, and the vessels are far from there.	Now when we wish to undertake this we should incise the larynx under the third or fourth ring of the windpipe with a small incision transversely between two rings, so that the incision may be through the membrane, not the cartilage. This spot is suitable for incision, for it is deficient in flesh, and there are no blood-vessels near.	0.8108036
And if the practitioner is fearful, he should stretch the skin of the throat with the hook, then cut into the flesh until he reaches the trachea; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see any, and then cut the syfac, as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the expulsion of phlegm from the trachea which jumps out through the place that is opened, and by the loss of voice; and leave the wound open for a while.	If the practitioner be nervous, he must stretch the skin of the throat with a hook, then cut down through the skin till he reach the windpipe, and avoid blood-vessels if he see any. Then let him incise the membrane which we have spoken of. You can be certain of having opened the trachea by the emission of phlegm when it is pierced, and by the loss of voice. Then leave the wound open for some while.	0.89628327
And when the time has passed during which strangulation is feared, bring together the two lips of the flesh wound, and sew it alone without the cartilage; then administer medicines that promote flesh growth, until it is healed.	When the danger of suffocation is passed, bring the two lips of the wound together by the skin, which alone must be sutured, without the cartilage. Then use medicaments stimulating granulation till healed.	0.79178596
Albucasis says that one should not do this until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be dying, and lacks breath.	The author of this book says, the interpretation of this account that we have given is this: when they see that one of the tumours that they mention has obstructed the patient's throat and he is approaching death and is anxious himself to be incised, they resort to laryngotomy so that the patient may breathe somewhat through the wound and his life be saved.	0.45288703
Then one cuts the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death; and for this reason the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the danger of the illness has passed, and it passes in three or four days. And then they instructed to sew the wound and treat it, until it was healed; and I will tell you what I saw.	They bid leaving the wound open till the worst of the disease abates; its height will last about three days; then they bid sew up the wound and dress till healed.	0.58822256
I saw that a young woman took a knife, and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the trachea of the lung; and I was called to treat her, and found her as if dead.	My own experience was this: a slave-girl seized a knife and buried it in her throat and cut part of the trachea; and I was called to attend her. I found her bellowing like a sacrifice that has had its throat cut.	0.8045941
I uncovered the wound, and found the blood that had come from it, and knew well that she had not cut a vein or principal vessel but the throat, and the air came out through the wound.	So I laid the wound bare and found that only a little haemorrhage had come from it; and I assured myself that neither the jugular vein nor an artery had been cut, but air passed out through the wound.	0.8220438
I hurried, and sewed the wound, and treated it until it was healed; and nothing happened to the young woman except that her voice was hoarse, and afterwards returned to its normal state; therefore I say that in cutting the epiglottis there is no need for fear.	So I hurriedly sutured the wound and dressed it until healed. And no ill befell the maid except for a hoarseness in the voice, but nothing more; and after some days she was restored to the best of health. Hence we may say that laryngotomy is not dangerous.	0.8041814

chapter-2-subchapter-44.txt
This abscess is called "throat hernia", and is a large abscess the color of soot, and is very common in women; and it is of two kinds: natural, and accidental; there is no trick to the natural one.	This tumour which is called 'Elephant of the throat' is a large tumour of the colour of the body; it commonly occurs in women. It is of two kinds, congenital and acquired. As to the congenital, there is no treatment for it.	0.7443062

chapter-2-subchapter-45.txt
There are many kinds of knots/nodes, of which I will describe all the appearances; and now I must explain all the differences between a knot/node and a growth/protrusion.	There are various kinds of cyst. We have already mentioned all their varieties in the proper place. But we need here to set forth the difference between a cyst and an abscess, for it is complicated.	0.6388382
I say that a growth/protrusion involves heat and persistent fever, until the boiling is over, and the putrefaction is complete; then the fever and heat subside.	The abscess will be accompanied by heat and fever and fearsome pain, until the boiling-up of the superfluous matter settles down and the suppurating process is completed: then will the fever and intensity subside.	0.7386488
With a knot/node, there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a cyst, which is its own sac and is the same color as the body, and it begins like a speck and grows large; and they are of two types, either fatty or moist, and of many colors as I have said in the classification.	But with a cyst there is neither heat nor fever nor pains, and a membranous capsule encloses it, its own particular covering. The cyst is flesh-coloured, and it begins like a pea and becomes like a melon, more or less; and is of two kinds: either fatty or containing humidity; and the colours of the humidities are several, as we mentioned in the appropriate section.	0.8211846
It is necessary, when you come to treat a knot/node, that you first examine and explore it with the instrument called a "probe," according to its form, which will come in the chapter that follows.	When you come to treat the cyst, you should first sound it and examine it with the instrument called the explorer, which is figured in the next chapter.	0.69665515
And the way to examine the abscesses of the nodes is that you take the moistest place that you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little, until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, provided that it is according to the size of the abscess; then withdraw the probe, and pay attention to what comes out.	The way to examine all tumours and cysts is to take this instrument and press it in at the spot where the tumour is softest, and revolve it gently with your fingers till you know you have pierced the skin; then press it in proportionately to the size of the tumour. Then remove the explorer and see what comes out after it.	0.797467
If a thin, flowing moisture comes out, note what color it is, then lance it as I have said for other abscesses; and if no moisture comes out after the probe, know that it is fatty, then cut it crosswise, and take it with forceps, and peel it gently on each side and watch the membrane in which it lies so that you pull it out whole with the node; and if you cannot pull it out whole, pull it out in pieces so that nothing remains.	If a humidity should flow, whatever the colour, make a simple incision, as I said for the other tumours. But if no humidity come out along the track of the explorer you know at once that it is fatty. Therefore make a cruciform incision upon it in this shape, as I have told you, and attach hooks and dissect away the skin gently from all sides. Be careful with the capsule; if you can, get it out whole, together with the cyst.	0.8490341
For if anything remains, the node will return many times; and if a bit remains, and the blood troubles you, fill the wound with some sharp corrosive powders, and bind the wound, and apply soothing things for a hot abscess, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed; and if the node is large, stitch the two edges of the wound, and treat it with what generates flesh.	For if a part of it is left behind, either great or small, the cyst will generally return. If it defeats you and some little piece of it remain, pack the wound, when you have done all you can, with some caustic powder and bandage it and put on it something to ease the inflamed tumour, and treat in the usual way until healed. If the tumour be large, sew the edges of the incision together and treat with stimulants.	0.78011906
And if the pulsating vein or other things hinder you, hurry and fill the place with crushed vitriol, and leave it there for two or three days, until the wound rots, and the boiling of the blood subsides; then return to cutting out what remains of the node.	If you should come across a blood-vessel, pulsating or not, and there be haemorrhage, hasten to pack it with pounded vitriol; and leave bandaged for two or three days until the wound becomes purulent and the boiling-up of the blood is allayed; then resume cutting open the rest of the cyst.	0.8600895

chapter-2-subchapter-46.txt
The shapes of the hooks are of many resemblances, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and there are hooks that have two curves of three kinds also; and there are hooks that have three curves, and they are also of three kinds; and there are hooks that have two curves, and hooks of only one curve, and they are of three kinds; and all these are necessary in their place.	There are many kinds of hook. For example, there are the simple hooks, that is, having only one prong; there are three kinds of this: large, medium, and small. There are also the blind hooks, of which there are three kinds. And there are the hooks provided with two prongs, of which there are three kinds.	0.8051584
and it is sometimes placed at the location that heals by cutting veins, and arteries, and sometimes they take the following large form:	Haemorrhage from a venesection is stopped by these; or in the case of a cut artery or vein. Sometimes round ones are made, like this.	0.64235735

chapter-2-subchapter-47.txt
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupt, so much so that they resemble women's breasts; and they remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wishes to treat them, must cauterize them according to this form from this line .b. up to .g.:	The breasts of some males may swell on attaining puberty so as to resemble the female breast, and they remain permanently swollen and ugly. If this is abhorrent, a semicircular incision should be made on the breast, like this figure, from b to g. Then dissect away all the fatty tissue and pack the wound with a cicatrizing compound and sew the lips together and dress until healed.	0.76054525

chapter-2-subchapter-48.txt
These abscesses that come under the armpits are kinds of hard scrofula where there are ribs, and some contain moisture.	These tumours under the armpit are of the type of scrofulous tumours, hard, enclosed in a capsule. Some contain humidity.	0.7921073
Those then that contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line .b. to line .g.: And when all the pus that is in the abscess is emptied, then fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with a suitable ointment until it is healed.	Those that contain humidity should be opened with a semicircular incision like this, from b to g. When you have removed all the pus that had been in the tumour, pack the wound with teased-out cotton wool and leave till another day. Then remove the cotton wool and dress with a suitable ointment until healed.	0.7833904
And if the abscess is of a similar nature to scrofula, then lance it as we have said in lancing scrofula, and if the wound produces pus, then apply cautery as we have said before.	If the tumour be of the nodular scrofulous kind, cut directly down on it just as we prescribed for that kind. If the wound continue to discharge pus, apply the cautery to it as prescribed before.	0.72310793

chapter-2-subchapter-49.txt
of the rupture of the artery When the artery is ruptured, and the skin above it is closed, an abscess often forms, and the same happens with a swollen and abscessed vein; and it is recognized as being from the artery if the abscess is long and deep; and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel a tightening; and when it is from the vein, redness from the outside is apparent; and it is foolish to cut this abscess, especially when it is under the armpits, and in the groin, and in the neck, and in many other places, and is very large.	On opening a tumour arising from a bloodvessel, called an aneurysm. When an artery is injured and the overlying skin scars, a tumour very often arises from this; the same thing happens to a vein: a swelling and a tumour. And these are the signs by which you may diagnose whether the swelling and tumour arise from an artery or a vein: if it be from an artery the tumour will be a deep and elongated mass; and when you press upon it with your finger there will be a feeling of pulsation. But if it arises from a vein the swelling will be circular and superficial.	0.81241107

chapter-2-subchapter-50.txt
Just as abscesses occur in the artery and in the vein, abscesses also occur in the nerves when they are injured, or by excessive work, and similar things.	As a tumour arises on an artery or a vein, so may it also come in a tendon when it has been bruised; or it may arise from excessive fatigue, or such causes.	0.7880118
If the abscess is small, hold it with forceps and cut it at its root; and if it is large, suspend it with a hook and peel it, then remove it and close the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healed.	Incise the skin of those occurring on the head or forehead, and if the tumour be small take hold of it with the forceps and cut it away by the root. But if it be large, catch it up with a hook and dissect it away and remove it; and sew up the incision and dress until healed.	0.8057844

chapter-2-subchapter-51.txt
of large hanging swellings Sometimes thelul occurs in the abdomen and nowhere else, and it is a disease that is called "funge" because of its resemblance to them, and its root is thin, and the head large; and there are small ones and very large ones; and I saw a man who had two in his abdomen that were more similar to fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a thin root, and were already split open, and moisture constantly flowed from them.	Some people often get warts on the belly and on the rest of the body, called fungous warts, because of their resemblance to fungi. They have a slender pedicle and a broad head, the edges of which are sometimes inverted ; and some are small, whereas others of them grow very big. I myself once saw a man who had two warts on his belly that looked more like fungi than anything else; they were white and had thin pedicles. Their edges were inverted and had split open, and a humour flowed continually from them.	0.8193246
I cut them and found in one eighteen ounces in weight, and in the other six and a half, and the procedure for the incision is that you look to see if the patient is moist, and the color of the growth is white and moist and of a thin root; then cut it with a wide spatula, and have the fire cautery ready in your presence.	I amputated them both and weighed them: one came to about eighteen ounces, and the other six ounces. This is the operation for amputating them: examine the patient carefully, and if he be of a humid temperament and the colour of the warts be white, and if they are soft, with a thin stalk, amputate them with a broad scalpel.	0.787017
For it is a cancerous abscess, and I will come to the treatment of cancer later.	I shall soon be mentioning cancer.	0.42471918

chapter-2-subchapter-52.txt
If the appearance of the intestine comes through a wound cautery or a tear in the peritoneum, and it is on the abdomen and some of the intestines come out of it, as happens in other ruptures, or blood that flows from veins or arteries depending on what is in front, or from flatulence; and if it is through the rupture of the peritoneum and by the protrusion of the intestine, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a mild thing without pain, and appears with various discharges.	On the treatment of protruding navel. The navel becomes prominent from many causes; either from a rupture of the peritoneum over the abdomen, so that omentum or intestine comes through it as in other ruptures; or from blood extravasation from an artery or vein, as we have mentioned; or else from wind trapped in it.	0.7462545
And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then it is more varied, and when one presses it with their fingers it goes back in, and then comes out again, and perhaps it is hard, and greatly enlarges upon entering the bath and due to strong exertion.	If it be due to ruptured peritoneum and protruding omentum, the colour of the tumour will be the same as the rest of the body; it will be soft and painless and will seem to change its position; But if it be due to an escape of bowel the change of position, compared with what we have described, will be greater, and it will disappear on digital pressure, and then will recur; and often there will be crepitus with it, and it will increase in size on entering the bath or on violent exertion.	0.6415151
And if it is due to fluid, it is a mild thing, and appears readily when you press it with your hand, and is not constrained; and if it is due to blood, the abscess appears by these signs, large and hard, and fixed in a certain quantity; and if it is due to flatulence, it is soft to the touch, and the task is for you to see if the appearance is due to blood from an artery, or from a vein, or flatulence.	If it be due to fluid, it will be soft and will not disappear on manual pressure, nor will it grow larger or smaller. If it be due to blood, then in addition to these signs the tumour will appear blackish. If it arise from a fleshy overgrowth, the tumour will be solid and hard, remaining always constant in bulk. If it be due to wind, it will be soft to the touch.	0.8066293
Then you must abandon the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, concerning the artery and the vein.	The operation for these is to examine, and if the exomphalos be due to arterial or venous blood, or wind, you should withhold treatment since it is dangerous in these cases, with an uncertain outlook, as I taught you in the chapter on tumours arising from an artery or vein.	0.5658254

chapter-2-subchapter-53.txt

chapter-2-subchapter-54.txt
And it should be sharp on both sides. with a point, and yet not so penetrating that it could reach the intestine when inserted, and could injure it; then see if the dropsy/edema is generated towards the intestines: you must cut above the navel three fingers directly below the xiphoid process; and if the dropsy/edema is due to liver disease, let your incision be to the left of the navel by three fingers; and if it is due to the spleen, let it be to the right, and the patient must not lie on the incision so that the excess fluids do not flow to that weak spot; then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and insert it, and lift your hand with the whole scalpel between the skin and the superficial fascia as if skinning to the width of a fingernail or thereabouts; then pierce the superficial fascia until the scalpel reaches the empty space, and this is the location of the water, then withdraw it, and insert this instrument of which this is the form: And it is similar to a thin silver tube, and it is made of brass or light bronze, and has at the lower part a small hole; and on the side on one part, three holes; and two on the other part, and one on the other; and the head is cut like a pen, and this is the shape of the incision with which the scribe cuts the pen:	Moreover, the incision must not be on the side which the patient wishes to lie on, so that the superfluities may not flow to the damaged part. Then pierce the skin with the instrument, introduce the instrument into that incision, and bring the scalpel up between the skin and the membrane, as if excoriating, over an area about the size of a fingernail. Then pierce through the membrane till the scalpel reaches a cavity, which will be where the water is; then withdraw the scalpel and put into the opening the instrument shaped like this; it resembles a fine section of reed, made of silver, bronze or white copper; smooth and well polished, with a small opening at the lower end and three at the sides, two on one side and one on the other, as you see. Its extremity may be cut to the shape of a writing reed like this; the upper end of it is supplied with a ring.	0.90790904
And if you are worried about the patient, and you leave a lot of water, then treat them with burial in warm sand, and with a lot of sweating or baths and in the sun, and let them abstain from drinking; and treat them with drying medicines until they are healed, and cauterize over the stomach and over the liver and over the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.	And do this daily, watchful and on guard against error, until there is only a trace of fluid left. But if you are afraid for the patient and leave a large amount of fluids treat him by burying him in hot sand, and by heavy sweating in the bath and in the sun, and letting him go thirsty; while you treat him with drying medicines, till he is well. He should also be cauterized on the abdomen and on the liver and spleen after the paracentesis, as I have previously described.	0.89223707

chapter-2-subchapter-55.txt
On the blockage of the penis/ urethra Sometimes children are born who have no opening in the penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its proper place.	On the treatment of boys born with imperforate urinary meatus; or with the meatus small or not in the proper place. Sometimes a boy is born from his mother's womb with the glans penis not perforate.	0.7465284
It is therefore necessary as soon as he is born to pierce it with a very fine scalpel / lancet according to this form/method:	So at the moment of his birth you should be quick and make a perforation with a fine scalpel figured thus.	0.70998627
Then put in the opening a thin nail of lead, and tie it and keep it thus for three or four days, and when he needs to urinate, the nail should be removed, and he should urinate, and then replace it; and perhaps it is not necessary, for the urine that comes out prevents it from closing.	Then put in the opening a slender leaden sound, tie it and keep it in for three or four days. When he wishes to make water, it will be removed and he will do so; then put it back. If you do not put in the leaden sound it may be that the urine passing through the place will prevent the wound from healing.	0.8506054
He whose opening is small, he is treated with the lead nail, as we have said, and it will widen.	The case having too narrow a meatus should be treated with the leaden sound, as we have said, for many days until it is wide enough.	0.5011269
Those who do not have the opening in its proper place are injured, for some are born who have the opening at the tip of the penis, because of which they cannot urinate forward unless they lift their penis up; and they cannot procreate because the semen cannot come down to the womb, and this is a bad condition.	In those cases having a misplaced meatus—for example, there are some born with the opening at the edge of the glans so that they cannot make water forwards until the opening of the penis is lifted up by hand, nor can they beget, since the semen cannot reach directly to the uterus, a disorder which is very ugly.	0.7266376
And the method of the procedure is that the patient lies on his back, then stretches the head of the penis and cuts it like the cut of a quill, so that the opening falls in the middle, as it should; and be wary of bleeding that often occurs there, and if it happens, stop it with something that stops blood, and treat the wound until he is healed.	The manner of operating in this case is for the patient to lie back; then with your left hand draw out his glans firmly and cut the end of the glans at the place of the meatus with a broad knife or sharp scalpel, as if sharpening a pen, or as if you were whittling something, so that the middle of it protrudes like a glans penis and the opening falls in the middle as it should. And beware, in your operating, of haemorrhage, which often happens; meet it with styptics and dress the wound until it heals.	0.79685366

chapter-2-subchapter-56.txt
of the pustules of the penis Often these pustules come on the penis, and it is an appearance of ugly flesh; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so you must take them with a fine hook, and cut and clean them all, then apply cotton moistened in Egyptian ointment; then treat it with diafinicon ointment until it is healed.	These pustules very frequently occur in the urinary meatus and are excrescences of foul tissue. Some are malignant and some are not. The nonmalignant you should seize with a fine hook and pare away until they are altogether gone; then apply to the place cotton wool soaked in Egyptian ointment; then afterwards dress with Palm ointment until healed.	0.814751
And if the pustule is malignant, of a foul color and suppurating, then you must apply cautery to it.	But when the pustules are malignant, of a dirty colour, for these you should employ the cautery after cutting and scraping them.	0.729547
When you have cut it, and if the pustule is at the tip of the penis, and part of it is inside the skin and part outside, you must first remove the pustule that is inside; and when it is joined, then treat the outside.	If the pustules be on the prepuce of an uncircumcized unbeliever and there are some inside the prepuce and some outside, those that are inside should be removed first; and when they are healed over, then treat those outside.	0.7926239
For when you treat it all together, the head of the penis is not safe from being pierced, and blackness and corruption come into the penis and into the testicle; so you must shave off everything that is black and corrupted, then apply a plaster of honey and flour made with pomegranate peel and vetches, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.	For if you deal with both at the same time you are in danger of going through the prepuce. Sometimes there occurs a blackness and necrosis in the testicles and prepuce; then you should scrape away all the black part which looks ready to go necrotic or has already necrosed. Then afterwards smear on the place honey with pounded and sifted pomegranate peel and bitter vetch. Then carry on with the usual treatment until healed.	0.7630619
And if bleeding occurs, then apply the lunar cautery in this way:	If haemorrhage set in, cauterize with a lunate cautery figured thus.	0.60394645

chapter-2-subchapter-57.txt
Circumcision is not a separation of continuity like other wounds; however, when we perform this operation of our own volition, and specifically on children, it is necessary that we perform the best work, and the easiest for healing.	Circumcision is nothing but a solution of continuity like other wounds: but as it is a result of our deliberate action, and as it is done particularly to boys, we should plan in this case the very best operation, and the easiest way that leads to safety.	0.820328
I say that the ancients did not speak of the circumcision of their children, because they did not practice it in their law, and we only have what we have acquired through experience.	Now the Ancients made no mention of circumcision in any of their books, since it was not practised in their religion; but it is something we have acquired by experience.	0.6791943
For I have seen the majority of masters and healers who performed circumcision around a knife, and forcefully, and with just a razor; thus the heart fled because there are two layers of skin, and perhaps they cut the upper one and leave the lower one.	I have myself seen the common run of practitioners and barbers carry it out with razor and with scissors; they use a spindle-whorl, a ligature of thread, and incision by means of the finger-nail. I have personally tried all these ways and have not found a better than circumcision with scissors and a thread ligature.	0.57810634
Then it must be cut again, and the pain is doubled, and with the cleaning, which is done with a knife, the tip of the member is not safe; and with the cleaning of the nail, perhaps the iron slips, and ruins the work, and often they are born such that they do not need cleaning, and I have seen it.	I have personally tried all these ways and have not found a better than circumcision with scissors and a thread ligature. For circumcision carried out with the razor is often eluded by the skin; for the skin of the prepuce is of two layers; and often the outer skin is incised and the inner is left intact, so that a second incision is needed, and renewed pain; while when the circumcision is done with a spindle-whorl you are in danger of cutting the tip of the penis, since the tip often goes into the aperture of the whorl. As for circumcision by the finger-nail, the nail will often slip off the skin and your operation be spoilt; or the boy's foreskin may be naturally short, for many are born thus, not needing circumcision. I have seen this myself.	0.68208855
Regarding the cleaning which is done forcefully with the thread, I have found the benefit of experience, because the force cuts evenly as well above as below.	I have seen this myself. Experience has taught me the superiority of circumcision with the scissors and the thread ligature.	0.51208127
For when you press your hand, cut evenly in one single motion; but ensure the thread is tightly wrapped around the skin; and the manner of the first procedure is that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are only tying the thread around the penis, and then make him happy in all the ways you can; then make him stand straight between your hands, and hide the tools between your hands or under your feet so the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the penis and blow into the catheter, and draw it upwards until the head of the penis is inside; then clean it well of the accumulated filth, then tie the marked place with a double thread, then tie it below in another place with another tie; and hold it with two fingers by the second tie with the thumb and index finger, and cut between the two ties, then quickly lift the catheter and pull the head of the penis; then let the blood flow little by little, for this is the best; and put powder on it and over the powder a cloth soaked in a mixture of cooked egg white tempered with rose water, combined with good fresh rose oil, and leave it on until the next day, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed. The shape of the forceps for cleansing is this: the two ends should be thin and sharp, and the ends should be as large as the handle, equally.	For scissors cut evenly, since the upper edge of the scissors is exactly the same as the lower edge; and so, as you compress your hand, thanks to the correspondence of the two blades you cut equally and simultaneously; and you make the girdle of the thread like a wall all round the skin of the tip of the penis: thus no error can occur. The manner of operating is first to make the boy, especially if he is one who understands a little, imagine that all you are going to do is tie a ligature on the tip of the penis and leave it for another day. Then amuse him and cheer him as much as you can, according to his intelligence; then stand him upright before you, not sitting; and hide the scissors in your sleeve or under your foot and do not let the boy's eye chance upon that or any other instrument. Then with your hand take hold of the tip of the penis, blow into the foreskin, and draw it back till the glans penis is exposed; then cleanse from it all unclean matter that has collected.	0.90467894
The error in the cleansing occurs when the catheter inside flees from the incision; then you must extend it with your fingernail, before the place forms an abscess; and cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, hold it with forceps, and then cut it.	So you should at the start draw it out with your finger-nail before the place swell; then make an even incision. And if you are unable to get a hold with your finger-nail then pick it up with a hook and make your incision.	0.7615178
And if three days pass, and what is under the penis is swollen, leave it until the hot abscess subsides, and peel it lightly; then cut it as gently as you can, and be careful of the part of the penis, so it does not harm it.	If after three days there still remains some inflation and swelling of the part below the tip of the penis, let it be until the effusion subsides, and then gently peel it away and cut it as best you may. Be careful of the tip of the penis; though if any of the tip is cut away that will do no harm.	0.85790694
Then treat the area with wound-healing powders, as we have mentioned in the treatise on powders, and if you cut the catheter excessively, and it goes too far, it will not cause harm; then treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.	And dress the wound with stimulating medicaments from among the powders that we described in the treatise on powders. Should more of the skin be cut away than necessary and the skin is wrinkled up, that will do no great harm either. Continue such treatment as we have mentioned, until healed.	0.80225444

chapter-2-subchapter-58.txt
of urinary retention	On the treatment of retention of urine.	0.55408084

chapter-2-subchapter-59.txt
When abrasions or blood appear in the bladder, or pus has collected there, and you want to instill waters and medicines, do it with the instrument called a "clepsydra," and this is its form:	When there occurs an ulcer in the bladder, or there is a clot of blood or a deposit of pus in it, and you wish to instil into it lotions and medicaments, this is done with the help of an instrument called a syringe.	0.7786329

chapter-2-subchapter-60.txt
of the stone	On the extraction of the stone.	0.44146636
We have already discussed in the section on types of stones, and their extraction together with medicines; and have explained the difference between stones generated in the kidneys, and all the signs, and in which stones one should operate by cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you plainly and briefly.	We have already in the due place reviewed the different kinds of stone and the medical treatment of them. I mentioned too the difference between stones arising in the kidney and those arising in the bladder, and gave all the symptoms of them. I also mentioned the kind of stone to which manipulation and incision are appropriate. This is in particular the stone arising in the bladder, and the sort impacted in the urethra.	0.8352951
And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with a clyster, to remove all the waste that is in the intestines. For it sometimes hinders the search for the stone.	When we undertake treatment the patient must first have an enema to empty his bowel completely; for sometimes the faeces prevent the calculus being found when it is looked for.	0.73118025
Then take the patient by the feet, and shake him and move him downwards, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes jumps from its high place; then have him sit prepared between your hands, and his hands should be under his thighs, so that the bladder is completely inclined downwards; then search for it and touch it inside; if you feel the stone in the area, then hurry now to cut into the stone.	Then the patient should be taken by the feet and jarred to and fro and shaken downwards to bring the calculus down into the neck of the bladder; or else let him jump down from a height a number of times. Then have him sit down upright before you with his hands beneath his thighs, to make the whole bladder incline downwards. Then examine him and palpate him externally. If you feel the stone in the empty place, immediately hasten and cut down upon it.	0.88249123
And if it does not fall at the touch at all, wet your index finger of your left hand with oil, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger, if the patient is a fully grown young man; and insert it in his anus, and search for the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, guide it to the neck of the bladder; then press down on your finger, and push it aside where you intend to cut.	But if there is not the slightest sign of it to the touch then you should anoint with oil the forefinger of your left hand if it be a boy, or the middle finger if it be a fully grown young man, and introduce it into the anus and search around for the calculus, until, when it comes under the finger, you can work it slowly towards the neck of the bladder. Then press upon it with your finger and push it outwards toward the place where you wish to make your incision.	0.86118424
And instruct the assistant to press on the bladder with his hand, and tell him to raise the testicles upwards with his right hand, and with his left hand to pull back the skin that is below the testicles in the area where the incision is made; then insert the cutting spatula, of which this is the form:	And bid an assistant squeeze the bladder with his hand; and bid another assistant raise the scrotum with his left hand and with the other hand stretch the skin under the testicles away from the place where the incision is going to be. Then do you take a lancet like this and make your incision in the space between the anus and the testicles, not in the mid-line but on the side of the left buttock; and cut down upon the calculus itself, keeping your finger in the anus and pressing it outwards.	0.8275768
For those then which have angles and edges, make the incision larger; and if it does not jump out, you must clamp down with forceps which are like a file at the tip, designed to grip the stone so that it does not escape; or you insert a subtle instrument curved at the tip underneath it; and if you cannot grasp it thus, widen the opening a little, and if the blood flows, staunch it with vitriol; and if there is more than one stone, push the largest to the neck of the bladder first, then cut down on it, then pull it out, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are several. And if it is very large, it must be sawn, and a larger wound made.	Then if it still will not come out you must then resort to a device— namely to catch hold of it with strong forceps having an extremity like a rasp, to get a tight hold of it so it shall not slip out; or else introduce beneath it a narrow instrument with a crooked end. And if you then cannot get the stone out, widen the incision slightly; and if there is any bleeding stanch it with vitriol. If there should be a number of stones first push the largest of them into the neck of the bladder, then cut down upon it; then push a smaller one down after it; and do the same if there be more than two. But if the stone be very large it is foolish to make a great incision down upon it; for the result is that the patient either dies or has a chronic urinary fistula because the place will not heal at all.	0.90052044
For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine constantly flows out so the wound cannot heal; but nevertheless, strive to pull it out, or to break it up with forceps, until you remove it in pieces; and when you have completed your work, fill the wound with frankincense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it, and put a cloth soaked in oil and wine over it, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the inflamed area; then lay the patient on his side, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day. And when you unbind it, wash the area very well with oil and water, then treat it with diachylon ointment and basilicon ointment, until it is healed.	Try rather to manipulate it so that it protrudes; or else attempt to break it up with the forceps so that you can extract it piecemeal. And when you have completed the operation pack the wound with frankincense and aloes and dragon's blood, and bind it up and apply a pad soaked in olive oil and wine or oil of roses and cold water, to reduce the swelling. The patient should lie flat on his back and the bindings should not be undone before the third day; and when they are undone foment the place with plenty of oil and water. Then dress it with Palm ointment and basilicon ointment until it heals.	0.8693304
And if hot abscesses develop in the wound and corrosion, and clotting of blood in the bladder, and because of this the urine is retained, which is recognized in such a way that blood comes out with the urine: then put your finger in the wound and remove that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder and rot it; then wash the wound with water and vinegar and salt, and help him in all the ways you know, until he is healed; and it is necessary that every time you treat him, you bind his two thighs, and apply the medicines to the area.	If an increasing and cankerous abscess occur in the wound, or anything similar such as clotting of blood within the bladder, with stoppage of the urine (which would be signified by the urine being accompanied by blood) pass your finger into the wound and remove the blood; for if it lies in it it will lead to sepsis and necrosis of the bladder. Then wash out the wound with vinegar and water and salt, and apply whatever treatment is suitable for the case until it heals. Also at all times during treatment his hips should be bound and kept together so that the medicaments applied to the place may not be disturbed.	0.84813595
And if the stone is small, and it is in the urethra, and lodged there, and the urine cannot pass; treat him with what I said before, that you cut him many times, though one is excused from cutting by this treatment. I have already tried this thus.	Now if the calculus be small and be impacted in the opening of the urinary passage, preventing the exit of the urine, treat it with the means I am about to describe before you go on to make your incision, for often I have found this treatment suffice without incision; I have experience of this.	0.7451565
Take an iron drill of this shape and let it be three-sided, fixed in a firebrand:	You take a drill of the finest steel, of this shape. It should be triangular at the point and sharp, with a wooden handle.	0.5730202
then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone, so that it cannot go back into the bladder; then insert the drill into the penis gently, until it comes to the stone; and turn the drill with your hand in the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; then the urine will come immediately, then press your hand over what remains of the stone that is inside the penis.	Then take a thread and with it bind the penis beneath the calculus to prevent the stone from returning to the bladder. Then introduce the iron of the drill gently into the meatus until the drill reaches the stone itself, and then very very gently revolve the drill upon the stone with your hand, and try to perforate it, till you pierce it through to the other side. Then the urine will at once be released.	0.92368746
It is then immediately broken, and comes out with the urine, and the patient is cured; and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, tie a thread below the stone and another above, then cut the penis at the location of the stone between the two ties, then extract it, and untie the ties, and clean the clotted blood that is in the wound; and treat it until it is healed.	Then, with your hand outside the penis, squeeze the remains of the stone, and they will crumble and be washed out by the urine and the patient will be cured. But if this treatment is not possible for you on account of some impediment, then tie a thread beneath the stone and another above; then make an incision down upon the stone in the penis itself between the two ligatures, extract it, then undo the ligature and clean away the blood that has clotted in the wound.	0.8897292

chapter-2-subchapter-61.txt
of the stone in women	It is very uncommon for women to have stone.	0.55016494
It rarely happens that a stone is generated in women, and if it does happen sometimes, the treatment is difficult, and it is prohibited for three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a knowledgeable woman who will reveal herself to doctors, especially when she is chaste. And the third reason is that perhaps one cannot find a knowledgeable woman skilled in this practice; and the fourth reason is that the stone in a woman is located deeper than the stone in a man, for which it is necessary to make a deeper cut, and there is great risk. And if necessity compels you to do this, then you must take a very knowledgeable midwife, and one hardly finds them, and if you do not find one, at least look for a discreet and skilled physician; and present to him a very wise matron experienced in the lives of women, or a woman who knows some of the art, and instruct her to do what you command her regarding the examination for the stone; and look carefully to see if the woman is a virgin: then she must insert her finger into the rectum and search for the stone; and if she finds it, she should hold it under her finger, and instruct the patient to insert her finger into her vagina, and search, and press her left hand firmly on the bladder.	As these are very uncommon, if you are without one then seek a eunuch doctor as a colleague, or bring a midwife experienced in women's ailments or a woman to whom you may give some instruction in this art. Have her with you and bid her do all that you enjoin; first of all, in searching for the stone. If she perceive that the woman is a virgin she should pass her finger into the anus and palpate for the stone. If she finds it and keeps her finger on it, then bid her cut down upon it.	0.7981519
know the symptoms to understand the outcome.	Learn to recognize these types and you will have an indication of what to do.	0.46098256
And when the heat of the blood has subsided, and the place festers, return to your work, until the stone is out.	And after some days, when the acute haemorrhage has subsided and suppuration has set in, return to your operating until you get the stone out.	0.680552

chapter-2-subchapter-62.txt
of fleshy hernia A watery hernia is nothing other than a collection of moisture or white hydrocele, which is below the covering of the testicles that contains the testicle; and it is called "hydrocele", and sometimes it is specifically in the membrane of the testicle, so that one thinks it is another testicle; and it is the skin of the scrotum between the white hydrocele that we have mentioned; and this does not occur except rarely.	A watery hernia is a collection of fluid in the white membrane lying beneath the skin surrounding the testicle, which is called the scrotum. Sometimes it has a capsule of its own which nature has formed alongside the testis so that one would think it another testicle; it may also form between the skin of the scrotum and the white membrane which we mentioned; however, this occurs very rarely.	0.83374465
And the cause of this hernia is a weakness that comes to the testicles, and this matter is spread.	This hernia arises from a weakness occurring in the testicles and this matter drains into it; sometimes it happens from a blow upon the testicles.	0.6335761
And sometimes it comes from a blow to the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: either it is a color tending towards jaundice, or it is blood red, or black, or watery white, and this occurs more often; and these are the signs to recognize this collection, for if it is in the white hydrocele that we have mentioned, then the abscess is round, a little long like the shape of an egg, and the testicle does not appear, because there is moisture all around it.	The fluid is of different colours, sometimes yellowish, sometimes blood-red, sometimes like lees, black, and sometimes the fluid is watery-pale; this actually is the commonest. Now these are the signs whereby we know where the fluid is collecting: if it be in the tunica albugínea, as we have said, the tumour will be round and slightly elongated like the shape of an egg. The testis is not apparent since the fluid hems it in all round.	0.8412947
And if there is moisture in the membrane itself, then the abscess is round along with a part of the testicle, and therefore one thinks that it is another testicle; and if the moisture is between the skin of the scrotum and the white hydrocele, then one feels it well; therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, test it with the square probe, whose form is shown above. According to what then comes out after the probe, judge what is inside.	The testis is not apparent since the fluid hems it in all round. But if the fluid be contained in a capsule of its own the tumour will be round, to one side of the testicle; therefore one imagines that it is another testicle. If the fluid be situated between the skin of the scrotum and the tunica albugínea it will be obvious to the touch. If you wish to know the colour of the fluid, take a sample from the tumour by means of the four-sided exploring needle which has been figured previously; and by what comes out in the track of the explorer you may know the colour of the contained fluid.	0.82987773
And if you find the testicle corrupted by another disease, you must tie the spermatic cord which suspends it, fearing the flow of blood; then cut the testicle along with the spermatic cord, and remove the testicle, and treat it as we have said.	If you find the testicle corrupted by some other disease, you will have to tie off the vessels which are in the suspensor, for fear of haemorrhage. Then cut the testicle from the suspensor and remove it and dress as we said above.	0.85041964
And if fluid is collected in two parts together, know that these are two branches; cut the other part as you did the first, equally, then wipe the blood and put wool soaked in rose oil in the wound; and above put other wool soaked in wine and oil, and place it over both testicles, and put doubled cloths on top, and tie it up with the bandage which is according to this form: Then take two cloths, and fill them with carded wool according to this likeness and join them by stitching at the opening of the pants, and one of the ends should go over the buttocks up to the back, and the other to the area of the penis; and the other two ends over the two groins, and let all the tightening be gathered in the buckle of the pants; and sometimes this branch is treated with a cautery instead of a cutting iron, and that is that you take a thin, knife-like cautery, and cut the skin of the scrotum, and it should be heated as we have said, so that the white hydrocele which contains the water is uncovered; then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce this hydrocele with the hooks, and peel it with this thin, hot cautery:	If the accumulation of fluid be on both sides you may know it to be a double hydrocele; so make another incision on the other side as you did for the first. If it is convenient for you to make one operation of it, do so. Then wipe away the blood and apply to the incisions wool that has been soaked in olive-oil or oil of roses and on that again more wool that has been soaked in wine and oil, and spread that over the testicles and over the hypogastrium; and over that again folded pieces of linen forming pads and bind them down with a bandage having six heads. Two pieces of cloth should be taken and sewn together and packed in between with carded wool to this pattern.	0.8741933
And cut it in all the ways you can, until you remove everything; and be careful that the fire does not touch the testicle; and know that this work is safer, and less prone to bleeding, and gentler than the work of cutting; and if anything opposes you, either a hot abscess or bleeding or something else, then treat what opposes you, according to what has been said before.	But be careful that the heat do not touch the testicle. You should know that this operation is safer, further removed from the danger of haemorrhage, and better, than operation by incision. If, while operating either with the knife or the cautery, you are hindered by an inflammatory swelling or haemorrhage or anything else, you should deal with all of them by suitable treatment in accordance with what has been said before. If the patient be timid and will not suffer this operation on account of its unpleasantness, then treat by perforation as I shall now describe.	0.7658671

chapter-2-subchapter-63.txt
Know that in the cutting of this branch there is fear in many situations, for which reason it seems to me that it is better to leave it alone; and I will tell you the procedure and the appearances of the abscess.	You should know that cutting for this kind of hernia has an uncertain outcome and in most cases results in death; and therefore I think it better to let it be and to safeguard the patient. However, I shall mention the manner of operating for this and all kinds of tumour.	0.68736553
I say then that many abscesses arise in the body, and especially in the testicles; and this is for many reasons.	Now I say that many tumours arise from the bodies composing the testicles; and this from several causes.	0.77106416
When it is from a night artery, it is known by the condition of a hot abscess, when you press it with your fingers; and you should not touch it.	The sort arising from a swelling of the arteries may be recognized by a dispersal of the lump when you press upon it with your fingers; this should not be interfered with at all.	0.6763092
The one that is made from the swelling of a vein is known by its condition upon pressing it with the fingers, and one can safely make an incision on this type, and on other flesh; and you must cut the heart of the testicles, then stretch the testicle upwards, and draw it out from the white tunic, and free the suspensory ligament on all sides of the testicle.	The sort arising from a swelling of the vein will not disperse when you press upon it with your fingers. It is sometimes possible to cut down on this kind and also on the other fleshy tumours thus: make an incision in the skin of the testicles; then draw the testicle upward and out of the tunica albuginea, and free the suspensor from the vessels and tie the vessels, and cut the suspensor after you have freed it from all round the testicle.	0.82323307
If the testicle is already attached to this new flesh, then you must draw out the testicle and cut it; and if there is air in the tunic, or in what is inside the vessels, then you must free all that tissue, and cut it roundly.	Should it happen that the testicle is adherent to the fleshy growth, you will have to cut away the testicle itself and remove it. But should the adhesion have formed somewhere inside the membranes or in the space between the vessels, then you must free the adhesion as a whole and cut it away with a circular incision.	0.6935431
And if the growth of the flesh is in the back part, then you must cut it all out and extract the testicle, as we have said.	If the fleshy growth should be at the site of the junction which is behind, you will have to cut the whole thing away and remove the testicle as we have said.	0.8559397
And when your work is completed, fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.	And when your operation is finished, pack the wound with wool moistened with oil of roses and wine; then dress in the usual manner until healed.	0.8401315

chapter-2-subchapter-64.txt
This is an abscess enveloped in an envelope similar to a bud, with softening of the testicles, and the patient suffers greatly when he walks; and the treatment of this disease is almost as daunting as the one before, and yet we will tell you the procedure for it, according to what the ancients did.	A varix is a twisted tumour resembling a cluster of grapes, with relaxation of the testicles, which makes movement and exercise and walking difficult for the patient. The treatment of this condition is of uncertain outcome, akin to those conditions just spoken of. Nevertheless we must describe the operation for this condition as it was performed by the Ancients.	0.67901915

chapter-2-subchapter-65.txt
And the sign when it is from the tear of the peritoneum, is that it causes sudden pain at the beginning, and the swelling appears varied, close under the skin, and this is because of the exit of the intestine and the body outside the peritoneum.	When it is due to a split in the membrane, the signs will be that it starts with a sudden severe pain, and the lump varies in consistency, appearing close under the skin; that is due to the emergence of the bowel and its passage outside the membrane.	0.765802
And sometimes the omentum descends with the intestine, and is retained within, and causes great pain to the patient, especially when it is compressed.	Sometimes also the excrement comes down with the bowel and gets held up there, and this involves the patient's death, for thence arises an intractable pain and borborygmi, specially when pressed upon.	0.7462695
And in these treatments, using iron is feared, therefore it should be avoided.	The treatment of the varieties of this disease with the knife is dangerous; so be cautious of rushing at it.	0.5819133
And sometimes the white peritoneum that we have mentioned is cauterized, after the incision, for fear of bleeding.	Then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound, and the bandage that we prescribed (sometimes also the white membrane that we spoke about is cauterized after the incision to forestall haemorrhage, for that usually happens) and let the ligatures be until they fall away spontaneously.	0.5362169
For this happens often, and leave the ligature until it falls off by itself; and if it is slow to fall, it should be moistened with warm water, and apply what we have mentioned, until it falls; then treat the wound with other treatments, until it is completely healed.	If they are slow in coming away, then foment with hot water and apply something to sweat them off. Then dress the wound in the usual manner until it heals.	0.6294261

chapter-2-subchapter-66.txt
of fleshy hernia	On flatulent hernia.	0.451328
In this type of hernia I have never seen anyone who dared to perform the treatment with an iron instrument.	I have not seen anyone pluck up enough courage to attempt the operative treatment of this kind of rupture.	0.69286984
And the ancients said that it is done like the hernia which is near the face, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after cutting above or lightly below; then cut in the middle, and treat the abscess of the one who operates, until the vessels fall off; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.	The Ancients indeed said it ought to be done in the same way as hernia with varicocele; namely, to ligate the blood-vessels after cutting down upon them, gently, and lower down. Then make an incision in the middle and apply to the tumour such things as will keep it open until the blood-vessels fall away. And dress the wound in the manner we have already mentioned until it heals.	0.82456756

chapter-2-subchapter-67.txt
And when you cut the threads, clean it and treat the wound until it is healed.	Then dress the wound, and when the stitches come apart remove them and bandage the wound again until it is healed over.	0.7138562

chapter-2-subchapter-68.txt
of the softening of the skin of the testicles	On the loosening of the skin of the scrotum.	0.6243682

chapter-2-subchapter-69.txt
of castration	On castration.	0.5506375
Know that castration is forbidden in our law, and therefore I would prefer not to speak of it in this book; and it is only necessary for two reasons: one is that the physician should know how to answer when asked about it, and know the treatment; and the other, because we often need to castrate some animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other animals.	Castration is forbidden in our law and I ought therefore to make no mention of it in my book. But I must speak of it for two reasons. One reason is that it should be part of the doctor's medical knowledge when asked about it, and that he should know how to treat anyone whom it befalls. Another reason is that often we need to castrate certain animals for the sake of the benefits that accrue from them, such as rams, he-goats and cats, and such animals.	0.89137614
I say then that castration is done in two ways: either by pulling, or by cutting.	So I say that castration can be performed in two ways: either by contusion; or by opening up and cutting away.	0.8775524
In the one that we do by pulling, we make the beast sit in hot water, until the testicles are softened and hanging; then take them in your hand, until they are drawn back and you no longer feel them.	The method by contusion is that we make the animal sit in warm water until his testes are relaxed and become soft and pendent; then rub them with your hand until they are so loosened that they are no longer palpable.	0.8217735

chapter-2-subchapter-70.txt
of hermaphrodites	On the treatment of the hermaphrodite.	0.4441322
Hermaphroditism occurs in two ways in men: one is that between the two testicles appears something like the form of a woman's nature, where there is hair, and sometimes urine flows there.	There are two kinds of male hermaphrodite: one has the appearance as of female pudenda with hair in the region of the perineum; the other has the same in the skin of the scrotum between the testes. Sometimes also urine is excreted through that which is in the skin of the scrotum.	0.80119693
And the other way is in women, and they have on the pubis something like a penis and two testicles.	There is also one kind among women, in which there is, above the female pudenda, on the pubes, what resembles the male organs.	0.6621182
And the treatment for the man and the woman is that you cut away all the extra flesh, and treat them like other wounds; in the second type, of men whose urine spurts from the skin of the testicles, there is no cure.	This is the treatment of all three kinds, that is, two male and one female: the superfluous growths must be cut away so that every trace is destroyed; then the usual treatment for wounds should be applied until they are healed. As to the second kind, in man, where the opening is in the scrotum and the urine runs out of it, there is no operation for this, and no cure.	0.7386311

chapter-2-subchapter-71.txt
Tentigo is an extra growth on the genitals, so much so that it is very ugly to see; and some women have it as big as a hand, and this is the treatment.	The clitoris may grow in size above the order of nature so that it gets a horrible deformed appearance; in some women it becomes erect like the male organ and attains to coitus.	0.55523074
You must hold the excess of the tentigo in your hand or with hooks, and cut it carefully; and do not go too deep, so that bleeding does not occur, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed; and there is another growth that arises at the opening of the uterus and fills it, and sometimes appears suddenly, and is similar in appearance to a tail, and therefore the ancients called it "tailed sickness. You must cut it, as we have said for tentigo, and treat it until it is healed.	You must grasp the growth with your hand or a hook and cut it off. Do not cut too deeply, especially at the root of the growth, lest haemorrhage occur. Then apply the usual dressing for wounds until it is healed. As to the fleshy growth, that is, flesh growing in the cervix and filling it, and also often protruding like a tail (on which account some of the Ancients called it 'caudate disease'); this too you should cut away as you do for the clitoris, and dress until healed.	0.81661475

chapter-2-subchapter-72.txt
Erysipelas occurs when a woman's genitals are not perforated, or the opening is small; and this is natural by birth, or accidental due to a disease that has occurred; or it is due to extra flesh, or from a thin or thick syfac, and it is located deep in the uterus, or on the sides, or underneath, or wherever it may be; and it prevents conception, and childbirth, and sometimes menstruation; and the diagnosis of this is by examination of the vulva.	This condition is when a woman's pudenda have no opening or have only a tiny opening; it may be either congenital or acquired. The acquired sort is due to some preceding disease; either to a fleshy growth or to a membrane, thick or thin. It may be in the fundus of the uterus or in its walls or in the upper part or in the lower part; and it prevents intercourse, conception, and delivery; it often also hinders the menses. This is recognized by inspection by the midwife, if the obstruction be obvious and low.	0.8092961
If the blockage is near and visible, then search with your fingers or with a probe.	This is recognized by inspection by the midwife, if the obstruction be obvious and low. But if it be not visible she should palpate with her fingers or with a probe.	0.63271105
If it is from a thin syfac, and it is close to the two labia, then hurry, and break it thus: put your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back, with her legs spread; then stretch the two labia firmly, until the thin syfac is broken, and the blockage is opened; then take wool, and soak it in oil, and put it on the spot, and let the woman lie still every day, so that it cannot close up.	And when the obstruction is due to a thin membrane near the labia you should lose no time in breaking it down. This is done by applying some sort of pad to the labia; then put both thumbs upon it. The woman should be upon her back with her legs spread wide apart; then the labia are to be stretched strongly till the thin membrane is ruptured and the obstruction is laid open. Then take wool soaked in oil and apply to the place, and let the woman engage in coitus every day lest the place close over.	0.8368984
And if the syfac is hard and thick, then you must cut it with a myrtle-leaf shaped scalpel.	If the membrane be thick and strong you should incise it with a broad myrtle-leaf scalpel.	0.77310276
If the blockage is from excess flesh, then lift it with a hook and cut it; and have medicines to stop the bleeding, such as acacia, dragon's blood, frankincense, together with egg white; then insert a wide lead tube, so that the wound cannot close; and let it remain thus for a long time, and apply a dry linen tent; then treat with other remedies until it is healed.	And have at hand remedies for allaying haemorrhage without pain, such as acacia and dragon's blood and olibanum, all mixed with egg-white. Then use a cannula of lead to prevent the wound healing up too quickly. She should keep it in position for some days and employ a bandage of dry linen. Then treat with the usual healing dressings until it heals.	0.7477404
And when excess flesh grows in the womb, it must be cut in this manner, unless it is a malignant abscess. For a malignant abscess that is in the womb, one should not touch it with iron.	Sometimes other growths of flesh arise in the uterus itself; you should cut away in this manner all except cancerous tumours; for a cancerous tumour arising in the uterus is under no circumstance to be treated with the knife.	0.64158374

chapter-2-subchapter-73.txt
of hemorrhoids Hemorrhoids are openings of veins which habitually bleed, and when the hemorrhoids are old they become bluish; and we have already spoken in the division about their nature, and the symptoms, and I will speak here of those that can be treated.	Haemorrhoids are an inflation of the heads of the blood-vessels leading to abundant and constant bleeding. When haemorrhoids are chronic they turn into warts. I have already mentioned in their place the kinds of wart and their symptoms. Now here I shall say which kinds permit of treatment and which do not.	0.75812674
I say that for hemorrhoids and bluish swellings, when they are deep in the anus and they cannot be felt, the treatment is not with iron.	I begin by stating that haemorrhoids and warts in the depths of the uterus that are not palpable are not able to be treated operatively.	0.7120873
Those that are at the opening of the anus, that can be felt, are those that can be treated.	Those at the orifice that are palpable you can treat.	0.7139175
And if it stops, that's good.	And if the bleeding cease, good; but if not, apply to the loins and breasts cupping-vessels without scarifying.	0.4182573
If not, have cupping glasses applied to her back and breasts without incisions; then take wool, and soak it in plantain juice or in holly juice with old wine, and apply it warm to the area.	Then take wool and dip it in the juice of red cynomorium or plantain or wild eglantine, together with syrup of oak galls, and apply to the place. And when the swelling has subsided treat the place with ointment until it heals.	0.60693806
And when the abscess subsides, treat the area with ointment until it is healed; and the one that is called "albathir" is red, and looks like a rough head, you must cut it like I said for the swelling; and then treat it until it is healed.	And when the swelling has subsided treat the place with ointment until it heals. Now red pustules resemble the heads of thyme, and are of rough appearance. All that appears on the surface should be cut away in the manner mentioned for treating warts; and dress the wounds until healed.	0.7388897

chapter-2-subchapter-74.txt
of abscesses of the womb/uterus	On the perforation of eruptions occurring in the uterus.	0.44882536
Many kinds of abscesses occur in the womb/uterus, such as canker and stony abscess and herpes and corroding ulcers and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, and several other illnesses that I mentioned in the division/classification.	From time to time there occur in the womb various kinds of tumour, such as cancer and the stony tumour and ulcer and abscess and gangrene and fistulae and varicosities and cracks and warts and inflamed tumours; all these diseases I have mentioned, with their varieties and their symptoms, in the appropriate section.	0.7434635
It is therefore necessary that I discuss in this treatise the hot abscess that occurs in the womb/uterus, which is not among the abscesses that collect pus; and if you want to know how to proceed, observe if the abscess is acute at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red if you can see it.	But now in this treatise we must mention an inflamed tumour of the kind where there is a collection of pus, and the manner of its opening with the knife. You should inspect it, and if the pain of the tumour is acute from the outset, with pulsation and inflammation and fever, and, if it is visible, you see that it is red, then do not be in a hurry to open, but treat it with applications helpful for suppuration till these symptoms have subsided.	0.75800824
And if the wound is deep in the womb/uterus, you must avoid cauterizing with iron, but treat it as we have described in the classification/division.	But if the lesion be hidden in the depths of the womb then you will have to abstain from operative treatment but carry out treatment as spoken of in its place.	0.6281021

chapter-2-subchapter-75.txt
For it sometimes comes feet first, and the body or the head and the hands come out, or it comes on its stomach, or often, and is perhaps turned on its neck, and in other bad positions; so it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skilled in these things, and to beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the positions and how one should assist them.	Sometimes the infant is delivered by its feet; or by its hands before either head or feet; or a single hand or foot; or the head comes out together with a foot. Or it comes out all twisted, often with the nape of the neck first; or in other wrong positions. So the midwife must have wisdom and dexterity and be skilled in all these cases and beware of failures and mistakes. I shall explain the technique in these modes of delivery so that she may be instructed and may be acquainted with them all.	0.860413
If the child comes head first by natural delivery, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and her strength is weak, have her sit on a birthing stool, where the women hold her; and revive her nature with oil or cooked fenugreek, and then the midwife places between her fingers the small spatula of which here is the shape:	When the foetus comes out by the vertex in the normal manner and yet the delivery is with great difficulty for the woman and you see that her strength is getting exhausted, then make her sit on a seat and have her held firmly, and foment her womb in a decoction of fenugreek and in bland oils. Then the midwife should take between two fingers a little scalpel and make an incision in the foetal membrane or open it with the finger nail, to allow the contained waters to flow out; and put pressure upon the woman's abdomen until the foetus comes down.	0.77624047
and tear the afterbirth/amniotic sac, and cut with her fingernail so that the liquid which is inside runs out; and press the woman's belly so that the child descends, and if it does not descend, then give the woman an enema of fenugreek mucilage with sesame oil; then make her grab and sneeze from hellebore, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: the child will come out immediately.	Then the midwife should take between two fingers a little scalpel and make an incision in the foetal membrane or open it with the finger nail, to allow the contained waters to flow out; and put pressure upon the woman's abdomen until the foetus comes down. But if it will not come down then the woman should have an enema of mucilage of fenugreek with oil of sesame. Then bid her bear down after the enema, and with ptarmica stimulate her to sneeze; and close her mouth and nose for a while and the foetus will quickly come out.	0.8405511
And if the two hands come out, you must gently push them back in little by little; and if they cannot go back in, put the woman on a seat, and lift her feet up high; then push the seat down to the ground, and someone hold the woman so that she doesn't fall when it is pushed down; and if the hands cannot be put back in, and the child is dead, then cut the hands with the knife which is shown earlier, and extract the child, and replace everything as it was.	If the hands of the foetus present, you should slowly and gently push them back; and if they will not go back then place the woman upon a seat, have her feet raised and meanwhile shake the seat; but the woman should be held lest the shaking cause her to fall off. But if the two hands will not go back and the foetus is dead cut them off and draw out the remains. Or tie tapes to the hands and pull on them evenly and it will come out.	0.88652194
of the delivery of the child feet first When the child comes feet first, you must push it up; and then turn it little by little, until it is positioned correctly; then take one of the feet and extend it little by little.	Foot presentation: when the foetus presents feet first you should raise them both; then you should very gently turn the foetus so as to straighten it. Then take one of its feet and stretch it gently.	0.8482368
When it jumps/moves up to the thighs, tell her to hold on, and make her sneeze with hellebore; then it jumps/moves out, God willing.	When they come down as far as the hips, bid her bear down, make her sneeze with ptarmica, and it will come out.	0.6115711
And if it does not come out as we have said, then turn it little by little, until it is in its natural position. For then it comes out easily.	But if it will not come out with these means we have described, you should return the foetus gently until you have placed it in the natural position; then it will come out easily.	0.77172905
And if it does not come out as we have said, take mucilage of marshmallow, and sesame oil, and melted gum, and grind everything in a mortar; and put this ointment on the woman's genitals inside and outside, then make her sit in lukewarm water up to below the ribs; and when she is softened below, make a pessary of myrrh, and put it inside her, and leave it for an hour; then make her sit on a seat, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and press her belly gently, for the child will come out immediately.	But if it defies all that we have described, take mucilage of marsh mallow and fenugreek and oil of sesame and dissolved gum, and pound them all well together in the mortar and anoint the woman's pudenda and lower abdomen; then make her sit down in warm water reaching to the costal margin. And when you see the lower parts are softened, make a suppository of myrrh and let her introduce it; and when she has had the suppository in for a while make her sneeze, stopping her nose and mouth; and press gently upon the abdomen; then will the foetus immediately emerge.	0.90276086
When the child comes in this way, the midwife should put her hands there little by little; then she should be supported by her neck, with her feet hanging down, and lying on a bed; and fold her hands little by little, and then take her hands on her belly, and remove the cushions from under her, so that she is positioned downwards; and if the child does not come out, take her feet and move them strongly, then move her belly upwards, then put your hands there; and pull the child little by little; and tell the woman to push until the child comes out. of the delivery of the child who comes out sideways with one hand hanging out It is necessary to devise a way to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, make the woman get up and walk; if she cannot walk, make her lie on a bed, and stretch her legs strongly; then administer the mucilage that I have described; and if she does not give birth, make her sit on a seat, then work on bringing back the hand; and pull the child according to its natural position, and make her sneeze, and tell her to push until the child comes out.	And when you see the lower parts are softened, make a suppository of myrrh and let her introduce it; and when she has had the suppository in for a while make her sneeze, stopping her nose and mouth; and press gently upon the abdomen; then will the foetus immediately emerge. Presentation of the foetus by knees and hands : when it comes out after this manner you should seek to introduce the hands slowly; then let the woman lie back on her shoulders with her feet hanging down, reclining on a couch with her hands clasped together; then very gently put pressure upon the abdomen; then take away the pillows from under her feet until her lower parts are vertical ; and if the foetus does not come out then, take both her feet and shake them violently ; then press upon her costal margin until the foetus ascends ; then let the midwife insert her hand and put the foetus in the right position, very gently, and bid the woman bear down, until the infant is born. Presentation by the side with one hand hanging down: attempt to manœuvre the hand back again; but if you cannot reduce it then make the woman stand up and walk. But if she cannot walk then have her lie on a couch, and agitate her feet violently.	0.928998
of the delivery of the child on its neck, with its hands spread out, and its face turned towards its mother's back	Presentation on the back, with hands outstretched and face towards the mother's back: the midwife should take the infant's hand and then turn him very slowly, and gently rectify his position.	0.5994922
The midwife must hold her hand, then turn it little by little, and pull it gently; and when it is aligned, apply the mucilage of marshmallow and oil as we have said, then tell her to move little by little; and when you have done this, make her sit on a seat, and tell her to push; and make her sneeze.	Then when he is in the correct position apply to the maternal passage the oil and mucilage prescribed. Then bid the woman move gently and when she has done so make her sit down upon a seat and bid her lean over to her right side; then bid her bear down, and with ptarmica make her sneeze ; then the foetus will come forth.	0.7628411
When the afterbirth comes out in this way, cut the afterbirth with your fingernail, until the moisture is drained; and if the child is hanging by its face and neck, cut it from the abdomen so that it is not retained, and the child dies; then push the child inside, until you have placed it as it should be, and tell the woman to push a few times: then it will come out easily. of the delivery of twins	The foetus presenting laterally, doubled up : when it presents at the os in this manner together with the membrane, open the membrane with your finger nail and let out the waters. And if it adhere over the infant's face and neck, cut it away from the umbilicus lest he be strangled and die. Then push the foetus back till it is in the proper position, and bid the woman bear down a few times until the foetus comes forth.	0.8468539
of the delivery of twins Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four are born; and this is not a strange thing, and happens rarely.	The birth of twin or multiple foetuses: you should know that it is a common occurrence for twins to be born alive, and sometimes three or four infants, but this is a rarity; while five after this manner is altogether unnatural and they never live.	0.81319326
Two is a strange thing, and they do not often live; I know this, that they are multiplied, and are separated by the membrane that divides them, which is attached to the abdomen; and sometimes they come out as naturally as one whole, as we have said.	Although they may be more than one, they are enveloped in a single membrane but separated one from the other by a dividing membrane joined to the umbilicus of each one. And when they are born they may come in the natural easy manner of a single foetus; or by any abnormal presentation such as we have described.	0.65304035
And if they come out with difficulty, treat them as we have said, and let the midwife be skillful, and do quickly and lightly what she does; and do as is best for their safe delivery. of multiple children	And if one of them be born with difficulty, presenting in some unnatural manner as described, the treatment is also as described. Let the midwife be delicate and do whatever she does gently and calmly, adopting in each case whatever technique it demands that will conduce to a safe result.	0.6997053
Sometimes one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or more up to fifteen, are formed in the womb, all formed in the shape of a child by the measure of the glorious sage, and the midwife must know all this, because perhaps such a thing will happen to her; let her do according to what is necessary.	Sometimes in the womb there may form one or two or three or four or five or six or seven or more than ten. And I can vouch that one woman had an abortion of seven foetuses and another woman of fifteen, all of them formed. This is by the decree of the Almighty, the Wise. And all this should be part of the midwife's knowledge, for one day she may meet such a case and she must deal with it in the proper way.	0.82677

chapter-2-subchapter-76.txt
of the dead child	On the extraction of the dead foetus.	0.43124452
then insert another hook against it, or a third if you need it, so that the extraction is even; and then pull evenly, moving from one side to the other, to make it come out, and the hook should be toothed to hold it, as is the shape here:	Then opposite it let her fix another or a third if need be, so as to give even traction, not pulling to one side. Then she should pull evenly, not just in a straight line but with the foetus moved from side to side so that its exit may be eased, as is done in extracting a tooth.	0.80348444
And if a part remains, let the midwife anoint some of her fingers with oil, and insert them into that part, and pull the other part; and if any of it remains, put this hook in a higher place, and do this until it all comes out.	From time to time the tension must be relaxed, and if any part of it be held up the midwife must oil some of her fingers and introduce them to one side to manipulate the retained part. And if a part only of the foetus come away she should shift the hooks to other parts a little higher up, and so on, until the whole of the foetus has come out.	0.74662644
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back due to the tightness, you must wrap it in a cloth, until it comes out completely; then cut it at the joint of the wrist or at the elbow, and so you must do with the other hand, and with both feet.	If the hand should come out before any other part and it is impossible to reduce it on account of the pressure, then a tape should be wound round it and she should pull on it until it is all out; then it should be cut off at either the carpal or the elbow joint. In the same manner should the other hand be dealt with, and the feet.	0.84086925
And if the child is on its feet, the extraction is easy, and the straightening at the opening of the womb is easy.	If the foetus present the feet then the extraction will be easy and it will be a simple matter to guide it to the maternal opening.	0.73096526
And if the child is on its side, and you can straighten it, administer what we have said for the live child; and if one cannot, then pull it out piece by piece, and leave nothing of the afterbirth.	If the foetus present laterally and it is possible to reposition it, there should be applied the things mentioned for a living child. But if this be not possible then it should be cut away piecemeal and extracted. It is necessary that not a scrap of the afterbirth be left behind in the womb.	0.74106646
And when you have done this, administer what we have said for hot abscesses that occur in the womb; and if bleeding occurs, she should be placed in constricting water, and other treatments administered.	When you have completed your treatment then also apply those treatments we have mentioned for abscesses occurring in the uterus. If haemorrhage occurs, the woman should be put into styptic fluids and the usual treatment applied.	0.7683059
And I saw a woman in whose womb a child had died, then another was conceived over that one, and the other died as well. After a long time, she developed an abscess in the buttock, and it swelled so much that it opened, and began to suppurate heavily.	Now I myself once saw a woman who had become pregnant and the foetus had then died in utero; then again she conceived and the second foetus also died; and after a long while she got a swelling in the umbilicus which grew and eventually it opened and began to produce pus.	0.89328647
I was called to treat it, and I worked on it for a long time, and the wound would not close.	I was called in to attend her, and I treated her for a long while but the wound did not heal up.	0.82460773
I applied a plaster with strong drawing power, and a bone came out, and after a few days, another one. I was very surprised, because there are no bones in the belly.	So I applied to it certain very strongly drawing ointments, and then a bone came away from the place; then a few days passed and another bone came out; and I was mightily astonished at this, seeing that the abdomen is a place where there are no bones.	0.8007115
So I thought that these were the bones of a dead child.	I formed the opinion that these were bones from a dead foetus.	0.7801298
I examined the wound, and drew out many bones, until the woman was in better condition; and the woman lived for a long time like this, and a little pus always came out of the place; and I have only recorded this chapter so that, when a physician finds a strange case, they might know how to offer help.	I continued this procedure and got a great number of bones out of her, the woman being in the best of health; indeed she lived for quite a while like that, with a little pus being exuded from that place. I bring forward this uncommon occurrence here since it gives knowledge and help about the sort of treatment that the doctor who practises surgery may contrive.	0.8091526

chapter-2-subchapter-77.txt
Here follows the shape of the press, with which one squeezes the books; and it has two screws at the two ends of the two cords.	This is the type of instrument with which books are pressed. It has two screws at either end of two pieces of wood; but this instrument should be more slender than a book press, and should be made of ebony or boxwood.	0.66535854
However, the screws should be more slender than the restrictor, and be made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the wood should be one finger wide, and the edge of the shafts one finger, and a palm and a half long; and amidst the two cords, there should be two attachments of this same wood, which are fastened to one and the other, half a palm long or a little more; and these two attachments are inserted into the opening of the marrow to open it when the two screws are turned.	The width of each piece of wood should be about two fingers' breadth and the thickness about one, and the length a span and a half; and in the middle of both pieces of wood, firmly attached, should be two projections made of the same kind of wood, each half a span long or a little more, and two fingers wide or a little more. It is these two projections that are to be introduced into the vagina so that it is thereby opened when you turn the screws. Another instrument, for the same purpose, but smaller and lighter.	0.90003616
These instruments are all excellent, and their forms are multiplied; and when the physician has prepared them, the work is that much faster, and more valuable to people because of their quantity.	The more types of these instruments the practitioner has ready by him, the more rapidly he operates, and the greater his reputation among men.	0.68257976
So do not disregard the instrument without having it prepared, because the need for them is not excusable.	So do not neglect to have ready by you a single one of these instruments, for you will certainly need it.	0.6899812

chapter-2-subchapter-78.txt
When the afterbirth is retained after childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze using pepper, and hold your hands over her mouth and nose; and if it comes out because of this, it is well.	When in a confinement the afterbirth is left behind, you should bid the woman hold her breath then make her sneeze with ptarmica, with your hand holding her mouth and nose; and if it come away thus, good.	0.8623294
If not, then take a pot, and make a hole in the lid, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the marrow, such as calamintha, rue, anise, chamomile, birthwort and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked in the pot with water over the fire; then put one end of a reed in the hole of the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the marrow, and hold it there until the vapor enters the marrow; then make her sneeze, as we have said.	But if not, then take a pot, pierce a hole in the lid, and put in it herbs that will open the womb, such as pennyroyal, rue, anise, chamomile, artemisia, cassia, and centaury, some or all of these remedies, submerge them in water, and place on the fire. Then fix a silver tube to the hole in the cover and bring the other end into the orifice of the womb and hold it in position so that the vapours may reach the body of the uterus.	0.8543217
Then the afterbirth will come out quickly.	Then let her sneeze, as we said, and the afterbirth will quickly come away.	0.5077703
And if it remains after this treatment, and does not come out, instruct the midwife to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or in althaea mucilage, and then insert it into the vagina, and search for the afterbirth; and when she has found it, she should take it and pull it gently and straight, so that the marrow does not fall out during the extraction; but she must move it gently to the right and to the left, and then pull; so it will come and be released.	But if, after this treatment, it still remains and does not come out, then tell the midwife to dip her hand in oil of sesame or mucilage of marshmallow and introduce it into the vulva and search for the afterbirth, and when she has found it, to take hold of it and very gently draw it until she bring it out.	0.81224865
And if the opening of the marrow is too narrow, we have described the treatment of sneezing, and fumigation with herbs; and if it does not come out with all that we have said, be careful not to be foolish in pulling; but you must tie what is at the opening of the marrow to the woman's thigh, then give her an enema of tetrapharmacum ointment; this will rot and loosen it, and it will come out; but nevertheless, when it rots, a bad odor comes to the stomach and head, and harms the patient.	But if it be adherent to the depths of the uterus, then let her pass her hand in as we described until she find the afterbirth; then let her draw very slowly and gently lest by violent pulling she cause a prolapse; and she should slowly move it from side to side, left and right; then let her increase the traction, for then it gives way to the pull and is freed from its adhesions. If the uterine opening be narrowed, we have earlier mentioned the treatment by induced sneezing and that of the pot and herbs. But if it does not come away by all the means we have described, beware of treating her roughly with repeated traction. Whatever of it comes out of the opening should be tied to the woman's thigh, and then syringe her with Tetrapharmacon ointment; for that will cause putrefaction in a few days and it will loosen and come out.	0.8144799
Suitable fumigations are therefore necessary for this: some of the ancients have tried fumigation with watercress and dried figs.	One of the Ancients tried suffumigation with nasturtium and dried figs.	0.5273554
The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman for the retention of the flowers and of the afterbirth is this:	The form of instrument for suffumigating a woman for retention of the menses and of the afterbirth and the like.	0.74481153
And it is made of glass, resembling a tube, and the narrow end is placed in the vagina, and the wide end over the fire; and the fumigation should be over coals, and continue until it is consumed, and start another.	It is made of lead, resembling a funnel, or it may be made of bronze. Its narrow extremity is introduced into the pudenda and the wide end is put over the fire, and the suffumigation is produced on the hot coals. Keep it there until all the fumes are gone, and repeat once.	0.75371563

chapter-2-subchapter-79.txt
Many children are born without a perforated anus, but rather it is closed by a thin membrane: so the midwife must pierce this membrane with her finger, and not pierce it with a sharp instrument, and take care that the umbilical cord is not touched; then apply wool soaked in wine and oil, then treat with ointment until it is healed.	Infants are quite often born with the anus imperforate, closed by a fine membrane; then the midwife should perforate the membrane with her finger or pierce it with a sharp scalpel, being careful not to touch the muscle. Then wool dipped in oil and wine should be applied, and treat it with ointments until healed.	0.838157
And if you fear that it will close again, place a lead tube in the opening, and leave it for several days, and remove it when the child needs to go to the toilet/latrine.	If you are afraid it may close up, put into the opening a leaden tube for many days, which will be removed when the child wants to evacuate the bowel.	0.7420561
And sometimes this blockage comes from the healing of a wound or abscess; so it is necessary to cut this adhesion: and it should be treated, as we have said, with the lead tube.	Sometimes also the anus is closed by the scarring of a wound or an abscess; then the scarring should be incised, and then dressed by those methods we have mentioned, including the leaden tube.	0.7494369

chapter-2-subchapter-80.txt
of the fistula of the anus/rectum Fistulas that occur below the anus are swellings, and growths that appear near the anus outside, or in the space between the two buttocks, where there is one fistula or several; and when this swelling is old, it opens, and releases a whitish watery fluid or thin pus, and sometimes these fistulas are perforated; and they are recognized because there is a discharge or gas when the patient defecates, and perhaps a worm comes out.	Fistulae in the lower parts are a knotting and thickening of the tissues occurring externally near the anus or in the perineum to one side. A fistula may be single or multiple. When a thickening of this kind has become chronic it opens and there flows out a white watery humidity or thin pus. These fistulae may be perforating into the rectum or bowel, or non-perforating.	0.8326249
And there are fistulas that penetrate to the bladder, and to the middle of the penis; and reach the hip joint, and even to the base of the spine.	Sometimes also there are fistulae occurring in the perineum which penetrate to the urinary bladder and to the urethra; and some also penetrate to the hip-joint and to the coccyx.	0.7423489
And thus one recognizes the penetrating fistula in the anus, and the non-penetrating one: you insert your index finger into the anus, and insert a thin needle of brass or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity/winding path.	A fistula penetrating to the anus may also be distinguished from one not so penetrating by introducing the finger into the anus and a fine probe into the fistula, made of either bronze or iron, if there be no bend in the course of the fistula.	0.76023364
And if there is a winding path, insert a thin lead probe, or a horsehair, until you feel the probe or the hair with your finger; and if you don't feel it, and no excrement, gas, or worm comes out of the opening, as we have said: know that it is not perforated; so hurry to treat it.	But if the course of the fistula be tortuous, then introduce a thin leaden probe or a horse-hair, until you feel the probe or horse-hair come on to your finger. But if you do not feel it at all and if no faeces nor flatus nor worm come out of the opening, as we said, you may know it is not perforating; so hurry on with treatment.	0.8670286
And when the fistula penetrates to the bladder or to the urethra, urine comes out of it, and it cannot be healed by medicines.	When the fistula penetrates to the bladder or the urinary passages it is signified by the passage of urine and by the fact that medical remedies cannot cure it.	0.81111866
If it is perforated to the hip joint, the probe will reach the place; if there is no winding path, and the origin of the pain is around it, then pus constantly comes out of it, and neither medicine nor healing by ointment is effective; and in these penetrating fistulas there is no cure other than work, and the vanity of foolish physicians who meddle with them.	But if it penetrate to the hip-joint or coccyx, this will be signified by the probe's passing right through to there if it be a straight passage to the bone; and by the pain felt in that part; and by the chronic purulent discharge; and the fact that medical treatment does no good and ointment does not heal it. There is in these perforating sinuses no cure whatever; and their treatment is labour in vain for all the ignorant doctors who pretend that they understand them.	0.7922162
In one that is not perforated and not old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced, and the patient should lie on their back between your hands; and lift their legs up to their thighs, with their thighs bent towards their stomach; then insert a brass probe, or lead if there is a winding path, until you know where the probe reaches.	But there is hope in operative treatment for those that are not perforating and chronic, as I know from experience and shall now describe. Thus: have the patient lying on his back before you and let both his legs be raised with the thighs flexed back upon his belly; then introduce a probe of bronze, or of lead if the course be tortuous, until you determine where the probe reaches.	0.8308317
If the patient feels it around the anus, then you should insert your index finger, and feel if the probe has pierced through; and if it is exposed where you feel the tissue or flesh between your finger, then know that it is perforated; so do not work on it because it cannot be healed.	Then, if the patient feel the probe somewhere in the region of the anus, put your forefinger into the anus. If you feel the probe itself with your finger, coming through bare, and you do not feel anything interposing between your finger and the probe, either membrane or flesh, then you may know for certain that it is a perforating fistula; do not spend your energy over it, for, as we have said, there is no cure.	0.86655575
It is said however that some can be healed, but this happens rarely; and the help that one gives, is to heat a thin cautery according to the width of the fistula, as mentioned before; and insert it hot into the fistula, until it comes close to the anus; and do this two or three times, until you know that the diseased flesh is burned, which resembles a bird's feather; and then treat it with tents soaked in butter, until this flesh comes out, then treat it with ointment that generates flesh and heals.	Yet some have said that it may be cured in certain cases, but rarely. The treatment from which some relief may be hoped is to heat a fine cautery corresponding to the width of the fistula, as we have said before, and pass this, hot, through the fistula to the anus; then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those compact tags of superfluous flesh, which resemble quills, are burnt away. Then dress with a pad soaked in oil until the burnt tissue comes away.	0.8900862
If it is thus healed, that is good.	Then treat with healing ointments and, if it heals, well and good.	0.5565312
If it cannot be healed otherwise; and if the probe enters, but does not pierce through to the finger which is in the anus, and there is a thick covering of flesh or tissue between your finger and the probe, and you see the fistula at what covers the opening; then cut it from the beginning of the fistula, and insert the probe further, and then the cautery after it, until it reaches the end of the probe; and the probe will be released, and will fall out; then clean the diseased flesh that resembles a bird's feather, and leave nothing remaining.	If not, it will never heal with any other treatment. If you introduce the probe and it does not come through to your finger in the anus, and there be between your finger and the probe something firm interposing, either tissue or lining, and you see the fistula to be close under the skin, then cut open the skin at the origin of the fistula and continue your incision, with the probe in the fistula, until you come to the place where the tip of the probe has reached and the probe is freed and falls out. Then clean out all the solid quill-like pieces of tissue and let none remain.	0.8992003
And if the blood overcomes you, and flows between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or a sharp medicine.	If the haemorrhage be too much for you and interferes with your operating when cutting away the tissues, then the best and most speedily efficacious thing you can do is to cauterize, either with fire or with caustics.	0.6064999
For the fire cautery combines two good things: that is, the burning of the diseased flesh, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture; then treat it with tents soaked in butter or in mashed things, until the place oozes pus, and the burned flesh comes out in the pus; then treat the wound with healing ointments generating hard flesh, and these are dry medicines.	For cauterizing with fire unites two good characteristics, the burning away of those superfluous tissues, and the stanching of the bleeding, as well as the drying-up of humidity. Then treat with a dressing soaked in butter, or sulphur pounded with oil, until the place putrefies and the burnt tissue comes away in the pus. Then treat the wound with salves to encourage healing and the growth of firm flesh, these remedies having also a styptic and drying quality.	0.8428198
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.	Then when the wound is healed over it is cured for good and there is no fear of a recurrence.	0.52148736
And if a fistula goes deep into the anus, and is far from the opening, then put your finger in the anus, and investigate it.	If the fistula reaches deep into the anus and is far from the surface of the body, then put your finger into the anus and palpate.	0.78096867
And sometimes fistulas are like this: that is when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is on the side of the anus next to the skin above, so take a tent pierced at the end in this way: And put a twisted thread in two, and push the tent with the thread into the fistula until it reaches the end.	Sometimes also a fistula is cut out in this way: namely, you pass a probe into the fistula; it should be near the circle of the junction of the outer skin with the anal mucosa; then take a probe with an eyed point like a shoemaker's needle; put into it a thread twisted of about five threads, and insert into the fistula until it reaches the end.	0.7629394
If it is piercing the edge of the anus inside, then pull the thread from that hole, so that you put your finger in the anus; and pull the end of the thread, and bring the two ends together, and tie one to the other, and leave it for a day or two; and tighten it sometimes, until the thread cuts the flesh that is between them, and it falls off; then treat the wound until it is closed and healed.	If it has perforated through at the anal margin within, nearby, draw the thread out of that perforation by introducing your finger into the anus. Draw out the end of the thread and tie the two ends together and leave for one or two days. As the thread cuts into the tissues, tighten it up well until those tissues enclosed in the thread are cut through and fall away. Then dress the wound until it be healed and sound.	0.8827537
If the fistula does not pierce, make it pierce by all means that you can, unless it is too deep. For it is not appropriate to make the thread cut so deep, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.	If the mouth of the fistula is not perforated, perforate it as best you can, unless the depth is too great; in which case you must not do so lest you cut the muscle. Then treat as we have said until it heals.	0.90673864
The shape of the pointed scalpel with which one cuts the fistula is very sharp on one side and cutting; and not on the other, so that one does not cut what one should not cut, as you see here:	Figure of the sharp-pointed scalpel for cutting open fistulae; the curved edge should be exceedingly sharp and the other blunt, lest you cut what should not be cut, as you see.	0.81595147

chapter-2-subchapter-81.txt
You must scrape the bark on top with the point of a spatula or your fingernail, which prevents it from moistening; then treat it until it is healed as it should be; and if it cannot heal, repeat the scraping more strongly than before, until it bleeds a lot, and is excoriated; then treat it until it is healed.	If they become chronic, and medical treatment is unavailing, you should scrape them with the edge of a scalpel or with your finger-nail until they become soft and the upper layer, that prevents healing, is removed; then dress until they mend as they should. But if they do not heal, repeat the scraping more strongly than at first until they bleed freely and become raw; then apply dressings and they will heal.	0.788733

chapter-2-subchapter-82.txt
Formication is a small false sensation around the body, and goes very deep; and sometimes the cold finds it, and it feels like a shivering death, and comes all over the body, and more in the hands than elsewhere.	A pimple is also a little compact thick prominence on the skin surface, going deep; when it gets cold there is a feeling as of an ant's sting in it. It is found all over the body but mostly on the hands.	0.7231532
And the treatment is that you take a quill from a goose feather, or a strong vulture feather, and place this quill on the shivering, so that the circle surrounds the shivering completely; then turn your hand with the quill until you cut all around the shivering, and push it deep, and pull out the shivering by its roots.	The treatment is to take the quill of a strong feather of the goose or the vulture, and place the quill over the pimple so as to encircle it with the circumference of the tube; then revolve the quill with your hand so as to cut all round the pimple, and go deep into the flesh, and then the pimple may be drawn out by the roots.	0.89656615
And if you wish, make this with a quill of brass or iron according to this shape, and let it be thin underneath and cutting on top:	If you wish you may extract it with a tube of bronze or of iron, of this form. The upper closed part of the tube should be fine, solid, and twisted, to give easy purchase for the fingers in holding and revolving it.	0.60527825
not pointed, so it can be held in the finger, and pressed.  And if you wish, cauterize the shivering, as described above in the chapter on cautery.	The upper closed part of the tube should be fine, solid, and twisted, to give easy purchase for the fingers in holding and revolving it. If you wish you may cauterize the pimple as described earlier on the cauterization of warts in the book on the cautery.	0.5813247

chapter-2-subchapter-83.txt
of the form of the clyster Sometimes a clyster is made of silver or pewter, or cast or hammered brass; and sometimes these instruments are made small and large, according to those to whom they are administered.	On the kinds of instrument for administering enemata in diseases of the rectum, and in diarrhoea and colic. A clyster may be made of silver or of Chinese alloy or of cast or hammered bronze.	0.61856675
Those then that are administered in the treatment of children and who are weak and suffering, are small.	Large and small varieties of this instrument are made, to suit those on whom they are to be used; those for the treatment of children will be small.	0.47549927
The form of the clyster, small and large, is wide at the top, where the bladder is tied in this manner:	Patients with stricture of the anus, or pain, will have very slender clysters. Figure of a large clyster. The upper end of the funnel to which the membrane is bound should be broad like this; it should have a rim where the membrane may be bound down, as you see.	0.57023704
And the medicine should be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the tip of the clyster with oil or egg white, or something similar, then insert it gently; then the administrator squeezes it with both hands together, until it is completely empty, then withdraw the clyster, and the patient raises their legs against the wall, and if the medicine wants to come out, hold it in as long as they can; and if they sleep a whole night, it is a greater help.	Then anoint the tip of the clyster with oil or egg-white or mucilage of fenugreek or the like; then gently pass it into the anus; then let an assistant take the membrane in both hands and together firmly squeeze it until all the contents are squirted into the bowel. Then the clyster should be removed and the patient should raise his legs against the wall. If the enema stimulates him to evacuate, let him hold it as long as he can; if he delay all night long, it will be all the more efficacious.	0.8729698
And if you administer a clyster for diarrhea, and the medicine hastens to come out, repeat it until they are healed.	If the enema be given in a case of diarrhoea and he has to evacuate hastily, then the use of the enema should be repeated until he is cured.	0.69365096
And if there are hemorrhoids in the anus, or an abscess, the clyster should be as slender as for a child; and this is the form of the slender clyster on which the leather is tightened:	If there be haemorrhoids or painful tumours in the anus, the clyster should be exceedingly slender and smooth, of the sort employed for children. Here is a figure of a fine clyster with its skin tied on.	0.76556325

chapter-2-subchapter-84.txt
of wounds/about wounds	On the cure of wounds.	0.4729324
We have already spoken in the division about the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you the treatments of hands and of medicine, according to completion.	I have already mentioned in the appropriate section the treatment of such wounds as are suitable for cauterization. Here I shall describe the operative and medical treatment in full.	0.6821251
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and from what they are made.	So I begin by saying that wounds differ according to that which causes them and according to the site.	0.73517865
The things by which wounds are made are by the throwing of a stone, and the cut of a sword and knife, or of a spear or wood or arrow, or similar things; or that are made according to the places of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the foot, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and will begin with simple head wounds, for the remaining will come in its chapter.	Those things that cause wounds are many: a knock from a stone, a cut from a sword or a knife, a blow by a spear, stick, or arrow; and many such things. To consider wounds according to their site on the body, they are such as a wound occurring in the head, or neck, or chest, or belly, or liver, and so on. Now I am going to describe the treatment of certain wounds, so that you may take them as a standard and a guide for other wounds. I shall begin particularly with the simple wounds of the head; for mention of the compound wounds will be made at the beginning of the third book.	0.8836877
I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head, and the bone is not broken, take note if it is from the throwing of a stone or similar things, and the skin is nevertheless broken and the wound is large, and you fear the development of a hot abscess: then immediately have him bleed from the cephalic vein, especially if little blood comes from the wound, and let the bleeding be on the opposite side from the injured part; and the patient should avoid repletion from wine and rich foods.	I say then, that when there occurs a simple wound of the head, with no accompanying bone-fracture, you should look; and if it be caused by a knock from a stone or the like, and has only broken the skin, but it is a big wound and you fear lest there occur an abscess, then bleed the cephalic vein at once without delay; draw off from him blood in proportion to his vigour if there is no contra-indication to venesection; and particularly if the haemorrhage from the wound be slight. The venesection should be on the opposite side to the wound; and caution the patient against gluttony and wine and rich food.	0.9063232
And if he does not want to bleed, then let his food be light, and he should not drink wine, nor eat meat; and put on the wound, if a hot abscess develops there, cotton moistened only in rose oil, or in astringent wine; and if there is no hot abscess, then put on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not altered by the air, a powder, which I will describe a little later; and if the air has altered it, then put on some ointments, until it is healed.	But if from any cause venesection is prevented, he should be on a light diet and avoid meat and wines. And apply to the wound, if there be any inflammation, cotton wool soaked in oil of roses, either alone or with a somewhat astringent wine. And if you are sure there is no inflammatory swelling, then apply directly to the wound, if its blood is fresh and it is unaltered by the air, the powder that I shall describe to you a little later. But if the air has already changed the wound, apply to it one of the ointments to cause it to discharge the pus; then dress until healed.	0.8598927
And if the wound is large, such as from a cut of a sword or similar, and the edges cannot be brought together by tents, then bring them together by stitching, as I will describe for wounds of the belly, concerning stitching.	Now if it be a great wound, being caused by a sword-cut or the like, and dressings will not bring the edges of the wound together, you should suture them together in the manner I shall describe in dealing with the suture of abdominal wounds.	0.8596155
If the wound is uncovered to the bone, and hangs, and only holds on by a little, then cut it off; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat rich foods, such as heads and cooked wheat, also like chicken, and similar things.	But if the skin has actually disclosed the bone, and is attached by a small strip only, then cut it away and dress the wound with medicaments that will produce firm flesh to replace the skin, and bid the patient go on a diet of solid food such as brawn and gruels and the like.	0.80247986
And if you find rot in the skin, and it does not reach the bone, then cut away all the rot, and throw it away, then treat it; and if there is an artery in the wound or a vein, from which blood flows, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then search for the artery, and if you find it displaced, then tie it with a thread; and if that is not helpful, then cauterize it.	And if decomposition arise in the skin and it will not adhere to the bone, then excise all the diseased part and discard it and then dress. If in these wounds there be an artery or vein shedding blood, and medicinal applications do not stanch it, then examine the artery, and if you find it not quite severed then cut it through with a scalpel and ligature it; and if you are compelled, our directions being unavailing, then cauterize until the haemorrhage stops.	0.8994751
And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is easy: and that is that you put in this powder which heals before the air alters it.	If these be small and simple wounds their treatment will be a light and easy matter; it is sufficient to sprinkle some of this powder on while they are still bleeding, before the atmosphere causes a change.	0.79071367
And the method for the powder is this: take one part incense; two parts dragon's blood; three parts quicklime, and powder it finely, and fill the wound, and bind it tightly, so that it dries well and joins with all its blood; and then tie it well, and leave it without untying, unless it swells; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.	Description of the powder: let one part of olibanum and two parts of dragon's blood be taken, and three parts of quick or slaked lime, all beaten up together and passed through the sieve; and let the wound be packed with this and bound up tightly so that the powder sticks in position and coagulates with the blood. Then bind pads above and let it be, not undoing it so long as it remains without swelling; for the dressing will not come away of itself until it is healed.	0.8516365
And sometimes this is done with lime alone, when one does not have incense or dragon's blood, but only if the air has not altered the wound.	Lime alone can do this if you have no olibanum and dragon's blood at hand. It has exactly the same effect too on most large wounds, when the application and bandaging are properly done, and when the haemorrhage is recent, so long as the air has not changed them.	0.6680925
And if the air has altered the wound, especially in summer, then one does not put this powder on it; but applies some digestive ointments, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, until it discharges pus; then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.	If, however, the air has brought about some change, especially if it be in the summer season, then there is no point in the application of this powder. Treat it then as we have said, by applying one or other of the suppurative ointments; or by applying a gruel of barleymeal with water and honey, so that the pus flows; then treat by all the usual methods until cured.	0.84561646
And if a bone fracture occurs with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine pincers; and I will tell you later about fractures of the head.	If, with the wound, there be also fracture of a bone, if it be slight, you should extract it with forceps. I mention the treatment of fractures of the head later on.	0.7968247
of the wound of the neck	On wounds in the neck:	0.6417227
If a wound occurs in the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.	If a wound occur in the neck the treatment of it does not differ from that of a head wound, if it be simple.	0.7397953
If it is the nerve, there is no other solution than to leave it to heal, and not to apply anything restrictive, for it harms the nerves and causes them to retract; and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their connection is with the brain, which is the highest member; but let the medicine be soft, such as warm water washes, and mixed with rose oil, and cooked leeks also washed in fresh water, and other ground-up stones in this manner, and moist ointments.	But if a nerve or artery in the neck happens to be cut: if it be a nerve, there is no device that will serve except to avoid treatment of it by strong styptic remedies such as verdigris and vitriol and the like; for these injure the nerve and cause spasm; and under no circumstance let anything cold be applied to the wound, for the substance of the nerve is cold and it is continuous with the brain, which is the most noble among the organs. But let your remedy for it be mild, such as lime slaked in sweet water many times and moistened with olive-oil or oil of roses; and with tutty, likewise washed in sweet water; and other minerals according to this prescription, and with bland ointments.	0.8511557
And if the wound is large, sew it and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.	If the wound be large, use stitches or draw the edges of the wound together with pads; then dress until cured.	0.7203131
And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.	If it be a fresh wound, sprinkle on the powder I have described ; and if any bone corrupt in the wound and it becomes a fistula, treat it by those means we shall mention in their place.	0.7203674
of the wound from a lance or knife If it is a blow from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, then see if wind comes out of the wound when the patient breathes: know then that the wound is mortal; and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put the powder in it at the first hour, and do not bind it because of the blood so that it does not remain deep inside, and return to the heart, and kill the patient; but put in an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day; and if you do not have ointment, then put old cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more; so no spasm will come, nor bad heart tremors or shortness of breath; and when you see the good signs, then know that the wound is safe.	If it be a piercing wound by a spear or a knife, and you see that it is deep, examine if there be a passage of air out of it when the patient breathes; whence you may know that the injury is mortal. But if it is not deep and the haemorrhage is fresh, then do not straight away apply powder or bandage lest it keep the blood in the depths, so that it be returned to the heart and kill the patient; but apply to it a drawing ointment, and uncover it twice daily. If you have no ointment, apply carded cotton to the opening of the wound to soak up the humidities issuing from it. And make the patient sleep on the (side of the) wound so that what collects therein may flow out.	0.8786204
If it is a blow from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, then see if wind comes out of the wound when the patient breathes: know then that the wound is mortal; and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put the powder in it at the first hour, and do not bind it because of the blood so that it does not remain deep inside, and return to the heart, and kill the patient; but put in an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day; and if you do not have ointment, then put old cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more; so no spasm will come, nor bad heart tremors or shortness of breath; and when you see the good signs, then know that the wound is safe. Then treat it with tents and other treatments, until it is healed; and if it cannot heal, and opens again, know that there is a fistula; so treat it as one should.	If you have no ointment, apply carded cotton to the opening of the wound to soak up the humidities issuing from it. And make the patient sleep on the (side of the) wound so that what collects therein may flow out. And if three or four days pass by after the wound, and the patient have no spasm or harmful palpitation of the heart nor obstruction to drawing breath, and you see that in other respects he is doing well, you may know that the wound is not dangerous; so treat it with pads and the usual dressings until it heals. But if it will not heal and it permanently discharges pus, you may know that it has become a fistula; look for the treatment of this in the proper place.	0.8657606
And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is simple, whether in the chest or the back, treat it as described before; if it is large, with stitching; and if it is small, with powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has cut pieces, then search the wound, and draw them out if they are detached; and if they are not detached, let the wound fester, then the extraction will be easier; and for other wounds on other limbs, the judgment is as we have said.	If the wound be from a cut with a sword or knife, a straightforward surface wound in the breast or back, then treat it as described before; that is, by suture if it be a great wound or by powder if it be a small one. But if there has also been injury to the bone, cutting out fragments from it, you should explore the wound and hasten to draw out the fragments if they are detached from the bone; but if they are not detached then let be until the wound suppurates, when the removal of the fragments will be easy. Then with regard to other wounds occurring in other parts of the body, the same class of treatment should be used for them as for those already mentioned.	0.9091126

chapter-2-subchapter-85.txt
of the rupture of the belly/abdomen The rupture of the belly/abdomen is large, medium, and small; from the large wound sometimes the intestine, or the sinews of the intestines, protrude, which makes their insertion difficult; and the stitching is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the large one, because it is harder to put the intestines back in, if they are not put back in immediately; because the intestines swell as soon as they feel the cold, so they are harder to put back in, and therefore the medium wound is better, because the intestine is more easily returned to its place than in the other two. And know that the rupture of the belly/abdomen is of four kinds: the two common stitches occur in the stitching of the belly/abdomen, and the stitching of the other wounds of the body and two other specific stitches are common to other wounds; and yet they are more specific to the stitching of the belly/abdomen, and I will describe each one and explain.	On wounds of the abdomen, and protrusion of the intestine; and on suturing them. The tear that occurs in the abdomen may be great or small or it may be middle-sized. From a large tear one or more segments of gut may protrude. The reduction of this and the suture of the wound is an exceedingly hard and difficult matter.	0.7006409
I say that when the wound is small, and some part of the intestine comes out, and it is difficult to put it back, this is for one of two reasons: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen from the cold.	I begin then by saying that when the wound is small, and a piece of intestine protrudes from it, rendering the reduction of it difficult, the difficulty will be due to one of two causes: either on account of the smallness of the fissure, as we said; or because the gut has become inflated on account of the coldness of the air.	0.8725742
And when it is cold, warm it in this way: wet a sponge or a soft cloth in lukewarm water only, or in which you have cooked squinanth, cypress, and spikenard, and sprinkle the intestine until the swelling is gone; and sometimes this makes the veins contract, and is better than plain water for reducing swelling.	If the latter case obtains, the gut must be warmed by fomenting with a sponge or piece of cloth bathed with warm water or water in which have been boiled rushes and cyperus and hyacinth, bathing the gut until the inflation is gone down. Wine that is somewhat astringent may do; in bringing down the swelling it is better than plain water.	0.7802585
And when you see the swelling subside, moisten the intestine with water in which marshmallow and mallow have been cooked, for this makes the entry easier by a little; and if it cannot enter, then cut the wound a little with the instrument with which hemorrhoids are cut; and the first treatment is better than cutting, which one should not do unless there is great necessity; and this is the instrument for cutting it: it cuts inside the curve and not outside, and here is its form:	When you see that the swelling has come down, bathe the gut with water in which have been infused althea and mallows; for with this the reduction of the bowel becomes easy, using the lightest effort. But if after this treatment the reduction is still difficult, open up the wound a little with the instrument for opening up haemorrhoids. The first method, if possible, is better than incision, but one may be compelled to incise when other means have failed. This is the form of the instrument.	0.7827802
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine protrudes, put it back in its natural form in its proper place, if you can, for this is better.	When the wound is opened up a little with the instrument and the bowel is reduced, it is important to return it to its natural shape and proper position, if you can, for that is better.	0.7689094
When the wound is large, and it is in the lower part of the belly, you must make the patient lie on his back, and put his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part below the belly, then put the head and chest higher than the lower parts, and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts put your attention to this so that the injured part is higher than the other; and thus it is necessary to manage what I say in large and medium wounds.	When the wound is large and in the lower abdomen the patient should lie on his back and have his legs higher than his head; but if it be in the upper abdomen his head and chest should be placed higher than his lower parts. And in the same way if the opening be on one side of the abdomen you should always make it your object to put the wounded side higher than the other. So must you proceed in large or middling wounds.	0.9174784
I put his intestines back after they had been out for twenty-four hours, and the wound was stitched up to fifteen days, and I treated him, and he was healed.	The opening was in the middle of his belly; and I reduced it after the bowel had been outside the wound for twenty-four hours. The wound healed in about a fortnight, and I treated him until he was better; and he lived for many years after this, carrying on as usual.	0.74026394
And the physicians had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle; and I did not treat him with ointment, for I was in a place where none was found, nor any medicines; and I simply put old cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he was healed.	The verdict of the doctors was that he could not be healed. The remarkable thing is that I did not treat him with any ointment, for I was in a place where there was no sort of medicine; so twice a day I applied teased-out cotton wool to the wound, and carefully washed it with honey-water until he was healed.	0.85649645
Now I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching: take the needle, and push it from the outside to the inside; when it has pierced the flesh straight through, then leave the edge of the siphac or skin where you pushed the needle, and make it pierce on the other side from the inside to the outside; and the meaning of this stitching is that you sew as the leather-workers do skins, and that you leave the syfac once on one side, and take it again on the other, until the stitching is completely finished. The second way of stitching, which Galen specifically describes, is as some do, who bring the two parts together naturally, and join one end of the siphac to the other end, in this way: insert a needle at the edge of the wound nearby, and make it pierce only that place, and leave the two edges of the siphac; then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the outside to the inside, at the two edges of the siphac; then make it pierce both from the outside to the inside, in two other edges of the wound that are on the other side; and this is the better way of stitching and the most common.	Then begin again on that same side and sew it together with the peritoneal edge on the opposite side and bring the needle out through the skin nearby. Then reintroduce into the same skin area and sew the opposite peritoneal edge with that abdominal skin edge and bring the needle out through the adjacent skin. Do this once again and repeat until you have sewn up the whole wound after this fashion. In short, this way of suturing is to sew with the stitch used by furriers in sewing skins; thus you stitch the peritoneum once one way with the skin edge and leave it once the other way, until you have done.	0.7457639
Galen said these words, and some testify to it, that one should sew the belly with two needles, with thread in each; and one should push one needle from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew straps; and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, the stitching is more difficult than in other places of the belly.	These are Galen's very words. Some have said that the suture of the abdomen may be performed with two needles, thus: you thread one thread into both and begin by introducing the needle into that part near you and carrying it through to the other side. Then you insert the other needle on the far side and bring it through to the near side, after the manner of the shoemaker's stitch. You must understand that when the fissure is in the middle of the abdomen the sewing of it is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.	0.8596909
The intestine which is called "jejunum" cannot heal when it is wounded, and this is because of the layout of the veins that are there, and because of the thinness of the whole body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.	But the part of the bowel called the jejunum is not likely to recover from an injury to it at all; and that is due to the number and size of arteries in it and to the thinness of its structure and to its nearly approaching a nerve in its character.	0.7142237
And if the omentum protrudes from the wound, put it back in just like the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is old and has become green or black, then you must tie off the place that is black, so that a flow of blood does not come there, because there are veins and arteries; then cut what is between the ties, and let the two ends hang from the part below the wound until later to ease the extraction when the omentum falls off, and the wound festers. of the rupture of the bowel	If what protrudes from the wound be omentum, and you find it freshly protruding, then reduce it as you do intestine. But if some time has lapsed and it has turned green or black, you should ligate it above the site where it has gone black lest there be a haemorrhage; for the omentum contains veins and arteries. Then cut off what is below the ligature and leave the ends of the thread hanging out from the lower part of the wound, so that it will be easy for you to draw upon it and extract it as the omentum falls away and the wound suppurates.	0.8921293
When the intestine is round, and the wound is small, it can be restored in some men, because I saw that a man was wounded in the belly by a lance; and the wound was to the right of the stomach, and it swelled and became a fistula, and the excrement and gases came out of it; I treated it as best I could, and I did not cease to refine the treatment until he was healed, and the place was closed.	When a break occurs in the intestine and it is a small one, it is possible, in some men, that it may mend. For I myself saw a man who had been wounded by a spear-thrust in the abdomen. The wound was to the right of the stomach, and, being chronic, became a fistula whence issued faeces and flatus. I set about treating him, though I had no hope of his recovery, and I continued to attend him, and eventually he recovered and the place healed over.	0.8873637

chapter-2-subchapter-86.txt
of a fistula wherever it may be Know that any wound or abscess, when it festers, is universally called a "fistula," and especially when it becomes hollow and forms a cavity.	You should know that any wound or tumour, when it becomes old and chronic, and turns into an ulcer, and does not heal over, but discharges pus chronically and constantly, is generally called a fistula, in whatever part of the body it may be; but we call it a defluxion.	0.7488038
Now I must inform you about the treatment of a fistula that is made by manual work.	Now here I must explain to you the operative treatment of fistula and defluxion.	0.7192775
Know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come to the large veins, and to the arteries, and to the nerves, or to the peritoneum, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and there are some that occur within the principal member itself, and in similar places.	You should know that a fistula may happen in any part of the body; and some fistulae reach as far as some great vein or artery or nerve or membrane or intestine or the urinary bladder, or one of the ribs or dorsal vertebrae, or some highly complex joint such as the hand or foot, while some terminate quite near some major organ, and so on.	0.88017595
If a vein or nerve does not hinder you in the principal members, as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, scrape it until all the corruption is removed, then treat it with things that generate flesh until it is healed; and if it is not healed, and releases fluid as before, know that you have not gone deep enough: so uncover and search until you are at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the area; and if it is thus healed, that is good.	If a bone be the cause of the fistula, and you are sure of that, then examine the fistula and open it up in the way I have told you, if there be nothing in the way like a blood-vessel or nerve or important organ, as we said. And if the bone is laid bare to you and there be in it some corruption and blackening, then scrape it until all the corruption be removed; then put on dressings that will encourage granulation, until it be healed. If it does not heal but discharges pus in the way it did before, then you may know that you have not yet managed to extirpate the corruption completely. Therefore you must expose it again and with the utmost diligence carry out the scraping and cleaning of it.	0.87482953
If not, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot reach it; so there is no other solution than to leave it to nature; and if there is a small corrupted bone, and you can pull it with forceps, extract it with a suitable instrument, and if there are many bones, pull them all out, do not leave a single one; and if the moisture hinders you, and there is no error or fear, cut both the moisture and the flesh, and free the bones. And if you cannot remove them at once, put something on the wound that generates decay, and leave it until the area around the bones is decayed, and then the bones will be easier to remove; and if it is a large bone, such as from the leg or thigh, just scrape the corruption until all the blackness is removed, then restore the wound; and if a large part of it is corrupted, and it reaches the marrow of the bone, it must be scraped and cut all the way to the corruption, and then treated until it is joined; and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take example and help in your work.	Then dress it; and if it heals, good; if not, then you may know that this corruption is very deep-seated in the body and out of reach, and there is nothing you can do for it but leave it to nature. If the diseased bone be a small one, and it be possible for you to extract it, then do so with a pair of fine forceps suited to the purpose. And if there be a number of bones then you must accurately carry out the extraction of all of them, and spare no effort to ensure that none is left. If any ligaments lie in your way and there be no danger in incising them, then make an incision into the ligaments and whatever tissues are there, and free the bones.	0.85886294
I placed a tent in one of these openings, and then examined all the openings, and found that they all connected with each other from all parts of the leg.	So I introduced a probe into one of the openings and the probe touched bone. Then I investigated all the openings and found them all communicating with one another in all parts of the leg.	0.8110399
For because of the bloodletting he often sobbed, but he was completely healed, and hard flesh grew in place of the bone, and it was of good quality and had no harm or adverse effects at all, neither coming nor going.	But he was completely cured, and in place of the bone there grew up firm tissue; his bodily state was sound and his strength was restored. He went about his business, and no hurt whatsoever came to him from walking.	0.6540332

chapter-2-subchapter-87.txt

chapter-2-subchapter-88.txt
And if the sinus emits undigested pus after many days, know that the sinus will not heal.	Do this for several days until the sinus is clean and the smell disappears. It may be irrigated with water of ashes if the medicine is not at hand.	0.55529964
And if thin venom flows after a long time, do not despair of healing, for health is approaching.	But if, after a long while, the sinus discharges a thin ichor, do not despair of its closing up, for its healing is near.	0.70735395

chapter-2-subchapter-89.txt
A panaris is an abscess that arises under the nail of the thumb, or of the foot, or perhaps arises in other fingers; and when it is old, and one does not take care of it, a hot abscess develops there, and spreads and emits pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and sometimes it runs all over it; and the corrosion reaches the bone, so that there is a foul-smelling pain, and the head of the finger is enlarged, and its color is dark.	Paronychia is a growth of flesh under the nail of the thumb or big toe; it may also occur in the other fingers and toes. When it is chronic and the treatment of it is neglected, it comes up as an abscess, or corrupts and generates pus until it eats away the root of the nail. Often it rots it entirely, and often the disease reaches the bone and gives rise to foetor and broadens the tip of the finger and makes it livid in colour.	0.8313479
When you treat it as we have said in the section, and the treatment is not effective, then you must cut away with a knife all the excess that remains of the nail, then cauterize the wound afterwards.	When you have treated it with those means mentioned in their place, and your treatment is ineffective, you must excise all the superfluous growth from the nail and then cauterize the wound, for in this case cauterization is a great help.	0.7753925
The cautery is very helpful if the bone is healthy and the nail is healthy; and if the nail presses into the flesh, and begins to prick and wound it, then you must put the spoke under the nail that pricks the flesh, and push it upwards, and cut this flesh subtly and lightly, and put burning and corrosive medicines on the remaining flesh to remove everything; then treat it with ointments until it is healed.	But if the bone be healthy and the nail also healthy, and the in-turned angle of the nail has pressed the flesh inwards and begun to stab it and injure it, you should pass a thin probe beneath the corner of the nail that presses into the flesh, and raise it up and carefully cut away that flesh and apply caustic to the remainder, until it is all gone; then dress with ointments until cured.	0.8492136
The extra finger that grows on the hands of some men by chance is entirely fleshy, and sometimes there are some that have bones, and sometimes there is a nail, and some of them grow at the base of the joint, or their origin is in some of the joints of the fingers.	A superfluous finger growing on the hands of some men sometimes is all flesh, sometimes contains a bone, sometimes has a nail. Some of them arise at the root of a finger, or on one of the phalanges of a finger, and the latter do not move, while those that arise from the root of a finger do sometimes move.	0.88102853
The one that grows on a joint of the finger does not move, and the one that grows at the joint of the finger sometimes moves; cutting the one that is fleshy is easy, in this way: cut it at its base with a wide spatula.	That which is purely fleshy is easily removed; you cut if off at the root with a broad scalpel.	0.5749278
The one that grows at the base of the joint is difficult to treat: therefore refrain from cutting it.	But the treatment of that which arises at the root of a finger is difficult; you should avoid amputating.	0.68735
In the one that grows on the finger at the last joint, you must first cut the flesh roundly down to the bone, then cut the bone with a saw suitable for this, then treat it until it is healed.	In the case of one growing from the finger at a phalangeal joint, you should first cut through the flesh down to the bone with a circular incision; then saw the bone through, with one of the saws that suit the purpose; then dress it until it heals.	0.82573724
The fusion that occurs between fingers comes by birth, or by the healing of a wound, or by a burn from fire, or by similar things.	As for webbing of the fingers one to another, that occurs very frequently. It may be either congenital or from the healing of a wound or burn or the like.	0.7190672
You must cut this fusion, so that the fingers return to their natural shapes; then place between them two tents or cloths soaked in rose oil, so that they do not fuse again; or you put between them two pieces of thin lead, until the place is healed, as it should be.	You have to cut the web away until the fingers are brought back to their original form; then interpose between them a pad or piece of material soaked in oil of roses, to prevent them from rapidly joining together and to keep them apart; or you can put between them a thin sheet of lead until the healing takes place as it should.	0.8371805
If a fusion occurs in any of his fingers with the palm, cut this fusion as is appropriate.	Similarly, if one of the fingers becomes joined to the palm of the hand, cut through the adhesion according to the form it takes, and with proper regard for the shape of the member.	0.5656892

chapter-2-subchapter-90.txt
Varicose veins are large, swollen veins full of melancholic superfluities, which occur in several parts of the body; and it happens more in the legs of those who walk and who work and carry things than in others.	Varices are thick twisted veins filled with melancholic superfluities. They occur in most parts of the body, but generally in the legs, particularly in the legs of couriers and ploughmen and porters.	0.7675939
It is therefore necessary that you sometimes administer a purgative of bile, and then heal it with basil.	First you must purge the body free from black bile, several times, strongly. Then venesect the patient in the basilic vein.	0.5840252
The treatment of hemorrhoids is according to two methods: one is that they are cut, and the black blood is drawn out; and the other method is that you lift the vein and draw it all out.	The treatment with the knife is of two kinds: one is to incise and bring out all the black blood, the other is to draw out the vein and extract it bodily.	0.8717332
And if the vein is constricted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it lengthwise, but do not cut it through; and draw it out as we have said before.	If the varix be contorted, with twists and turns from side to side and not in a straight line, as we said, then you should cut down along both sides of the twisted part and the places where it is tortuous, then catch it up with hooks and extract it whole. Be careful in incising over it that you do not cut into or injure the vein, for this will render the extraction difficult; therefore be most careful.	0.70670354
The shape of the iron instrument with which the vein is cut is curved, and does not cut, so that it does not sever the vein; and it has a large curve, because if it were thin, it would cut the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and here is the shape:	The lancet for cutting upon a varix. The blunt hook. It is not bent like other hooks, and its extremity must be blunt so as to not injure the vein. It should be of a broad curve and smooth, for if it is fine-pointed its fineness may cut the vein; rather it should be quite thick, as we said.	0.71305895

chapter-2-subchapter-91.txt
This vein is generated in legs, in hot regions where neither grass nor trees grow, and in land where there is no moisture; and sometimes it arises elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens because of the putrefaction that comes under the skin, just as snakes and worms, generated between skin and flesh, occur within the body.	This kind of vein occurs in the leg in hot countries such as the Hejaz and the lands of the Arabs and in hot arid infertile countries. It also often occurs in other parts of the body beside the legs. The origin of it is a corruption taking place beneath the skin in the same way that round-worms and worms and gourd-worms arise in the inward parts of the body; also the worms that are generated between the skin and the flesh.	0.72962505
And the sign of the beginning of this vein is that a very large inflammation appears in the leg, then the place changes, and the vein begins to protrude, like the root of a plant.	The sign of the beginning of the occurrence of this vein is a violent inflammation in the leg; then the place swells up and blisters; then the vein begins to extrude at the blistered place as if it were a plant-stem or an animal.	0.77756834
And sometimes this vein has many branches, especially when it appears in the ankle joint, or in the foot, and many holes appear there, from which branches sprout; then treat it as we have said before.	Sometimes also this vein is found branching, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot itself; and in this case there are many openings and a branch comes out of each. The treatment is as mentioned above in the section.	0.8697101

chapter-2-subchapter-92.txt
of the worms that arise between skin and flesh This disease is called in our land "ox disease", because it often happens to oxen, and it is a small worm that arises between skin and flesh, and travels throughout the body ascending and descending, and one feels it moving from limb to limb, until it breaks the skin where it goes, and comes out; and it is generated from the putrefaction of certain humors, as worms and snakes and earthworms and ascarids arise in the belly; and one fears its malice, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye, perhaps it enters and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.	This complaint is called by us in some regions 'the cattle disease' since it frequently happens to cattle. It is in fact a small solitary worm generated between the skin and the flesh, that creeps all over the body, both up and down; it can be felt as it creeps from one part to another until it breaks out at a place where it can break through the skin, and out it comes. It arises from the putrefaction of certain humours as do worms, round-worms and gourd-worms in the abdomen. Part of the harm that may be expected of it is that when it creeps about the body and goes up to the head and reaches the eye it may make an opening in the eye and come out and destroy the eye; this frequently happens.	0.89021546

chapter-2-subchapter-93.txt
of the pain that comes from flatulence This disease is called in our land "wandering pain", and it is a pain that comes in some limbs, and then moves from limb to limb; and I saw what I tell you.	On incision for the disease known as 'flitting disease'. The disease known in our region as 'the flitting disease' is a pain arising in a limb and then passing from limb to limb.	0.8000517
I was called to a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and a little after, I saw it rise like a worm to the shoulder, faster than anything, like quicksilver when it runs from one place to another; the pain left that place, and settled in the shoulder, and then a little later ran throughout the body, until it came to the other arm; then she told me that it always turned around the body, as I saw it.	I have personally seen it as I shall describe to you: I was called to a woman patient in a country district, who uncovered her arm and showed me a small inflation of the cephalic vein. After I had waited a while I saw the swelling creep like a worm along the forearm, ascending towards her shoulder, with the greatest possible speed, as of quicksilver running from place to place. Then the pain left that place and settled in the elbow. Then I waited a while and the pain ran through the whole body until it reached the other arm.	0.8930565
I was very surprised how it moved thus from limb to limb, for I had never seen this disease in this manner.	I was amazed at the speed with which it migrated from one part to another, as I had never before seen this disease in this form, though I had seen many who had a pain that passed from limb to limb; but never with my own eyes had I seen anything like what I saw in this woman.	0.76703954
However, I had often seen that pain could move from place to place, but I had not seen it like I saw it in the woman; and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and the veins prominent, and because of this, this constrained flatulence appeared; and it does not appear in this way in those who are overweight and who have moist bodies and hidden veins.	The only opinion I could form of it was that it was due to the woman's being of the dwellers in the wilds, dry of body, with outstanding veins, and hence that moving vapour was perceptible. But it follows then that it does not appear in that manner in people leading a leisured life, with humid bodies and hidden veins.	0.73831314
And when you want to treat this disease, and the patient feels this pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then tie it above and below quickly, and then cut on it until this constrained flatulence comes out of the place; and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your eyes, then treat it with that which expels flatulence, such as fetid pills, and pills of sagapenum, and other similar things.	When you want to cure this, and the patient feels the pain of it, and if you observe the appearance we have described, then tie a bandage round above and beneath it as quickly as possible and cut down on it so that the vapour enclosed there may come out; and cauterize the place. But if there is nothing visible to you then treat by purging of the body and by medicines dispelling and getting rid of flatus, such as foetid pills and pills of sagapenon and the like.	0.8924539

chapter-2-subchapter-94.txt
Arrows/Arrowheads are diverse, according to their appearance and according to the places of the body where they fall/land.	Arrows vary both as to types and as to the different parts of the body pierced by them.	0.6813783
Their diversity is such that there are some that have large points, and small ones, and are bladed, and barbed; and some that have two barbs, and some that have tongues, and some that are in pieces; and one which falls into a limb can fall in two ways: either in a principal member's head, such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members.	They differ thus as to type: some are big and some are small; some with hollow heads and some with solid; some of them have three angles and some four; some have tongues; some have spikes.	0.7163931
When it falls then in any place in these members, and the signs of death, which I will tell you about later, appear to you: then you must abstain from extracting this arrow, because death follows in many ways; and when these bad signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not deep, then draw it out, and treat the wound. And the signs of the brain, when the arrow lodges there and pierces the bone, and the membrane which is over the brain spurts out, are dizziness and fainting and turning green and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps blood comes out of the nostrils, or the ears; and perhaps loss of speech and voice; and a white moisture resembling pus comes out of the wound, and also something like burnt flesh; and if these signs appear to you, abstain from treatment, and remove the arrow if it is not embedded.	The difference due to the part transfixed by the arrow is twofold: for there are either the chief hollow organs such as the brain, the heart, the liver, the lungs, the kidneys, intestine, bladder, and so forth—when one of these arrows transfixes an organ of this kind, and you observe the signs of death which I shall describe to you later, then you must avoid the extraction of the arrow in that case, for death will generally follow; but when you do not see these fatal signs and the arrow is not quite buried in the depths of the organ, then extract it and dress the wound. Now the signs when the arrow has struck the brain, and penetrated the bone and injured the meninges covering the brain, are these: there arise from that a violent headache and vertigo and giddiness and a redness in the eye, and a redness of the tongue, and convulsion and mental confusion and bilious vomit; perhaps also blood comes out of the nose or from the ears; often also the speech is affected and the voice is lost; also there comes out of the site of the wound a white fluid which resembles gruel, from which there flows something like the juice of meat. If you observe these signs, avoid treating the patient and extraction of the arrow if it has not come out.	0.9116316
The signs of the arrow when it falls into the heart are that it is near the left nipple, and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not hollow; and perhaps the arrow moves like the pulse, and black blood flows, and coldness and cold sweat come, and fainting: know then without doubt that death is imminent.	The signs of an arrow in the heart are: nearness to the left breast; the patient feels it as if it were fixed in something solid, not hollow; often also there will be imparted to the arrow a pulsating movement; and black blood will issue from the wound; and after this follow coldness of the extremities and a cold sweat and unconsciousness; then you may know that death is surely on its way.	0.91251576
And the sign of the arrow that pierces the lung is that blood full of froth comes out of the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs deeply and seeks cold air.	The sign of an arrow that has wounded the lung is the exit of frothy blood from the wound; also the vessels that lie along the neck swell up and the patient changes colour, breathes heavily, and seeks to inhale fresh air very strongly.	0.8616978
And if the arrow falls into the covering of the chest, it is near the small ribs; and causes great difficulty breathing and great pain and sighing; and all the limbs from the shoulders down twitch.	But if the arrow strike the pleura then it will be close to the small ribs and he will breathe deeply with much pain and heaving of the chest, and all parts of his shoulders will be agitated. If the arrow hits the liver, there ensues violent pain, and blood flows from the wound, resembling the liver in its redness.	0.8164793
And if the arrow falls into the stomach, perhaps some undigested food comes out of the wound.	If the arrow strikes the stomach, often undigested food comes out of the wound and renders the case obvious.	0.6920674
And if the arrow falls into the belly, and feces come out of the wound through a ruptured intestine, there is no hope in treatment, nor in extracting the arrow.	If the arrow wounds the belly and is fixed in it, and from the wound there comes excrement or omentum or torn bowel, there is no hope in treatment nor in extracting the arrow.	0.80959916
And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and urine comes out of it abnormally, and the patient feels intense pain: know that the wound is mortal.	If the arrow has hit the urinary bladder, and urine comes out and some of the bladder protrudes and the patient has violent pain, then you may know that the wound is mortal.	0.6933278
The other limbs, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the armpit and the spine of the back and the forearm and the thigh and the legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to various factors. When the arrow is in the nerve or the artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, so that you may do likewise.	But as for the other parts, such as the face, eye, throat, shoulder, arm, dorsal vertebrae, collar-bone, hip, leg, and the like, in most cases they will heal if the arrow does not happen to strike an artery or nerve, and if the arrow is not poisoned. Now I will relate to you certain cases of arrow wounds that I have seen, so that you may be guided thereby to your own methods of treatment.	0.77563226
It happened to a man that an arrow struck him in the tear duct at the root of the nose: I probed it, and pulled it out the other side under the fat of the ear, and he was healed without harm.	For example, once an arrow struck a man at the corner of his eye near the root of the nose, and I extracted it from him on the other side beneath the lobe of his ear, and he got well, and his eye was none the worse.	0.7567887
And I pulled an arrow from a young man that had struck him in the fat of the eye under the lower eyelid, and the arrow was embedded, and I could only reach the tip towards the shaft, and the arrow was from a Turkish bow, with a light iron head without barbs; the young man was healed, and no ill effects came to him.	Also I extracted from a Jew another arrow that had pierced the orbit beneath the lower eyelid; the arrow had sunk out of sight and I could take hold only of the tiny extremity of it which is secured to the shaft; but it was a big arrow from a compound bow, the iron tip four-sided, very smooth without barbs. The Jew recovered, nor did any ill befall his eye.	0.8254896
And I pulled an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabian with barbs: I flattened the barbs, and worked carefully until I pulled it out, and the Christian was healed.	I also extracted another arrow from the throat of a Christian. It was an Arab arrow, one of those with two barbs; and I cut down upon it between the two jugulars (for it lay deep in the throat), and worked gently at it until I extracted it; and the Christian was saved and recovered.	0.78328514
And I pulled an arrow from a man, that had fallen into his belly, and I thought he would die; and after thirty days had passed, his condition did not change; I cut down to the arrow, and manipulated it, and pulled it out, and he had no ill effects.	I also extracted another arrow from a man, that had struck him in the abdomen, and our opinion was that he would certainly die from it. But when it had remained in him for the space of thirty days or thereabouts, and his condition was unimpaired, I cut down upon the arrow and manoeuvred it out and extracted it; and he recovered, nor did any harm befall him.	0.8655946
And I also saw a man who had an arrow fall into his back, and the wound closed over it; and the arrow remained inside him, and his natural disposition did not change, nor did he find any harm in any of his natural functions.	And I saw a woman who had been struck in the abdomen by an arrow and the wound healed with the arrow remaining in it, and her condition was unimpaired; she felt no harm from it and her natural functions were not harmed.	0.82587385
And I saw another man, who had an arrow fall into his thigh, and the wound closed; and it remained thus without causing great pain; and many other similar cases.	And I saw a man who had been struck by an arrow in the face, and it had healed over, and he did not feel much pain from it. And many such have I seen.	0.795807
And I pulled an arrow from a man of the king's princes, which had fallen in the middle of his nose, and was slightly inclined to the right side; and the arrow was completely embedded. I was called to treat it three days after it had fallen. I found the wound very narrow.	I once drew out an arrow from one of the officers of the State, that had struck him in the middle of the nose and was inclining a little to the right, and the whole arrow was buried. I was called to treat him three days after he had received the arrow wound; and I found the arrow wound very narrow.	0.877867
I probed it with a very fine tent, and did not feel it; yet he felt a pricking and pain under his right ear.	I explored it with a fine probe but did not find it; but the patient felt a pricking and a pain beneath the right ear, and I hoped that the pricking was due to the arrow.	0.77635056
I thought it was from the point of the arrow. I applied an attractive and digestive plaster to the area, so that the place would not swell; and the location of the arrow appeared to me.	So I applied a poultice to the spot, a poultice with power to draw out and cause suppuration, desiring that the place should swell and that a sign to indicate the arrow should appear so that I could cut down upon it.	0.7006708
I applied the plaster for many days, and the wound healed over again, and the patient remained like that for a long time, until he felt the arrow one day inside his nose; and he told me.	Then one day he felt the arrow inside his nose, and he told me of this; so for a number of days I applied a caustic medicine to the wound until it opened.	0.78666
And physicians believe that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I then restored it, and the wound was healed, and the patient was completely cured.	The medical men judged that the cartilage of the nose would not be restored, but I restored it and the wound healed up and the patient made a complete recovery nor did he suffer any harm.	0.76859426
Now I have told you the nature of extracting some arrows, so that you may apply your care to what I have not said, for the book cannot encompass everything; but the wise master understands a great deal from very little, and from what is present and lacking, finds new work, and a new instrument, for the removal of the strange things that occur in this art.	Now I shall tell you the method of extracting certain arrows so that you may take it as a guide and an analogy for others that I have not mentioned; since all parts and details of this art cannot be comprehended in any description, nor can any book include them. A skilful worker will form a judgement on much, from little; and on what is not present from what is before him; and he will think out a new method and a new instrument for an unaccustomed case when it occurs in the practice of this art.	0.8060734
I say that arrows do not come out of the limbs where they are embedded except in two ways: either through the place where they entered, or through another part; and the one that comes out through where it entered, that is an arrow entering fleshy places, and sometimes comes out immediately.	So I would state that arrows come out from the parts of the body they have transfixed, in two ways: either by drawing out from the site of entry; or from the opposite side. An arrow that comes out by the track of its entry: the arrow may be visible, standing out from a fleshy part, in which case it may be extracted by pulling.	0.81955487
And if it does not come out immediately, leave it until the flesh around it is rotted, and the exit is widened; and also if it is embedded in the bone, and it cannot come out, leave it like that for some days, and move it every day; and then it will come out, and if it does not come out, then pierce around it with a very fine drill, until the place around it is widened, and then pull it out.	Similarly if it has stuck fast in a bone and will not come out, leave this also for a few days, repeatedly pulling on it and shifting it day by day, and then it will come out. But if it will not come out after some days, you will have to drill away the bone from all round with a fine drill so as to make room for the arrow; then draw on it and pull it out.	0.8339263
And if the arrow is embedded in the bone of the head, and goes as far as one of the ventricles of the brain, and any of the accidents that I have mentioned appear in the patient: do not pull it out, but leave it until it is even after some days, because if the arrow reaches as far as the meninges, it is death.	If the arrow is buried in some part of the body and is quite lost to sight, explore for it with a probe, and if you can feel it then draw it out with any suitable instrument.	0.40964592
And if the arrow is only embedded in the bone, and does not reach the meninges, and the patient remains for some days without ill effects, then devise a way to pull it out.	But if you cannot get at it on account of the narrowness of the wound and the depth at which the arrow is, and there be no bone nor nerve nor blood-vessel, then cut round it until the wound be sufficiently wide to enable you to take hold of it and extract it.	0.4340448
And if it is embedded very deeply and cannot come out otherwise, then apply drills around it, as I have told you; then treat the place until it is healed. And if the arrow is lodged in a place in the body where it cannot be seen, then search for it with the probe; and if you feel it, pull it out with a suitable instrument; and if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound, and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein there, then enlarge the wound until it is large; and pull out the arrow if you can, and if the arrow has barbs which hold it in place, then remove the flesh that is embedded in them from both sides as best you can, and then break or bend the barbs of the arrow, so that you can pull it out; and be very careful not to break the arrow, as you would have more difficulty pulling it out.	And if it have two barbs by which it is held, free them from the adherent flesh all round, in any way you can; or, if you cannot free the tissues, try skilfully to break off the two barbs and twist them about until the arrow comes free. Whenever you try to extract an arrow from any part, employ a twisting motion of your hand with the forceps in all directions until you free it; and use the utmost gentleness not to break the arrow and thus make it hard to draw it out and remove it.	0.7605615
And if you cannot do it at once, leave it until the surrounding area is putrefied, then pull it out, for the extraction will be easier.	If you are unable to get it out at once then leave it for some days until the tissues that surround it putrefy, then return to it, for then the extraction will be easy; and if haemorrhage interfere use the remedies prescribed in the chapter dealing with that.	0.64926773
And if the flow of blood hinders you, then apply what we have said about the treatment in its chapter; and beware of cutting a nerve or vein, and devise how you can best pull out the arrow without danger, either quickly or slowly, or firmly or gently; and position the patient according to the position he was in when the arrow struck him, for this is the greatest help there is, and if you cannot, then position him according to what the symptoms indicate.	Exercise the utmost care not to cut a blood-vessel or nerve or tendon; and employ the greatest skill in freeing the arrow; it should be done gently and unhurriedly and with perseverance, as I have told you. When extracting an arrow you should place the patient in the same position he was in when the arrow struck him, for that is more convenient; but if you cannot do this then let him be in whatever position is possible for you.	0.8342222
The arrow that emerges from the other side, where some part of it appears, or the skin is swollen around it so that it can be seen or felt clearly: then cut over it, so that the forceps can grip it, and then pull it out: it should come out immediately.	The arrow that is to be extracted from the opposite side either has some part protruding through or else the tip of the arrow gives rise to a palpable swelling just beneath the skin and you see it sticking out; then cut down upon it; the incision should be wide enough to admit the forceps. Then pull on it, for the extraction of it will be easy.	0.77791905
And if it is stuck in the bone, then rotate your hand circularly, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.	If it is stuck in bone, twist it round with your hand until the arrow makes an impression in the bone and opens up a way for itself; then pull it.	0.7797505
And if it cannot come out, then leave it again, and then resume the extraction until it comes out; and if the shaft of the arrow is there, push it in with the whole shaft; and if the shaft falls off, and you wish to apply pressure, then apply a hollow instrument, so that the point of the arrow enters the hollow of the instrument; and then push it out, and if the arrow is barbed, apply an instrument with an inward-pointing tip, to facilitate the extraction.	If it does not come out, let it alone for some days, and repeat until it does come out. If the arrow-shaft be in the wound, then thrust the arrow out with that. But if the shaft has fallen out, and you wish to employ thrusting, introduce down to it the hollow instrument whose cavity will enter upon the ferrule of the arrow, then push it forward with that. If the arrow be hollow, thrust it forward with an instrument that will enter into the cavity, for the exit of the arrow will thereby be made easy.	0.8241965
And if the arrow is poisoned, then you must cut away all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as appropriate.	If the arrow be poisoned you must, if you can, cut out in a circle all the flesh into which the poison has entered; then treat it with what is appropriate.	0.86767495
And if the arrow falls in the chest or the abdomen or the bladder or the side, and it is close, and you can cut over it, then cut; and be careful not to cut the vein or the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew the wound, if necessary; and treat it until it is healed.	If the arrow that has struck be in the chest or abdomen or in the urinary bladder or in the flank and it be close enough for you to explore it with the probe and you can cut down upon it, then do so, but beware of cutting into a blood-vessel or nerve. Then remove the arrow. Afterwards suture the wound, if suture be necessary, and dress it until it heals.	0.8525401
The shape of the forceps with which one extracts arrows is similar to a bird's beak, and see here the shape:	Forceps for extracting arrows. The extremities resemble the bill of a bird and are engraved like a file so as not to lose grip when you close them upon an arrow or some other object.	0.5335366
And there are many kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.	They are made in several kinds, large, small, or medium, all according to the bigness or smallness of the arrow and the breadth or narrowness of the wound.	0.6749532
The shape of the pushing instrument is also like a bird's feather, to push against the tip of the arrow, as here is the shape:	The extremity is solid like a probe, to facilitate entry into, and pushing, the hollow arrow.	0.47116712

chapter-2-subchapter-95.txt
And the salvatella is the vein which is between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches; and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is below the bend of the left ankle, and the second is the saphenous which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein which is called "nesse", which is at the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg there are three veins below those.	And the salvatella which is the vein between the little and ring fingers; it has two branches. There are also three veins in the leg and foot; one of these is the sciatic vein on the outer aspect; the second is the saphena situated near the heel on the inner aspect; and there is the external saphena situated near the heel on the outer aspect. And there are three veins, counterparts to these, in the other leg. Venesection of the two veins behind the ears.	0.8981824
Bleeding from the vein of the forehead is worth as much as bleeding from the cephalic vein for chronic diseases of the face, and for migraines, and for redness; and the method is that the patient squeezes his neck by twisting, until the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called a "digger", of which here is the form:	Venesection of the vein in the forehead is, after venesection of the cephalic, a relief to chronic diseases of the face such as pustules and scabs and erysipelas. Now I shall relate to you the method of cutting: you bind the patient's neck until the vessel stands out; then you take the instrument called the 'pickaxe'.	0.75981826
And put the point on the vein, and strike it with your hand, or with something else, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity you want; then loosen the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is healed; and sometimes it is done with a broad lancet.	The spike in the head of the instrument you place on the vessel itself and then strike with a comb or some similar thing; and let the blood flow to the extent you wish; then loosen the band round the neck and bandage the vein until healed.	0.8000042
However, the lancet should not be too sharp; and bleed across, because the bone is close, and perhaps the lancet will break if it is thin.	The incision should be oblique, slightly longitudinal, with a small, rather broad scalpel, for in this place there is no flesh; so if the knife have too narrow a point it may be broken on the bone.	0.6632892
Bleeding from the two veins which are in the two tear ducts helps the eyes, and ringworm, and redness, and stye in the eye, and diseases of the face; and the method of their bleeding is that the patient squeezes his neck by twisting with some sort of band, as before; then bleed him, and the bleeding should be across, a little along the length of a somewhat wide lancet, because there is no flesh there.	Then let flow what blood you wish, put cotton wool on both, tie for one night, then loosen. Venesection of the vein of the nose helps in acute fevers, in violent headache, and in diseases of the face such as the red pustules that arise on the nose, especially if they are chronic. This is how you make the incision: the patient binds his neck and then you hold his nose with your left hand and take a long fine scalpel and stick it in the middle of the very lobule of the nose, perpendicularly in the nasal septum (for the vein is not obvious at that spot) and blood will immediately flow out.	0.6661818
And if the lancet is thin, it might break; then let the blood flow as much as you need, and then tie cotton over it, and tie it well.	You should advance the scalpel a little and cause the blood to flow as required; then bandage for one night, for it will quickly heal.	0.5583669
Bleeding from the veins of the upper lips helps with burning in the mouth, and infection of the gums, and chapped lips, and of the nose and around.	Venesection of the jugular veins helps tightness of breath and the early stage of elephantiasis, and the melancholic diseases arising on the surface of the skin, such as the black vitiligo and impetigo and malignant ulcers and cancrum oris.	0.58150876
And the method of bleeding is to have the patient sit in front of you, and squeeze his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left, and they are recognized by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that around them are small black veins: then cut one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, cut the largest on each side, and do the same with the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same method. of the bleeding under the tongue The bleeding of the veins that are under the tongue helps after the bleeding of the cephalic vein, and this is for tightness of the throat, and diseases of the uvula, and diseases of the mouth; and the way to bleed is that the patient sits between your hands in front of the sun, and lift the tongue, and look underneath on each side for a black vein: then bleed one and the other, and do not go too deep, for underneath are the arteries.	Do the same with the two veins in the upper lip. The two veins under the tongue: their venesection is, after section of the cephalic, of good effect in the quinsy arising in the throat from disease of the uvula, and diseases of the mouth. The way to venesect them is to seat the patient before you in the sunlight and raise his tongue, and look, and you will see beneath the tongue one vein on each side, blackish in colour. Cut them; but be careful not to go too far in your incision, for beneath them lie arteries from which there may be haemorrhage.	0.8396712
The veins of the neck that are commonly bled are bled in two ways: either by pricking with a myrtle-leaf-shaped lancet, or a thin olive-shaped lancet like a cutting edge, and it is called "anesil"; and they are wide and narrow depending on the width and narrowness of the veins. The myrtle-leaf shaped lancet is very renowned, and is wide as you see:	The three veins that are opened in the elbow are the veins which universal custom has used for bloodletting. There are two ways of venesecting these: either by piercing with a broad myrtle-leaf scalpel or a rather fine olivary; or by cutting with a knife-edged scalpel, the lancet whose figure follows. The broad myrtle-leaf scalpel.	0.7475912
The myrtle-leaf shaped lancet is very renowned, and is wide as you see: And it is needed for opening hairy veins full of thick, apparent blood, and that contain thick and cloudy blood; and this is the shape of the olive-shaped lancet:	The broad myrtle-leaf scalpel. As you see, it should be broad so as to serve for opening hollow, full, outstanding, obvious and thick veins, and those containing turbid blood. The olivary scalpel.	0.82910717
and it is more finely pointed, and is for bleeding thin veins, where there is thin, clear blood.	This scalpel is less broad and finer-pointed. It is suitable for venesecting fine veins that contain thin jaundiced blood.	0.64917386
Bleeding the basilic vein, which is one of these veins, helps with illnesses that are below the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the belly; and the bleeder must bleed wisely, and beware of the artery that is underneath.	This one indicates what the others are like; it is well known to surgeons. The basilic vein, which is one of these three vessels, helps, when cut, by extracting blood from disorders below the throat and neck, in the parts neighbouring the chest and abdomen.	0.7440319
And if he cuts the artery, and bleeding occurs, it must be stopped, as I have said; and the lancet should not be piercing, but cutting like a razor.	When one venesects it one must be careful and wary of it, for beneath the vein is an artery, so that if one is inaccurate and sticks the scalpel in too far one will cut the artery and cause a haemorrhage; therefore venesection of it should not be done with a transfixing scalpel but should be an incision with the lancet.	0.58118373
And if the basilic vein does not appear clearly, you must compress it and choose another; or you seek a branch of it, or you bleed instead the vein in the middle of the arm: it appears clearly; and cut it with the razor lancet, as we have said.	If the basilic vein is not clearly discernible, leave it and turn to another, or look for a branch of it; or venesect the brachial cord instead, for that is evident; incise it with the lancet as we have said.	0.8747645
And if you want to know the location for the bleeding, you must, before you tighten the arm, touch the area until you feel the pulse; then mark the place with ink, and then tie the arm, and cut the vein with the razor lancet; and be careful not to strike the artery when you see the area swollen, for that is the artery: avoid it then.	But if you wish to open the basilic vein itself you should, before you bandage the arm, palpate the place till the site of pulsation is found; then mark it with ink; then bind the arm and cut the vein obliquely with the lancet as we said, and take care that the stroke fall some way from the artery. If, when tying the bandage, you see a swelling in the place that you have marked with ink, that swelling is the inflation of the artery, so avoid it.	0.8581813
And if you see it spurt upwards like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is blood from the artery: hurry then, and put your finger over it for a long time, then remove your finger if the blood stops, which often happens; then tie the arm, and leave it like that, and let the patient not move it; and let him be wary, and not move it until he is healed.	And if, on section, you see the blood spurt out like a child's urine, and it is clear and red, then you may know that it is arterial blood; so then be quick and put your finger upon it for a long while; then remove your finger and if the bleeding stops, as it often will, then bind up the arm and leave it. Caution the patient against neglecting it; let him be careful and not move it for some days, until it heals.	0.9421493
And if the blood is not stopped, and it overcomes you, and the medicine is not at hand, cut the artery if it appears, for the ends of it retract; and the blood will stop.	But if the bleeding is not stayed but resists your treatment and you have no medicament there at the time, then cut the vessel through if you can see it; for the two ends will contract and the haemorrhage will stop.	0.76307464
And take a bark of fustic, and split it, and take one of the halves and tie it on tightly until the next day; if the blood stops, it is good; if not, treat it, as we have said, with powders that stop blood; and the stopping of bleeding is not difficult in most cases because of the small size of the wound, and the pressure of the bandage on the arm.	Or else take a pistachio nut shell and split it and take one half and bind it over the site of the haemorrhage with a pad and bandage until next day. The bleeding may stop; if not, then treat by those means mentioned previously, namely the application of styptic powders. It is not difficult in most cases to stop the bleeding, because the wound is small and it is easy to bandage the arm. So get to know it.	0.7858262
Bleeding from the median vein helps because it draws blood from the head above, and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said; and the bloodletter must beware of the nerve that is underneath, and if he pricks too deep, and finds the nerve, and it swells and the healing is difficult, and perhaps it cannot heal; and this nerve appears often, and if it does not appear in some men because of its thinness, you must bleed it with the lancet instrument; and avoid the nerve as much as you can.	Venesection of the median vein results in drawing off blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; this being due to the fact, as we said, that it is composed of a branch of the cephalic and a branch of the basilic veins. The venesector should be very careful in opening it because there is a nerve beneath; and if he takes the scalpel too deep and hits that nerve it will cause stupor, the healing of which will be difficult and perhaps even impossible. Generally this nerve can be felt, but if in some persons it lies hidden and is slender and not discernible, then you should make your venesection an incision with the lancet and diligently avoid the nerve.	0.88626176
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, split it lengthwise.	If the vein lies between two nerves you should cut it longitudinally.	0.79892755
Bleeding from the cephalic vein helps, as it draws blood from the head, and helps the eyes; and it should be bled by pricking at the olive-shaped swelling or the myrtle-shaped swelling, for it is the safest of all the veins, because it has neither nerve nor artery beneath it.	The cephalic vein: section of it is effective in drawing blood from the head and in diseases of the eyes. Particularly in this vein you ought, if you wish to incise it, to make your incision by puncturing with the olivary or the broad myrtle-leaf scalpel, for this is the safest of all veins as there is neither artery nor nerve beneath.	0.8185665
However, one must look for the easiest place, and it doesn't matter if one misses the first time, and starts again; and perhaps the place swells in some men, when one misses the first time, but it doesn't matter. The quality of the bleeding depends on your judgment.	When you are cutting it you have only to avoid with the scalpel the head of the muscle and to look for the soft place. It will not injure it, if at the first cut you miss the vein, to repeat the incision several times; except that in some people it will sometimes swell up if the section is not made at the first stroke; nevertheless that swelling will do him no harm. The manner of venesection, the accidents that may supervene, and the necessary preliminaries for performing it properly.	0.6525582
The first thing you must know about bleeding is that bleeding is administered only to maintain health, and to avoid future illnesses; and the bleeding should be done in one of the three veins that are in the elbow: namely, the cephalic, median cubital, and basilic; and one should bleed at the beginning of spring while fasting, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of plethora appear; and one should bleed on the first or third day, after two or three hours of the day.	First you should know that venesection may be employed either for the preservation of health or in cases of disease. When used for the preservation and maintenance of health and for guarding against the occurrence of disease, the venesection should be in one of the three vessels at the elbow, cephalic, median, or basilic; and it must be performed at the beginning of spring when the signs of repletion appear. The venesection should be done on a Sunday or Tuesday, after three hours of the day have passed.	0.82975703
Bleeding administered for illnesses has no fixed time, but only when needed, day or night, at all hours and at all times; and children under fourteen years of age should not be bled, nor should pregnant women except from the fourth month until the seventh. The elderly who have passed sixty years should not be bled.	On the other hand, venesection administered for diseases has no fixed hour but when need and necessity arise, either by night or by day, at any hour, in any season. Children should not be venesected until their fourteenth year, nor should you venesect old men of over sixty years.	0.8905954
And when someone wants to be bled, in whatever manner, it is necessary that they cleanse the intestines with a light enema, if they have a lot of retained feces, so that the veins do not draw putrid superfluities from the intestines, harmful to the principal members; nor should one bleed someone who is too satiated with food, nor who is drunk, until they are sober, nor the dropsical; and one should beware of bleeding after colic, and vomiting, and diarrhea, and excessive intercourse with a woman, and from work, from staying awake and fasting, and that which weakens all strength, either by something of the mind or of the body; then thin the humors, if the blood is thick, by foods and drinks and by medicines, if you have the power; then enter the bath, if nothing prevents it, to thin the blood, and bleed from the worst vein around the third hour, as we have said; and guard yourself that day from work, and from exertion, and from sexual activity, and similar things; and be happy and joyful, and let the bleeder be higher than the one being bled, and let him rub the arm two or three times, then tie the ligature above moderately, because when it is too tight or too loose, the blood cannot flow; and then let him rub the place with his hands, until the veins swell, and they can be felt; then let the bleeder moisten the lancet with a little old oil, then place the finger of his left hand on that vein below the place a little where he wants to bleed, so that the vein does not flee and fail upon being lanced. For there are veins that flee like cords when bled, and there are some that are full of wind, so that when the lancet is placed on them, it retracts from the lancet, and the vein cannot be opened, and thus it is with these; and if he opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, therefore the bleeder must be knowledgeable in these things.	After putting on the tourniquet the patient about to be venesected should chafe his own hands together until the veins swell up and become obvious. Then the venesector should wipe over his knife with a little olive-oil, preferably old. Then he should place the forefinger of his left hand on the vessel itself below the place where he wishes to cut, lightly, so that the vein does not slip away and elude the stroke; for there are some veins that you may find like cords slipping away at venesection, while others are filled with flatus and when the knife is applied to them they contract under it and deceive the operator and the knife fails to open the vein or makes only a narrow opening. Wherefore it behoves the venesector to be firm and deliberate in all these cases.	0.79791665
And if the vein opens the first time, that's good; if not, then try again a little below that spot or quickly above, if the place is not swollen.	Then he should apply the knife and if the vein is opened first time, good; but if not, let him repeat a little lower down or a little above, quickly, if the place does not swell.	0.89069164
And if the place is swollen, and the patient is frightened, leave it for a day or two, and do not tie the arm: perhaps hot abscesses will come there; do not enter the bath, then try the bleeding again if it pleases them; and if the opening is small, or the blood flows thinly and you doubt that not as much blood will come out as you want, then strike into that same opening with the whole lancet straight; and open it a little quickly, before the place swells; for this happens many times, when the wound is small.	If it does swell or the patient be anxious, then leave him for a day or two and do not bandage, for that might perhaps provoke an abscess; nor let him go to the bath. Then if he likes, let the venesection be repeated. If the knife has made an opening but it is small and the flow of blood is feeble and you fear that the amount of blood you require will not come out, then gently insert the knife again straight into the same opening and widen it a little. Do this speedily before the place swells up; for in many people the place swells up at once from a small opening.	0.920508
If you see the place swelling, do not restart the bleeding, and apply a little oil dregs, for it lightens the body of blood, and the dregs are better in this place than the oil; and thus administer the oil dregs in every bleeding that you bleed the veins, to stop the flow of blood; and the same is done with theriac and ox dung, when it is placed on the spot; thus the blood thins and spreads when it is too thick.	But if you see it swell up, on no account make another incision for it will be ineffectual; but apply to it a little lees of oil, for that will facilitate the flow of blood; it is superior in this situation to the oil itself and to all other unguents. Therefore use lees of oil in all cases of venesection when the flow of blood is hindered. The great theriac and shakhzanaya both have the same effect, for when the blood is thick it is rendered thin and running.	0.81115496
And if a large abscess develops there, which happens often, especially when it is not bled except at that time or the opening of the vein is small, then hurry, and apply a sponge moistened in slightly warm water and salt to the place, and squeeze it for an hour; and you must do this after the blood has flowed from the vein, and if any blackness or greenness remains at the place after a few days, it does not harm it; and if you wish, apply something of aloes or myrrh mixed with juice of calamint, wild mint, or similar.	If there occur a big tumour at the site of venesection, as often happens, especially with a man who has not previously undergone venesection or if the opening in the vein be small, then quickly apply to the place a sponge soaked in lukewarm salt and water and bandage it for a while, then it will go down. You should do this after the blood has gone out altogether from the same vessel or from another one. If there remain after some days some discoloration or greenness at the site it will not hurt; if you like, apply some solution of myrrh and aloes, or juice of penny-royal or something similar.	0.88647
And often an abscess and swelling occur with the bleeding of the basilic vein: then put your hand on it, and if you find the place soft when pressed by the hand, then this swelling is bad. Therefore, be careful not to apply anything of what we have said, for perhaps blood flows from the artery; but make a dry plaster for him to harden the place, then treat it with another treatment, until it is healed.	Often in section of the basilic vein there occurs tumour and swelling. Put your hand upon it, and if you find that it sinks when pressed then it is a harmful swelling; be careful not to apply to it any of the things we have told you; for often arterial blood comes from it. But apply a poultice with some styptic qualities, to harden the place; then treat in the usual way until healed.	0.8815918
And draw blood from each one according to the quantity of his strength, and the color of the blood.	Now in each case you should extract blood in proportion to the person's strength and to the prevailing colour of the blood.	0.6787348
For if the blood is black, let it flow until it is red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it is thinned; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.	If the blood be black, let it flow until it becomes red; in the same way, if you see it is thick, let it run until it is thin; and again, if it be sharp, until its sharpness is gone.	0.9085418
And for one who is full and strong, and needs bloodletting, a larger wound should be made, and the lancet be wide; and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and he should be bled little and often, and one should bleed him by cutting across, not by pricking; and this manner of bleeding is safe from excessive bleeding and cutting of a nerve, and is better than bleeding along the length or width.	In the case that is plethoric, robust, and requiring venesection just the once, the incision should be wide and the knife should be broad. And on the contrary for the debilitated person, in whose case you should venesect several times and the opening should be small. The best method in venesecting is if the incision be at an angle, oblique, cutting, not piercing. This manner of venesecting is safe from haemorrhage and from cutting the nerve; it is better and safer than cutting straight across or straight along.	0.817601
And to the one whose body faints during bleeding, give bread soaked in pomegranate juice; if he is heated, draw blood three or four times. And if he is of a cold complexion, before bleeding, have him eat bread soaked in syrup of muscat, or in syrup of aromatic honey with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and a very fragrant syrup.	To the patient who habitually faints during venesection you should give to eat beforehand a little bread macerated in the juice of unripe pomegranates or oxymel, if he be of a warm temperament; and draw off the blood in three or four instalments. And if he be of a cold temperament let him take beforehand bread macerated in syrup of quinces or in aromatic syrup of honey or in fragrant syrup of basil.	0.85121644
And if he faints during bleeding, after the release of much blood, he should drink meat broth, and a delicate fragrant syrup, and use the other things that we have mentioned in the section or chapter on syncope, concerning the opening of a vein.	If the patient faints during venesection and the cause is great loss of blood, then be should be given to drink meat-juice and thin syrup of basil; and he should perfume himself with galia moschata and anoint his chest with it. And for the rest, use what we have spoken of in its place in the chapter dealing with fainting due to evacuation.	0.67084324
And if he wishes to empty his arm, and bleed again, it is necessary, when he is weakened by much bleeding, that he bleeds little by little, according to the amount of his strength, continuously.	As for him who wishes to ease his arm and draw off blood a second time, when he is undergoing the venesection on account of great evacuation and the lowness of his strength, you should let the blood slowly, in proportion to his strength, on successive days.	0.76170325
And whoever wants to empty his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, let him bleed seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.	For him who wishes to ease his arm and draw off blood a second time, being of robust body, it must be done seven or nine hours from the first venesection.	0.79011124
And whoever wants to bleed from another part, should do so the second or third day.	He who wishes to draw blood from his body to the side opposite to that toward which it tends, should be eased on the second or third day.	0.79817444
And if the vein is swollen, leave it and do not constrict it, until the swelling has subsided.	But if the vein has begun to swell, leave it and do not touch it until the swelling has subsided.	0.8248687
And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, bleed him in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.	And if you are unavoidably called to let blood again, venesect either above the place or in the other arm or another vessel.	0.8311374
The vein in the middle of the arm is bled instead of the vein of the head because it is well-formed/suitable.	Section of the cord of the arm: this is cut in place of the median and basilic veins when these are not to be found or are hidden; for this vein is composed of those two.	0.4066996
And the method of bleeding is that the patient puts his hand in hot water, until the skin is red; then it should be tied moderately, so that the vein appears well, then bleed immediately across, not lengthwise nor along the length; and let the opening be wide, and be bled very close to the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot come out, put the hand back in hot water, and let the blood run into the water, until you have enough; and if it is in summer, do not put the hand back in hot water, for it is put there more in winter than in summer; and bleeding from this vein is safer than all other veins, because there is neither artery nor nerve. Bleeding from the cephalic vein of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is the method: clench the hand, and put it in hot water, until the vein is swollen, so that it can be seen; and bleed it across, and if you cut it completely through, it does no harm; and do not go too deep, because the nerves are underneath, bare of flesh, and then put the hand back in hot water, if the blood has congealed in the wound, and cannot come out.	Section of the salvatella of the right hand is efficacious in case of diseases of the liver. The method of venesecting it is to tie a band round the wrist or grip it with your hand, after you have put it in hot water until the vein is swollen up and is plainly to be felt; then cut it somewhat obliquely; if you cut it right through that will not matter at all. But be careful not to go too far with the knife, for underneath there are the tendons of the fingers and the place is bare of flesh. Then put the hand again into hot water and let the blood flow; for if you do not put it into hot water again the blood will clot in the opening and will be prevented from flowing.	0.8368624
And when you have drawn as much blood as you need, put oil and salt on the vein to heal it quickly, and do this for every branch/vein.	When you have extracted the required quantity of blood, put oil and salt on the vein so that it does not heal too quickly. You should act thus with every narrow branch.	0.84085786
Bleeding from it in the left hand is good for diseases of the spleen, and do just as I told you for the right.	Incision of the salvatella of the left hand is of value in diseases of the spleen. Venesection of it should be carried out in the same manner as you did in the other.	0.61013377
Bleeding from the saphenous vein is good for all illnesses that are below the body, such as illnesses of the marrow, and retention of menses, and illnesses of the kidneys, and of the thighs and of old legs, and similar illnesses.	Venesection of the saphena is beneficial in diseases of the lower part of the body, such as afflictions of the uterus and retention of the menses, and for diseases of the kidneys, and for chronic ulcers of the hips and legs, and similar diseases.	0.8646062
And the way to bleed it is that the patient puts his foot in hot water, and rubs the vein until it appears, and ties above the ankle joint; and the vein is at the ankle, and many branches go above the foot; then bleed it in the largest branch, or at the ankle, which is better.	Now the manner of venesection is for the patient to put his foot in hot water, then friction should be applied to it until the veins fill up; then bind a thong over the joint of the foot; then the site of the vein at the ankle is shown up running toward the big toe and forming many branches on the surface of the foot. Then make your incision either in the broadest branch or at the ankle before it ramifies, for that is better and safer.	0.8655311
And if you bleed it on the foot, beware of the nerves that are underneath, and bleed it across as if cutting; and let the lancet be sharp.	If you venesect it on the surface of the foot, be careful of the tendons that are beneath on the surface of the foot. Make the incision obliquely as though you were cutting the vein through. The knife should be a lancet.	0.73888916
And if the blood cannot come out, put the foot back in the water, and let the vein empty well.	If the flow of blood be impeded, put the foot back again into hot water and let the blood flow out into it until it is evacuated.	0.7530072
And if the bleeder misses the first time, try again a second time a little above, because the place is safe; do not fear the nerve, as we have said, and do the same with the saphenous vein of the other foot equally.	If the venesector makes a mistake the first time in the vein to be cut, let him repeat the section a little higher up, for the.place is safe; you need fear no mischief as long as you are careful of the tendons, as we said before. In the same way you may deal with the saphena of the other foot.	0.8061589
The place of the sciatic vein is at the outer ankle, and bleeding it is good for hip pain, when it's due to hot blood.	Now the position of the sciatic vein is, as we said, on the outside near the heel. Section of it is effective in pain in the hip when it arises from hot blood.	0.76341826
And the way to bleed it is that the patient enters the bath, and squeezes above the ankle with four fingers while twisting, because otherwise the vein does not appear; and if it appears, bleed it in every way you can, and across; and it is better that you cut it, because the place is safe, and it is very deep in many people.	The way to venesect it is to make the patient get into the bath. Then hasten and bandage his leg from the hip to a distance of four fingers above the heel, with a long narrow bandage; for only this will cause it to appear. When it has appeared then open it in whatever way you can; at an angle, which is best, or right through, or only cut it open, for it is a safe place.	0.7993809
And if you do not find it, bleed any small vein of it that appears on the top of the foot, and towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves; and let as much blood flow as you want, and then untie the ligature, and put on cotton and tighten it; it is now bled.	But in many people it is very hard to find; and if you do not find it or it is in no way palpable, then venesect one of its branches, which will be seen on the surface of the foot towards the fourth toe and the little toe. Be careful of the tendons, and let the amount of blood you require. Then loosen the bandage and apply cotton wool to the site of the section and bandage the place; it will heal quickly.	0.76978576

chapter-2-subchapter-96.txt
Cupping glasses are made of horn, or brass, or glass; and cupping is done in two ways: either by lancing and drawing blood, or without lancing.	Cupping-vessels are made of horn, wood, bronze, or glass. Cupping is carried out in two ways: one with scarification and drawing blood, and the other without scarification.	0.8258668
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the middle of the month, we order cupping after three hours of daylight.	So when we see anything of this kind, and especially if it be in the middle third of the month, we thereupon prescribe cupping after the second or third hour of the day has passed.	0.7312112
Bleeding from the nose helps with severe headache... that affects the eyes, and it should not be done after a full body purge; and this cupping is in place of bleeding from the cephalic vein, and those of a cold complexion should not use it, nor those who have catarrh, because it causes them great harm; and therefore the elderly should not use it, nor those who have cold illnesses in the head.	The effect of cupping the nape of the neck is to help in heaviness of the head and in a fluxion of humours into the eyes; but it should be done after a complete evacuation of the body. This use of cupping may take the place of venesection of the cephalic vein. But anyone suffering from coldness of the brain or catarrh should beware of using it, for this will cause serious harm. So it should not be employed on old men or on anyone suffering from a cold disease of the head.	0.81746304
And he who bleeds from it often, becomes forgetful, and therefore it is necessary to place the cupping glass a little lower down for fear of forgetfulness.	If anyone becomes addicted to it it brings about oblivion. You should therefore bid the cupper bring the cupping-vessel a little lower down lest oblivion supervene.	0.60692775
Cupping in the middle of the neck is in place of bleeding from the head and the basilic vein, and therefore it is good for tightness of the chest, and for splitting of the bronchial tube, and for cough, and for fullness; and it should be applied lightly, because if it holds too firmly, it causes forgetfulness or problems in the stomach and heart.	Now as to the application of cupping-vessels to the interscapular region: it is instead of venesection of the median and basilic veins; so it is effective for asthma and dyspnoea and for rupture of the organ of respiration, and for cough and plethora. The cupping of the interscapular region should be made a little high, for if it is too low it will bring about weakness of the heart and stomach.	0.7269782
Cupping on the two sides of the neck is good for headaches, and ophthalmia and migraine, and for choking, and for pain in the roots of the teeth, and it is in place of bleeding from the basilic vein; and you must instruct the person cupping to press his hand upon application so that he does not cut the artery and cause bleeding.	Cupping the sides of the neck helps in pains occurring in the head, ophthalmia, migraine, and in quinsy and in pain at the roots of the teeth; it replaces venesection of the basilic vein. And you should bid the cupper not to scarify very deeply lest he cut an artery and cause haemorrhage.	0.7995941
Cupping under the chin is good for diseases of the mouth, and for corruption of the gums, and similar ailments that are in the mouth; and it is in place of bleeding from the two lips.	The application of cupping under thé chin helps against ulcers in the mouth and corruption of the gums and similar diseases of the mouth ; and may replace venesection of the four labial vessels.	0.7585404
Cupping on the shoulders is good for illness that comes from heat and fullness.	The application of cupping to the shoulders helps in palpitation of the heart arising from plethora and heat.	0.697695
Cupping on the elbows is worth as much as bleeding from the three veins of the arm, for it draws blood from these large veins; and instruct the cupper not to strike too deeply, for the place is bare of flesh, and there are nerves and arteries underneath.	These capillaries draw blood from other larger veins till the drawing reaches those three great veins. You should bid the person who applies the vessels not to scarify deeply; for the place is bare of flesh and there are tendons and arteries beneath.	0.8096638
The cupping glass that is placed on the buttock is good for hemorrhoids of the anus and illnesses below, and it is necessary that the cupping glass be large, and made of brass, as it needs to draw strongly; and perhaps, if it were thin, it would break; and make large wounds there.	The application of a single cupping-vessel to the coccyx is effective for haemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers of the lower abdomen. You must tell the cupper that the cupping-vessel should be large and of bronze, for the place requires strong suction, and a glass cupping-vessel may break; and he should scarify deeply.	0.7644657
Cupping glasses on the legs bleed readily, for they draw blood from the whole body, and are good for old pains of the loins, and of the marrow, and of the bladder, and eliminate menstrual flow; and are in place of the two saphenous veins, and the two ankles, and yet they weaken the body after long use, and cause fainting in many situations.	Cupping applied to both legs reduces plethora manifestly, because it draws off blood from the whole body, and so is beneficial for chronic pains in the kidneys and uterus and bladder; and brings on the menses. It also serves for pustules and boils; and takes the place of venesection of the saphenous veins and the heel-veins. But it greatly exhausts the body and causes fainting in most people.	0.8517003
The way to apply the cupping glass is that you first place it empty, and suck moderately, and place it quickly, and move it evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the place red and swollen, and the redness of the blood appears; then strike, and replace the cupping glasses, and pay attention to the constitution of the body, for there are some who have tender flesh, and open pores: so it is necessary to strike only once, and make wide wounds, and a little deep; and suck lightly.	The way to apply the cupping-vessels: the vessel is first put in position empty; then you suck moderately; do not long hold the cupping-vessel in place, but apply it quickly and remove it quickly so that the humours gather evenly at the place; and go on doing it time after time until the place is seen to redden and to swell, and the redness of blood is manifested. Then scarify, and repeat the suction very gently; then consider the bodily condition. The person who is tender of flesh and porous of skin you should scarify once only, not more, lest the place ulcerate.	0.872002
And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to thin the pathway of the thick blood.	If there be a thickness of the blood he should scarify twice; the first time to make a way out for the thinner blood and serum; and the second time to complete the extraction of the thick blood.	0.7144805
And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to strike a third time; and when we want to draw blood little by little, it is enough to strike only once.	If the blood be very turbid let him scarify a third time for completion. In general, one scarification is enough when we wish to draw a little thick blood; but if we wish to draw much blood we make more scarifications.	0.83279586
And if we want a lot of blood, we start again often; and if the blood is thick, strike deeply, and the limit is that the skin be pierced suddenly, and for those who have thick and hard skin, and who have narrow pores, you should anoint the places for the cupping glasses with opening and dissolving oil: if it is in summer, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or oil of cucumber seed; and if it is in winter, with watercress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or similar.	A fair depth for the scarification is the thickness of the skin, and no more. The oils and water to be used in applying cupping-vessels, and what he who is to be cupped should avoid. He whose skin is thick, solid, desiccated, and narrow of pore: the operator should anoint the place with opening and emollient and resolving oils; if it be in the summer season, with, for example, oil of yellow gilliflower or of violets or of sweet almonds or of pumpkin-seeds. If it be in winter, with narcissus oil or oil of lilies or camomile oil, or of jasmine, or the like.	0.81179416
And if the superfluity is thick and cold, take oil of marjoram, or of balsamite, or oil of dill, and similar ones.	And if the superfluity be thick and cold, then with oil of marjoram or oil of wild thyme or oil of ben or oil of dill.	0.79919136
And if the one being treated has tender flesh and large pores, no oil should be applied, but they should be washed after cupping with rose water, or cold water, or nightshade water, or cucumber water, or purslane water, or similar.	If he who is to be cupped has wide-open pores and tender flesh, he should be forbidden oil. After cupping, such people should wash the sites with rose-water or cold water or water of black nightshade or of gourds or of garden purslain, or the like.	0.8243845
And he who has a lot of moisture, let him rise with vinegar, or myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.	But he whose blood is very humid should wash the sites of his cupping with vinegar or water of myrtle or sumac, and the like.	0.7034429
And those who have thick superfluities rise with old wine, or elder water, or a decoction of dill or chamomile, or other similar things; and one should not be cupped before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and should not sleep after cupping, and it is necessary that he be careful, when he is to be cupped and when he has been cupped.	He that has thick superfluities should wash the sites of his cupping with old wine or water of purslain or decoction of dill or of camomile or the like. One should beware of cupping in the bath or just after the bath, but should use the vessels one or two hours after leaving the bath. And no one should sleep after cupping. The correct procedure to be observed before and after cupping by him who is to be cupped or venesected.	0.8646319
And be wary if the one being treated is choleric, and if the blood is too sharp and inflamed; then he must take cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuces with vinegar, and similar things; and eat chicks, and mutton, and moist foods.	It is necessary for you first to consider, and if he that is to be cupped or venesected be bilious, and bitterness and inflammation prevail in his blood, he should take cooling things such as pomegranates and endive with vinegar and lettuce and oxymel and julep, and the like. His diet should be chicken and mutton made into stews with vinegar, and soups with verjuice, and the like.	0.78991723
And he who has a cold complexion, let him take honey syrup, and moderately fragrant wine, which is between old and new, and eat little, and eat chicks and small birds and pigeons; and the day he is cupped, he should drink more than he eats; and it is necessary to sometimes give some men theriac or nutmeg before cupping, or after, to strengthen the principal members; and let the blood be thinned, but it is not necessary that those who are warm drink it.	The man of frigid constitution should drink syrup of honey or syrup of quince or spiced oxymel; he should also take perfumed raisin wine, not too old and not too new; he should be bidden to be moderate in eating and should make his diet young pullets and larks and sparrows and young pigeons in white stews. And on the day of cupping and venesection he should drink rather than eat. It may sometimes be necessary to have some people drink the great theriac or musk-medicine or shllitha before cupping and before or after venesection, to strengthen the chief parts and to render the blood thin; but these draughts should not be given to the feverish.	0.91735816
The method of cupping applied with fire is as follows:	This is the figure of the cupping-vessel for use with fire.	0.5187292
In the cup then which is applied in the illness of pleurisy, with only water, there is no bar nor hole, and fire is not used except when it is full of water, and it is placed on the limb only; and this is the method:	But the cupping-vessel that is used in pleurisy, with water, has no cross-piece nor hole; it is used by simply filling with water and applying to the part. This is the figure of it.	0.7095628

chapter-2-subchapter-97.txt
Leeches are not used with fire except on limbs where one cannot place cups because of their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and in places devoid of flesh, such as fingers or nose, and other similar; and the way to use them is that when you find leeches that are in clear fresh water without impurity, take them; and put them for a night in fresh water, until they are hungry, and have nothing in their bellies; and then be bled by vein or by cup, then rub the limb until it is red, and place the leeches on; and when they are full, and fall off, if it is a place where one can put a cup, put it there, for it is very beneficial afterwards. If not, wash the place with vinegar, and then with water, very well, and then squeeze it; and if the place bleeds too much after the leeches' bodies, wet a linen cloth in cold water, and put it on, until the blood is stanched; and if the blood is profuse, apply ground vitriol, or gallnuts, and similar things, until it is stanched; or you put on the place halves of peeled beans, and leave them until they stick to the place, it will stop immediately; and if you need more, take other leeches.	Then you leave them in fresh water for a day and a night until they are hungry and nothing is left in their bellies; then you purge the patient's body, either by venesection or by the application of cupping vessels; then you scrub the afflicted part until it is flushed; and then place the leeches on it. When they are full they will fall off. If it is possible to make suction with a cupping vessel, the effect will be greater. But if not, wash the part with vinegar followed by much water; then rub and put pressure on it.	0.8213274
And if the leeches do not want to attach, rub the place with fresh blood, or prick it with a needle until the blood comes out, and then put them on, and as soon as they smell the blood, they will attach; and when you see that they are about to fall off, sprinkle on a little aloe and crushed salt, or ash, they will fall off immediately.	If the leeches fail to stick on, the place should be wiped over with fresh blood or pricked with a needle to bring out a little blood; then apply them, for if they smell any blood they will immediately adhere. When you wish to remove them, sprinkle over them a little powdered aloes or salt or ashes, then they will at once fall away.	0.89430964

chapter-3.txt
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is the restoration of fractures and dislocations.	This third part of the book, too, is an essential necessity in the practice of medicine; it concerns the setting of the fracture or dislocation occurring in bones.	0.62372327

chapter-3-subchapter-1.txt
It is therefore necessary that we state in the prologue of this book the main points of the discussion and the chapters where the wise man puts his understanding, and dwells on the truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.	Before we begin to speak of the fractures and dislocations of individual members we must, as an introduction to this book, give the general and particular information which compels your understanding and your being versed in it; both you and anyone else beside who is eager to learn this noble art.	0.6197581
And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary to nourish the patient with foods that make for substantial nourishment, where there is viscosity, such as wheat cooked in water, and rice, and heads, and feet, and cow's tripe, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For with such nourishment the fracture heals better and faster.	When the broken bone has begun to mend, the patient should be nourished with very nourishing food, fat, strong, having some glutinous property, such as porridge, rice, heads, trotters, the tripe of cows, eggs, fresh fish, heavy wine, and the like; for on this diet the mending of the fracture will be quicker and better.	0.8762227
And know that the broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot heal or knit well according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor can those who are too tender, such as the bones of small children; but it doesn't matter, replace the broken bone with a large splint which holds and joins the limb together, until it strengthens as it was before; and do not stop its work, and for this reason it must be nourished with rich foods, as we have said.	You should know that fractures occurring in mature and old people cannot join and mend into the original condition, on account of the dryness and hardness of their bones; though any bones that are extremely soft, like those of infants, may make a union and heal. Yet nature produces around the bone on all sides something like glue, with a certain viscosity, with whose help it joins, and it binds so that one part adheres to the other and they are linked to one another until it be good and firm as it had been before; so that there is no impediment to any of its functions. It is on this account that the patient's food should be the sort that has solidity and glueyness and thickness, as we have said.	0.8070723
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.	You should know that there are as many different types of fracture as there are members.	0.61177677
For a fracture of the head is different from a fracture of the chest, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. For there is a fracture that goes across, and another obliquely, like the cut of a quill for writing.	Thus a fracture of the leg bone differs from a fracture of the cranium; and a fracture of the breast bone differs from a fracture of the bone of the back; and similarly there are differences among the other parts. We shall give an exposition of each kind of fracture, each in its own chapter and distinguished from the others.	0.724627
For there is a fracture that goes across, and another obliquely, like the cut of a quill for writing. And there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with only a small crack. And each type has its own technique, and its own specific instrument for restoration, according to what comes to mind in its place; and the fracture of the bone is known because the place is twisted, and is clearly apparent by default, and sounds when pressed by the hand; and when there is no twisting nor sound when touched, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no fracture; but there can indeed be twisting, or a crack, or a small fracture.	The fracture of each bone also has its own variations; for the fracture may be a clean break without splintering; or the fracture may be along the bone, with splinters and projections which may be sharp or may not; and the fracture may involve a wound and a laceration of the skin; and the fracture may be a crack. Each kind has its own special technique of setting which will be mentioned in detail, each in its place. Among the diagnostic signs of a broken bone are: distortion, protrusion, the aspect of it, and the crepitus when you press on it with the hand. When there is no obvious distortion or crepitus at the site, nor do you feel movement when you manipulate the bone, and the patient does not experience severe pain, there is no fracture there.	0.83733565
So you should not move it with your hand, but apply the medicines that follow, and then bind it carefully immediately.	But it is possible that there is a luxation or a slight fracture or a little crack; so you must not disturb it with any extension or pressure, but apply one of the remedies suitable to the site, such as will be described later; then bind up gently.	0.489594
And know that for the fracture that goes across, and the two parts are separated, you must immediately put them back in place evenly, before a hot abscess develops there; and if a hot abscess develops, leave it for a few days, until the abscess subsides; then set it as evenly as you can easily and wisely, and know that its restoration is easier than the restoration of one where there are fragments; then bind it, as is appropriate below.	If the bone is parted and broken in two and there is no fragmentation but a simple separation of one part from its fellow, then you should lose no time in straightening and aligning it before an abscess sets in. If an abscess does set in, then let a few days pass until it has subsided; then gently and skilfully straighten it in whatever way you can. You should know that the setting or alignment of this is easier than that of a splintered bone. Then bandage as will be prescribed.	0.7845037
And if there are broken pieces in the bone, stretch it from both sides, if it is a hand or foot, or with your hand if it is a small limb, or with two cords, or with a cord and your hand; and place the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken limb are separated, bring the pieces back into their place as best you can, and be careful that your work does not cause injury or pain to the patient; and join the two ends of the bones well according to the best form.	But if the bone is splintered, extension from either side is necessary, whether it be hand or foot; with your own hands if it be a small member, or with two ropes or with one hand and a rope. You should place the part on a flat surface in its natural attitude so that when both parts of the broken bone have been extended you can try to restore the fragments to their proper place with all the skill and gentleness possible; and do your utmost to ensure that the patient experience no pain or distress as you operate. Try diligently to get one part of the bone fitted in the best form to the other.	0.89297235
And feel it carefully with your hand if it seems to you that it is not right: then straighten it gently, and do not bind it too tightly, nor press it as those do whose work causes a hot abscess and contraction of the limb, as we have often seen.	At the same time you should palpate and investigate both of them with your hand, and if you find anything wrong then mend it and straighten it to the best of your ability. But avoid violent extension or compression which many ignorant people apply; for by doing so they often cause abscess or crippling in the limb, as I myself have many times seen.	0.72407424
And when the limb is set, warn the patient carefully not to move it, neither waking nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way; and make sure that the limb is so secure that he feels no pain.	Then after you have exactly repositioned it and bandaged it, keep that limb still and quiet, and bid the patient beware of moving it while awake or asleep, and in his shifting and stirring, and in opening the bowel, and in every activity, to the utmost of his capacity; and that he should try to let the position of the limb be such that he is free from pain; when pain or distress is felt in any position in which he has disposed the limb, he should move it to a different position in which he feels no pain.	0.8001387
For when he feels no pain, it is not properly set, and it must be placed in such a position that he feels no pain; and be careful that it is placed straight, so that no crookedness occurs when it is healed; and the quality of the broken limb is according to what I tell you.	At the same time he should try to make that position even and straight, so that when the limb is mended there be no curvature in it. As to the way to bandage a broken limb, it is as I shall now describe to you.	0.64890826
Know that broken limbs vary in smallness and size and shape.	You should know that limbs which may be fractured vary in their size and shape.	0.85060424
And if there is swelling or an abscess, apply something soothing and warm for the abscess, and which removes the swelling, and leave it like this for a few days; then tighten your splints, and let them be half the width of a large, wisely cut dogwood branch, or of wood from which arrow shafts are made, or of palm branches, and let them be according to this figure:	But if there be swelling or effusion in the part, apply something to allay the swelling and disperse the effusion; leave it on for several days and then bind on the splints. The splints should be made of broad halves of cane, cut and shaped with skill; or the splints may be made of the wood used for sieves, which are made of pine; or of palm branches; or of brier or giant fennel or the like, whatever wood be at hand.	0.84791386
And if the patient is injured by the ends of the splints after tightening in healthy places, place linen padding or carded wool underneath them so that he is not injured.	If, after bandaging, the patient is hurt in the sound parts by the ends of the splints, then put a little soft tow or carded wool under them until they no longer hurt him thus.	0.7710762
When the wound is with the fracture, and the skin is broken, I will describe the treatment hereafter.	As for the case of a fracture accompanied by an open wound, it will be mentioned in a special section on its own.	0.49221325
And know that you should not tighten all broken limbs with splints on the first day. For when the limb is large, splints should not be applied until after five or seven days, or more depending on your certainty of a hot abscess occurring; and here is the method for ancient plasters to restore fractures, dislocations, and sprains: take the flour that sticks to the walls of the mill, and mix it with plenty of eggs, and apply this mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way of making the plaster that restores fractures of many kinds, and especially for women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.	You should know that not every fracture should be bound up with splints on the first day; that is, when the part is big you should not apply splints until five or seven days after, or more, depending on when you are satisfied that there is no effusion. This is a description of the plasters that the Ancients used for repair, applied to a fracture, dislocation, or sprain. Description of a common simple plaster for the repair of fractures, suited to most constitutions, particularly for women and children, because in it there predominates neither hot nor cold. Take mill-dust, that is, the fine flour that sticks to the walls of a mill as the grindstone moves.	0.8651599
Another method of plaster restoring fracture, dislocation, and sprain: take three units of yellow sweet clover, labdanum, elecampane, and asafetida, and gum arabic, and galbanum, ten units each; myrrh and aloe, five units each; mastic nine units; and make a powder, and mix them with plenty of eggs; if the person's complexion is hot, use this plaster, because it is of good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, and is beneficial for many people.	Description of another plaster for the repair of a fracture, luxation, or dislocation: take ten drachms each of pulse, gum-mastic, acacia, elecampane, mughath, and sukk; five drachms each of myrrh and aloes; twenty drachms of tamarisk and twenty drachms of clay of Armenia or Asia Minor; all should be pounded fine and mixed with water of tamarisk, or with eggwhite if the patient be of a warm constitution; then use this plaster, which is excellent for uniting, quickly repairing broken bones, and suits most people because of its mildness.	0.8008524
Another kind of plaster that is good for sprains: take galbanum and marshmallow, ten units each; myrrh and aloe, nine units each; acacia six units; Armenian bole ten units, and grind well, and mix with water or plenty of eggs, and administer it.	Description of another plaster valuable for a fracture or sprain: let there be taken ten drachms each of mughath, pulse, and white marsh mallows, five drachms each of myrrh and aloes, six drachms of acacia, and twenty drachms of Armenian clay. Let them all be well beaten up and passed through a sieve and made into a paste with water or egg-white and used.	0.7758106
Another kind of plaster for joints and bones separated from their places, and soothes the resulting pain, and outgrowth of bone, and fractures: take new wool, and soak it in vinegar and cooked oil, and apply it to the area.	Description of a plaster for dislocated joints or bones, soothing the accompanying pain, and for a crack or fissure of bone: let unwashed wool be taken and soaked in a decoction of oil and vinegar and applied to the place.	0.7315012
This plaster does not restore, but it is good for soothing a hot abscess, and effectively removes pain.	Now this plaster has no power of repair but it is outstanding for reducing effusion and dispersing pain.	0.73005176
Another kind of plaster that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves, and ground ivy leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.	Description of another plaster for the repair of a broken bone: let there be taken the leaves of the hard fig and of the wild poppy and both be beaten up together and a plaster made of them while still fresh and damp.	0.74583066
Another kind of plaster for the restoration of a bone fracture and to reduce the remains of the abscess. Take marshmallow root, chamomile, violet flowers, vetch flour, one part of each; and grind them, and mix with wine, and if the limb is heated, mix it with moist coriander water, or water, and use it.	Description of another simple plaster used when a fracture is mending and you wish to disperse residual swellings: take one part each of marsh mallow root, chamomile, violet flowers, and flour of vetch; pound it all and make a paste with decoction of wine, if the part be not inflamed. But if it be inflamed make it up with water of fresh coriander or plain water, and use.	0.81384313
Another kind of plaster, stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes during the restoration of the limb. Take marshmallow roots, and flax seed, pomegranate rind, sweet clover, and elderflower, and violet and chamomile flowers, equal parts of all; and grind them, and mix with salt water, or fresh water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.	Description of another plaster stronger than the former for resolving, used if a hard swelling arises as the bone sets: let there be taken equal parts of each of marsh mallow roots, linseed, fenugreek, melilot, sweet marjoram, violet flowers, and chamomile; they should all be beaten up together and made into a paste with willow infusion or sweet water or wine, according to whether the part is inflamed or its heat has subsided.	0.82702327
Hippocrates says in his book that one should not put on the fractured limb to restore it anything but a cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else more, and says that it should be medium, neither too soft nor too hard.	Now Hippocrates in his book did not mention any application for the repair of a fractured part except a wax plaster made of wax and oil, nothing else. He prescribed that it be of a consistency midway between thick and thin.	0.79315984
And Galen thinks that one should put on the broken limb, to restore it, slightly warm, dry things, such as myrrh and aloe and frankincense and similar things, as we have said.	Galen, on the other hand, thought it good to apply to the broken limb, when it is mending, things which have a certain power of drying, with some heat, such as myrrh, aloes, olibanum, and the sort of thing we have mentioned.	0.8027475
Another type of plaster that is good for injury and pain: take mastic and cut human hair, or bird feathers, and marshmallow root, and salt in equal measure, and grind them, and make a plaster and apply it.	Description of a plaster valuable for debility and pain: let equal parts of each be taken of mughath, chickpease, minced human hair or birds' feathers, marsh mallows and salt; grind it up and pass through a sieve and make into a paste and use as a plaster.	0.7551267
And if you see that the warm abscess and redness and pain and swelling are completely gone, and you need plaster and bandages, then start again, as you did the first time, similarly.	If you see that the effusion, inflammation, pain, swelling, and other symptoms are totally gone, and you need to plaster and bandage it, then repeat just as you did at first.	0.83420616

chapter-3-subchapter-2.txt
of the various types of fractures	The kinds of fracture occurring in the head are many, of various forms and differing causes.	0.4952455
There are many types of fractures, and various forms, and the causes are distinct; for there are fractures that are made by the blow of a sword, and the blow removes all the bone down to the syfac which is under the bone, as an axe or wood does; and therefore this type of fracture is called "hachure" (axe-like).	Some fractures are due to a sword-stroke which may cut right through the bone and reach the membrane beneath the bone, like an adze-cut in wood, for which reason this kind of cut is called 'ascial'.	0.6689292
Or the sword cuts the bone from above without piercing, and this type of fracture is called "absolue" (complete); and the wound of these two fractures is large or small.	Or the sword may cut through part of the bone, only slicing through the surface and not reaching the depth; this kind is called an absolute avulsion. The wounds in these two fractures can be either big or small.	0.737725
And if there is a blunt percussion, or a split or a blow from a stone, or from falling on a stone, or other similar things.	There are also some fractures accompanied by smashing or crushing; such as by a blow from a stone or by falling on a stone, and the like.	0.7274651
And if there is a piercing fracture, which reaches down to the membrane which is under the bone, or it is on the bone, and this wound is either large or small.	A fracture of this kind will be either penetrating, reaching the membrane beneath the bone; or superficial; the wound in these two fractures may be either big or small.	0.7774613
And there is also a wound that is placed in the bone as fine as a hair, and the crack is small, and therefore this fracture is called "capillaire" (hairline); and also the wound which is made either by striking with a stone, or by falling, or by a similar thing, and causes the piece of bone to enter downwards, and the place is sunken as cauldrons do when struck; thus the stone enters inside.	Then there is a type of fracture that is hidden in the bone, as fine as a hair, a thin crack; therefore this kind of fracture is called 'capillary'. There is a fracture due to a fall or a blow from a stone and the like, making a dent in the surface of the bone and a hollow at the site as occurs in a bronze bowl when a blow falls on it and a portion of it is pushed in.	0.8744364
And this happens more to those who have moist bones in their head, like a child's head; and it happens in all these types of fractures that small pieces are separated like splinters; and I will speak of them in their place.	This mostly occurs in heads whose bones are soft, as those of children. Any of these kinds of fracture may also have splinters, jagged or otherwise; we shall deal with the treatment of all these in their place.	0.73595285
And we recognize all types of fractures by the indentation above them, and the probing with tents, and by the corrupted flesh that is on top.	All these kinds of fracture are diagnosed by laying them bare and investigating them with probes and removing all the lacerated tissues over them.	0.61242545
The similar hairline fracture is recognized because when the bone has been uncovered, and one rubs ink on it, the fracture appears black.	The 'capillary' kind is diagnosed by laying bare the bone, wiping it clean, and rubbing ink on it, when the fracture will appear black.	0.6154008
In the treatment of the fracture, pay attention to the patient's accidents, and if you see any bad accident, such as vomiting bile, and loss of consciousness, and stretching, and inflammation, and acute fever, and the eyes coming out and becoming red, and other similar ones in several dispositions, then it cannot heal without a doubt.	As to the treatment of the fracture: begin by paying attention to the patient's symptoms. If you observe any symptom clearly indicating something dangerous, such as bilious vomit, convulsion, mental derangement, loss of voice, fainting, high fever, protrusion and inflammation of the eyes, and similar symptoms, then leave the patient alone and do not treat him; for in the majority of cases these symptoms undoubtedly indicate the approach of death.	0.76808065
And if you see no alarming accident, and you expect recovery, then begin the treatment.	But if you find symptoms that do not alarm you and you see hope of recovery for him, then begin treatment as follows.	0.7589262
And when the wounded first comes to you, and it is in winter, it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day, as early as you can.	If he be brought to you immediately after his injury and it be the season of winter, you should try to remove the bone, at all events before the fourteenth day.	0.78707635
And if it is in summer, hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, before the tissue under the bone is corrupted, and the accidents that we have mentioned occur.	If it be summer you must hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, before the covering membrane beneath the bone and over the brain be infected, and before the above-mentioned symptoms occur.	0.80314934
And then make another incision larger than the first.	Then use yet another chisel still broader than the second.	0.7071638
And the second way is that you have a number of different incisions, some narrow and others wide, and pointed, and made of Indian steel; and work lightly, so that you do not injure the head.	You should have by you a number of different chisels, some broader than others and some shorter than others; their tips should be exquisitely sharp; and they should be made of Indian iron or best steel. Let the strokes upon the chisel be gentle lest the head be shocked or injured.	0.70791876
And if the bone is strong and hard, you must pierce it around, before you make incisions with drills, not so deep that they pierce through the skull bone, and it should have a margin or a circle on the tip, which prevents the point from passing through the bone; and you must have several of them, so that each one comes to its place in the thickness of the bone, so that you have drills for every head; and this is the form of the three types of drills:	Let the strokes upon the chisel be gentle lest the head be shocked or injured. If the bone be strong and hard you should, before you use the chisel, make perforations round about it with drills called 'non-sinking' drills. Their name of non-sinking drills is due to their not piercing the cranial bone through to what is beneath, because the drill has a circular margin beneath its sharp head like a small collar or wheel, that prevents it from sinking in and going beyond the thickness of the bone. You must obtain a large number of these drills each of which will suit a certain thickness of bone; so that for each skull you have a drill whose pointed extremity is of a length to suit the thickness of that skull.	0.83665514
The method for piercing around the fractured bone is that you place a drill on the bone, and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced; then place the drill elsewhere a little further on, and so do all around, then cut with the incisors the space of bone that is between the holes, and do this as delicately as you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you remove the bone with your hand, or with some of the instruments that you have, such as forceps, pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the dura mater.	As to the manner of perforation round the fractured bone, you apply the drill to the bone and revolve it with your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced, then you transfer the drill to another place, making the distance between the perforations about the thickness of a probe. Then with the chisels cut out the bone between the perforations, using the utmost delicacy, as we have said. Then take out the bone, either with your hand or with some other instrument you have ready for the purpose, such as forceps or fine tongs. You will have to observe the utmost caution that neither drill nor chisel touch any part of the membrane.	0.8930565
And when you have pierced and removed the bone, you must cut the remaining bone fragment with another instrument similar to an incisor, but it must be thinner and more delicate than the other incisor; and if any small bones or scales remain, remove them gently with one of the instruments; then treat the wound with tents and ointments as we have described.	When you have cut the bone circularly, free from the membrane if adherent to it, and have removed it, then you will have to scrape away and smooth out all the roughness in the remaining bone with another instrument, resembling a chisel, except that it must be finer and slenderer than any of them. If there are any little bits or spicules of bone left, pick them out with whatever instrument you can, gently; and then treat the wound with dressings and ointments as we shall describe.	0.8972919
And the other method of working is the one that Galen describes, which is safer; and he praises it very highly, and these are his words. You must first uncover a part of the bone, where the fracture appears most, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place under it the head of this lenticular incisor, of which this is the form:	The other way of operating is altogether easy and free from danger; Galen mentioned it and greatly praised it; these are his words: You should begin by laying bare that part of the bone where the fracture is severest and most obvious; when you have done so, place under it the tip of this lenticular chisel figured here.	0.8716804
And it does not cut on one side, and the part is sharp on both sides, so that the cutting edge is towards the bone; then strike with a small mallet on it, so that you cut the bone lightly all around, and take good care of the membrane that is underneath; if it is attached to the bone, remove it gently, for it can be removed well without harm, and without fear.	The lenticular part of it should be smooth and not for cutting, the sharp part of it being on both sides longitudinally, as you see; so that the lenticular part is resting upon the meninges while the cutting surface is on the bone. Then with a small hammer strike the tool on one side until you gently cut through the bone in a circle, in the confident knowledge that nothing untoward can happen to the membrane even though the operator be the most ignorant and cowardly of men; yes, even if he be sleepy. If any membrane stick to any part of the bone, strip it off with the lenticular tip of the chisel and free it gently from it, for it will come away without harm or danger.	0.8034829
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate to the membrane, and the bone is only cut on the surface, and there are small pieces, you must scrape this roughness, and remove the scales with a fine scraper of which you must have various sizes, to use in each place the most suitable, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.	If it be a fracture of the bone not reaching to the meninges, only the surface of the bone being separated, and there remain some roughness and fine splinters, you should smooth down the roughness and remove the splinters with fine scrapers, of which you should have a number, of varying sizes so that you can use the one best fitted and most suitable, in the light of what is suggested by your operative method and the broken bone itself and its shape.	0.8197571
So scrape first with large scrapers, and then with finer ones, and do not cease doing this until it is well done.	When you smooth the bone you must first use the broadest of the scrapers and then a finer one, and so on until you come to use the finest and slenderest of all.	0.6347195
In each of the other hair-thin cuts and fine fractures, you must apply treatment according to its correction; and this is a thing not revealed to one who has not applied his study to this art.	As to the rest, the little capillary fractures and fine fissures, you will have to apply to each of them that treatment that will bring about a perfect repair. This is obvious to anyone who has the least practice in this art and is acquainted with what we have written in explanation of the big fractures.	0.6740531
Take care then, if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, it is undoubtedly doubtful.	Sometimes the surface meninges go black when the bone is removed, especially when the treatment of them is neglected; so observe, and if the patient exhibit any of the symptoms that we have mentioned you may know that he is undoubtedly doomed.	0.40313447
And if blackness appears only because of the medicine that was applied, which has such a property, then you must take one part honey, and three parts rose oil and soak a cloth in it, and place it on the meninges; then treat it with the appropriate methods of treatment until it is healed.	But if the blackness be due to some medicament applied to it, which has the power to produce blackness of that kind, then you should take one part of honey and three parts of oil of roses, beat them well up together, spread on a cloth and apply it to the membrane; then treat as necessary until cured.	0.8678293

chapter-3-subchapter-3.txt
Know that sometimes both parts of the nose above are broken, or one of them alone, for these are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break, but only bends or twists, and then heals.	You should know that the only portion of the nose that can break is the upper portion in its entirety or in one of its two parts; for it consists of two bones. The lower portion is cartilaginous and unbreakable; what can happen to it is contusion, twisting, or flattening.	0.8343532
And if one of the two parts is broken, you must insert your little finger into the nostril, and with your index finger and thumb from the outside, gently realign the fracture; do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.	If one of the two (upper) parts be broken you should pass your little finger into the nostril and straighten out the fracture from inside, with your index and thumb outside, until you reduce the nose to its natural shape; do it gently, and take care that you do not cause the patient pain in doing it.	0.84337056
And if the break is in the upper part of the nose, and your finger cannot reach the place, then you should straighten it with the end of a somewhat thick stick.	If the fracture be in the upper part of the nose and your finger does not reach it, it should be evened by means of a probe with some thickness to it.	0.8324593
And if the break is in two parts, do the same, and hurry to restore it the first day if you can; if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the hot swelling has subsided, then insert tents of linen cloth into the end of the nose, if the break is in one part.	If the break be on both sides, follow the same course. Haste must be made to set it on the first day if possible; but if not, after the seventh or tenth day when the effusion has subsided.	0.7966316
Or insert another one on the other side, if the break is there; and the tents should be so large that they fill the nostrils.	Then introduce into the nasal foramen a linen pad, if it be a unilateral fracture, or two pads if it be bilateral; the pads should be thick enough to fill the nasal foramen.	0.54090935
And some restorers say that the tents should be moistened with butter and changed every day. It does not seem good to me, but they should be moistened in a mixture of egg white and mill dust; then leave the tent in place until the bone is firm, and the cartilage hardened.	Certain of the ancient bone-setters suggest that you should soak the pads in butter and change them daily, but I do not think so; you should rather soak them in egg-white made up into a paste with mill-dust; then leave the pads in until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardens.	0.83640015
And sometimes goose feathers are inserted into the nose instead of tents, with a soft cloth around them, which holds the break in place, and the patient breathes through them; now do whichever you prefer.	Sometimes, instead of pads, the stems of goose-quills are introduced into the nose after being wound round with a piece of soft cloth, so as to make a stronger support for the fracture of the nose and not to hinder the patient's breathing. This is not absolutely necessary; do it if you prefer; or, if you prefer, put in pads.	0.7302616
And if hot abscesses develop in the nose while you are working there, apply cerate or cotton moistened with rose oil, or a little diachylon.	If during your operation an abscess occurs, apply to the nose a wax plaster or cotton wool soaked in vinegar and oil of roses or a little diachylon ointment.	0.8419768
And if hot abscesses do not develop, apply a cooling plaster made of sesame flour and incense powder, mixed with egg white, then put light compresses on top, and do not bind the nose; and if the break of the nose is small, and it is broken into small pieces, extract them with suitable instruments, then stitch the wound, and treat it with things that generate flesh and promote healing, such as suitable plasters and ointments; and if there is no wound inside the nose, treat it with tents, and insert lead cannulas until it is healed.	If no abscess occurs you should apply externally a plaster of white flour and frankincense made into a paste with egg-white; then put on top some soft tow, but do not bind up the nose at all. If the nasal bones are broken into small pieces or crushed, you should cut down upon them, remove them with a suitable instrument, and then suture the incision and dress with suitable ointments which encourage granulation and scarring. If there occur an internal wound of the nose, you should dress it with pads and employ leaden tubes until it heals.	0.8601358

chapter-3-subchapter-4.txt
When the mandible is broken underneath, and there is no external wound, and the break is internal only, and it is not broken in two, except perhaps fractured internally, then one can recognize it easily.	When the lower jaw is broken and it is a fracture without an open wound, examine it.	0.5161215
It is necessary, if the break is on the right side, that you put your index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the break is in the left mandible, then put your right index finger in, and gently push the fracture inwards, and adjust it with the other hand from the outside, and make it even.	If it is merely an external fracture, not broken in two but sunken inwards, which is easily recognized, you should introduce the index of your left hand into the patient's mouth if it be a right-hand fracture; but your right index if it be a left-sided fracture; and with this, from within, push the concavity of the fracture gently outwards, with the other hand outside, regulating the correction.	0.8447953
And if the fracture of the mandible is separated into two, then you must administer extension from both sides, until it is even.	If the break in the jaw be total, into two, traction must be employed, in a straight line on both sides, until it can be set.	0.7400815
And if loosening or breaking of the teeth occurs, secure them with a gold or silver or silk thread, then put cerate on the broken mandible, and put on a double cloth; and put on the cloth a well-made large star, or a piece of leather, evenly shaped, long and wide according to the mandible, and tie it on as tightly as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.	If any of the teeth be loosened or broken away, bind those that you hope may be preserved with a gold or silver or silken ligature; then put wax upon the fractured mandible, and upon that a doubled dressing, and upon the dressing a large and strong splint or a piece of shoe-sole leather, the length of the jaw; then over that bandage in such wise as you conveniently can and as will conduce to drawing it together so as not to loosen. Bid the patient hold himself quiet and still, and let his food be soft broths.	0.8831878
And if you see that the shape changes, untie it on the third day, and then readjust what has changed; and apply a plaster, made of mill dust with egg white or sesame flour, after you have removed the cerate; and put light wool over the plaster, and if the plaster dries and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until he is healed; many times he is healed in three weeks.	If you think there is any change of form at all, hasten to loosen it on the third day; then correct the change and apply a plaster of mill-dust and egg-white, or of white flour, after you have removed the wax from it, applying soft tow over the plaster. So long as the plaster sticks on it and the bone undergoes no change of state, let it be and do not loosen until it heals and the fracture mends, for often a fracture of this kind mends in three weeks.	0.8905239
And if hot abscesses develop, then administer what we have said many times.	If during that time an effusion occurs, employ those means of allaying this that we have often mentioned, until the swelling subsides.	0.47298342
And if there is a fracture and wound together, see if any piece of the bone has been removed; then carefully remove it with suitable instruments.	If the fracture be with an open wound, examine it, and if one or more splinters have been detached from the bone, gently remove the pieces of splinter with any suitable instrument.	0.7323752
And if the wound is narrow, widen it with a lancet according to your need.	If the opening of the wound be narrow, open it up with a scalpel as much as you need.	0.65540606
And when you have removed all these pieces, and none remain, sew the wound, if it is large, and apply a suitable plaster to generate flesh, until it is healed.	When you have removed these pieces, letting no trace of them remain, suture the opening of the wound if it is wide; otherwise apply one of the ointments that are suitable for that purpose and will encourage the growth of flesh over the wound, until it heals.	0.7726034

chapter-3-subchapter-5.txt
The clavicle often breaks anteriorly, towards the shoulder, and the fracture occurs in three ways: either it is broken and separated in two, and there are pieces, and it is the easiest to restore; or there is a fracture with a wound.	The collar-bone is very often broken from the end of the humerus anteriorly, and the fracture of it may be in one of three ways. It may be broken and separated into two without splintering; this is the easiest to repair. Or else splintering occurs, which is most difficult to repair. Or it is a compound fracture.	0.7941472
And the procedure is, when the fracture is without a wound, that you have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder blade near the broken clavicle; and the other stretches the neck towards the side; then align the fracture with your fingers, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is neither a bump nor a depression.	When it is a simple fracture the operation involves having two assistants present; one of them to hold steady the arm adjacent to the fractured clavicle, and the other to stretch the neck in the opposite direction. Then level the fracture with your fingers until it is reduced to its proper form and there is neither prominence nor concavity.	0.88826764
And if you need to stretch more, place a round bolster of cloth, or wool, under the patient's shoulder, and let it be thick according to your need; and stretch and lift the clavicle, and press the bolster with your hand, so that you align the fracture as it should be.	If there is need of still greater extension, place in the armpit of the patient a ball of cloth or wool made to a suitable size; and stretch and lift up the clavicle and squeeze the roll with your hand until the fracture is set in the proper way.	0.87359214
And if you cannot pull the end of the clavicle outwards, because it goes inwards deeply, then the patient should lie frequently on his back, and put a medium-sized pillow under his shoulder, and let the assistant push the shoulder downwards, until the bone of the clavicle is raised.	If you are unable to draw the extremity of the clavicle outwards on account of its being depressed, the patient will have to lie on his back and there must be put under his shoulder a medium-sized bolster. The assistant is to press the shoulder down until the depressed collar bone is elevated, and then you can set the fracture and even it out with your fingers.	0.8363047
And then straighten the fracture with your fingers, and if you find it shattered, then you must make an incision over it; and pull out the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join because of any protrusion, then cut it with one of the incisors that you have; but make sure you place this instrument under the clavicle, to protect the periosteum.	If you feel a splinter separated from the clavicle and movable, you must cut down upon the splinter and gently remove it. If the splinter sticks to the bone, you must contrive to cut it with one of the chisels you have prepared for that, having first put beneath the clavicle the instrument to protect the membrane; an instrument made of wood or iron, of which this is the figure.	0.75067663
And if hot abscesses develop there, soak a cloth in rose oil and vinegar and wine, and apply it.	If an abscess occur, soak the dressing with oil of roses and vinegar or wine and apply.	0.8123867

chapter-3-subchapter-6.txt
of the fracture of the shoulder	On the repair of a fracture of the scapula.	0.4699762
And if a piece of bone protrudes, and points under the skin, then cut over it and remove it, and do what we have described in the fracture of the clavicle to soothe a hot abscess.	If a splinter of bone protrudes and starts to prick under the skin, cut down upon it and remove it, and do as I said under fracture of the collar-bone, to allay the effusion, if anything of that kind happen.	0.7716875

chapter-3-subchapter-7.txt
of the fracture of the chest	On the repair of a fracture of the breast.	0.48224762
The chest is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks further down.	The breast is sometimes fractured in the middle but this happens rarely; more often it is the extremities of it that are broken and comminuted.	0.89200664
And when it is broken in the middle, it sinks downwards, and the patient feels great pain, and shortness of breath, and coughs, and perhaps vomits blood, and the hollow appears in the broken bone, and one can feel it clearly.	The symptoms that occur when it is broken in the middle are that he bows downwards and suffers violent pain, difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and sometimes he vomits blood; and there is an obvious and palpable concavity in the bone.	0.7989272

chapter-3-subchapter-8.txt
of the fracture of the ribs	On the repair of ribs when they are fractured.	0.41803783
Know that the fracture of the ribs only occurs in thick places near the back, and at the end inside, and they only bend because they are slimy; and one can feel it well on examination with the fingers.	You should know that fracture of the ribs occurs only at the thick parts bordering on the vertebrae, whereas the anterior extremities are only contused, because they are cartilaginous; this is easily diagnosed on examination with the fingers.	0.8002269
And the restoration is such that you set the fracture evenly, as is necessary. And then apply the plaster, and secure it with a splint, if you need to.	They should be set by levelling out the fracture with the fingers in any manner you can so that the form is as it should be; then apply the plaster and bind the broken bone with a splint, if necessary.	0.760119
And if the fracture of the ribs is pointing inwards, the patient feels very great pain, and a pricking, as if from pleurisy, because the bone pricks the lining; and breathes with difficulty, and coughs and vomits a large amount of blood, and it is a serious condition, and the ancients have applied great ingenuity to it.	If it be a depressed fracture of the ribs, then the patient will have a vehement pain and a piercing sensation like that of pleurisy, since the bone is piercing the pleura; in addition he will have difficulty in breathing and will cough, and vomit much blood; the treatment of this is difficult. In this the Ancients practised many devices.	0.88827646
And there are some who say that it is necessary to administer foods which swell the belly, to push the fracture outwards.	Some said that the patient should have food of such a kind as to generate wind and inflation to blow out and stretch the belly and so push out the fracture.	0.6553143
We do not do this, lest hot abscesses develop there, if they have not already. And if they are there, then treat them.	We, however, reject this, since it will excite an effusion if one has not already arisen; and if one has arisen it will increase and confirm it.	0.584965
And some of them say that one should place cupping glasses on the area, to draw strongly, and this seems reasonable; however, there is concern that the cupping glass may attract excess fluids to the area due to its weakened state.	Some of them said a cupping-vessel should be applied to the place and strong suction be made; this seems more reasonable except that there is a risk of the vessel's drawing superfluities to the place on account of his weak state.	0.8389716
And some of them say that one should cover the area with wool soaked in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to make the place even all around, then it should be treated with the treatment for pleurisy, with food and medicine.	Some of them said that the place should be covered with wool soaked in warm oil and that a pad should be placed in the intercostal space to fill it up so as to make the bandaging level when you wind it round. Then treat the patient with diet and medicines as for pleurisy.	0.81046593
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the bone that pierces the tissue, and there is concern for the patient, it is necessary to cut over the location of the broken rib, and it is necessary to place an instrument underneath to protect the peritoneum; and then one must cut the bone, and pull it gently, and then sew the two edges of the wound, if it is large, and treat it with plasters, until it is healed.	If the patient is in such a bad way that he cannot bear it, the bone painfully piercing the pleura, and we are afraid for him, then we shall have to cut down upon the place and lay bare the broken rib; then we place under it the instrument to protect the membrane, which has been described, and gently cut out the bone and remove it. Then the edges of the wound should be joined, with a suture if large, and dressed with ointments until healed.	0.8187729
And if hot abscesses develop, then apply cloths soaked in rose oil, and place them on the area; and meanwhile treat the area as appropriate for an abscess, and let him lie often on the side where he should, until he is healed.	If meanwhile there arise an abscess, quickly soak pads in oil of roses and apply them to the place and treat the patient with internal remedies against abscess too. Let him lie upon the side which is easier for him to sleep on, until it heals.	0.7930093

chapter-3-subchapter-9.txt
of the fracture of the neck Sometimes a fracture occurs in the bones of the neck, and rarely does it bend; and also in the spine of the back. And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if he will recover or not, take note if you see his hands softened and swollen and dead, and he cannot move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it.	On setting the vertebrae of the back and neck. When a fracture occurs in the bones of the neck, which is rare, as mostly they suffer contusion, as do the spinal vertebrae—when it happens to anyone and you want to know whether it will heal or not, then look and if you see both his hands relaxed and numb and dead and he has no power to move or stretch or close them, and when you pinch them or prick them with a needle he does not notice it or feel any pain in them, you may know, as a general rule, that it will not mend, for he is doomed.	0.842242
Know that he is mortally [injured] in several ways, and if he moves them and feels well when they are squeezed and pricked, know that the joint of the bone is safe, and that the patient will be cured, if treatment is applied.	But if he moves them both and feels in them the pinching and pricking, you may know that the spinal medulla is still intact and that under treatment the patient will recover. If anything of this nature happens to the vertebrae of the back and you wish to know if he will recover or not, then pay attention to his feet.	0.61526114
And if a similar thing happens to the spine of the back, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, take note if the feet are softened, and if the same things happen to them as to the hands, and on the back there is flatulence and involuntary defecation; and when he is turned on his stomach, there is involuntary defecation. And when he is turned on his back and he wants to sit up, he cannot.	If anything of this nature happens to the vertebrae of the back and you wish to know if he will recover or not, then pay attention to his feet. If you see them relaxed and in the situation we described in the case of the hands, and when he lies on his back he passes flatus and faeces involuntarily, and lying prone he passes water involuntarily and lying on his back he cannot pass water if he wishes, then you may know his case is hopeless, so do not concern yourself with his treatment.	0.8061117
And if these symptoms do not occur, the matter is less serious.	But if nothing of this kind occur then the case is easier.	0.6066662
And the treatment is that you see if there is a hot abscess, then put on the spine rose oil or oil of egg yolks, until it is soothed; then apply one of the strengthening and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and tell the patient to rest; and do not sleep on the side where he feels the pain, until he is healed. And if any bone is separated, it is necessary to cut to the heart of it; and remove the bone, then bring together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, then treat it with an ointment that generates flesh, until it is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "tail head", put in the thumb of your left hand, and align it with your other hand as best you can, then apply the plaster and splint on top, if you need it; then tighten it, and if there is a separated bone, cut into it, and remove it, and treat the wound until it is healed.	The way to treat this latter kind of case is to try to reduce the swelling by applying over the injured vertebra oil of roses, alone, or with roasted yolks of egg; apply three times a day until the swelling has gone down. Then apply to the place one of the strengthening and absorbent plasters and bind it on; bid him keep quiet and still and sleep only in the attitude in which he has no pain, until he is well. If the injury is accompanied by fragmentation or a separation of part of the bone, you must cut down on it and remove the bone; then bring together the edges of the opening, by suture if it be wide; then treat with granulating ointments until it heals. If the last bone of the coccyx, which is the sacrum of the tail, breaks, introduce the thumb of your left hand into his anus and reset the bone with the other hand in whatever way is possible and affords the best setting; then apply over it a plaster, and a splint if necessary, and bind it up.	0.8782515

chapter-3-subchapter-10.txt
of the fracture of the hip bone	On setting a fractured hip.	0.47953218
It rarely happens that the hip bone is broken, and if it does happen, it is only a small break at the head; and it runs lengthwise, and slopes downwards, and the patient feels pain in the area, and a pricking sensation, and swelling where it is broken.	It is rare indeed that hip-bones are fractured, and if they are fractured the fracture consists of a comminution of the extremities of them and a longitudinal splitting and a bending inward; and the patient feels a pain and a piercing at the site, and the leg on the fractured side is benumbed.	0.83441794
And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it, until you are on the fracture; and know what the fracture is like and its shape; and if the fracture is only at the head, align this fracture so that it returns to its natural shape.	To set it, you pass your hand over it and ascertain what the shape of the fracture is. If it is a fracture of the extremity only, set that fracture in whatever manner is convenient for you until it answers to its proper shape.	0.72666764
And if the fracture is lengthwise, where it slopes inward, have the patient lie on their stomach, so that the reduction of this fracture is accessible to you. And when you have aligned it, apply the plaster, then put on a splint of wood or leather, and tighten the fracture so that it does not move; and fill the area under the ribs, so that the bandaging is even.	But if it be a longitudinal fracture or it has bent inwards, have the patient lie on his stomach so as to make it convenient for setting the fracture; and when you have set it apply over it a plaster and over that a splint of wood or leather, and bandage it in such wise that you have no fear that the fracture may extend or the splint slip.	0.8373924
And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side, or on their back.	Level out the cavity of the lumbar region with some filling so that it may take the bandage evenly, and bid the patient sleep on his back or on his sound side.	0.54819787
And if hot abscesses develop there, do not touch them until the hot abscesses have subsided, and apply what we have said before; and then return to the reduction, and tighten it as needed, if there is no bad outcome; and this is the method.	If there occur an effusion, then refrain from bandaging or setting it until the effusion subsides; and apply to it something to allay it as before said; then return to setting it and bandaging it as it should be.	0.72402906

chapter-3-subchapter-11.txt
of the fracture of the shoulder blade/collarbone	On setting a fracture of the humerus. The humerus is what lies between the elbow and the head of the scapula.	0.44751826
The shoulder blade/collarbone is that which is between the neck and the head of the shoulder, and if it is fractured, it should be restored according to one of two methods: one of which is that you take a moderately thick piece of wood, in this shape:	The humerus is what lies between the elbow and the head of the scapula. If it is fractured it may be set in one of two ways. One is to take a smooth bow-shaped piece of wood of medium thickness, like this.	0.7374666
And tie two cords to the two ends, and hang them up high, and have the patient sit on a seat; then place their broken arm over the wood, until it reaches the armpit, and in the middle have a curved piece of wood, then hang some heavy object or have an assistant pull it downwards; then the physician sets the fracture with his hands together, until the fracture returns to how it should be.	You tie two bands at the two ends and then it is hung from above. The patient is to sit on a seat; then his broken arm is folded upon the piece of wood in such a way that his axilla fits into the middle of the curve of the piece of wood. Then hang a heavy weight from the arm, or have an assistant pull it downwards; then the doctor should straighten out the fracture with both hands together until it is properly reduced.	0.92066765
And the other method is that the patient is put on their back, and their hand is tied to their neck, then two assistants are instructed, one to hold above the fracture with their hands, and the other to hold below with a cord, and each pulls on their side.	The other way is to make the patient lie back and to suspend his hand from his neck by a band, then you instruct two assistants. One is to grasp with both hands the arm above the fracture, and the other the arm below the fracture; and each should make extension toward himself.	0.90125966
And if you wish the pulling to be stronger, tighten a cord below the fracture, and above the fracture, and each assistant pulls on their side.	And if you wish to extend more strongly, tie a band below the fracture and another above, and let each assistant pull toward himself.	0.89055777
And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, you must place a cord moderately tight under the armpit, and another towards the neck, below the fracture; and also if the fracture is towards the neck, a cord must be placed there lightly, without straining, until the fracture is even on top of the area, and on the neck; then set the fracture evenly, as is necessary, and bind it, if hot swelling/inflammation does not arise.	If the fracture is near the extremity of the shoulder you will have to put one band beneath the axilla and the other below the fracture near the elbow. Similarly, if the fracture be near the elbow you will have to put a band over the place and over the elbow itself. Then gently and without violence straighten out the fracture until it is restored to its proper shape and fits together well, and then tighten it if no abscess occur.	0.8624599
And if hot swelling/inflammation arises, do not bind it for up to seven days, and apply wool moistened in vinegar and rose oil, until the hot swelling/inflammation subsides; then bind it, and the way to bind it is to put the plaster on the fracture, then bring the arm against the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the chest; and place the cloth, and bind it over the shoulder, and over the arm, so that the arm is in the shape of a star, unless something prevents it, or if the bone is not displaced.	But if an abscess occur, leave the bandaging until the seventh day and apply raw wool soaked in vinegar and oil of roses until the abscess subsides; then bind it up. The method of binding it is to apply a plaster to the fracture; then wind round the plaster a bandage of new material; then bind the forearm to the humerus, placing his hand open on his shoulder. Then apply pads and bandages to the arm and forearm so that the forearm serves instead of splints, if there is no contra-indication and you see no pathological change in the broken bone.	0.8257115
And if you suspect that the bone might move, use splints, and place on the fracture a splint wider and stronger than the others, and have a finger's width of space between each splint, and each splint should be so large that it extends past the fracture by three fingers' widths on each side; then bind over the splints, as I said at the beginning of the chapter on fractures, tighter and less often changing the bandages.	But should you fear any such change then use splints. The way to use these is to place over the fracture itself a splint that is broader and stronger than the rest; and leave a space of a finger's breadth between splints; the splint should be of a length to suit the fracture with the addition of three fingers' breadth all round. Then bandage over the splints in the manner mentioned at the beginning of the chapter. That is, you should bandage more tightly over the fracture itself and more lightly as you get away from the fracture.	0.86790526
And if you observe the placement of the splints and the bandaging, as we have said, at the time you set the broken limb, and you are concerned about hot swelling/inflammation, leave it unbound until the seventh day, as we have said; then check the bandaging every three days, that itching or swelling does not occur there, or that nourishment cannot reach the limb because it is too tight. Then adjust it, as we have said.	If you decide to put on splints and bandage, as we have said, at the time you set the limb, do so. But if you fear an abscess, leave the splinting and bandaging until the seventh day as we have said. Then examine the bandaging every third day lest there be itching or swelling at the place; or nourishment be prevented from reaching the limb on account of excessively tight bandaging; treat all these in the proper manner according to our prescriptions.	0.9008565
And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be completely healed in forty days; and then one should unbind it and administer baths and medicinal ointments to restore the area.	Now it is the nature of the humerus and of the leg to knit in forty days; then they should be loosened and the patient should go to the bath and be treated with suitable ointments.	0.79054797
And if the injury is severe and swollen, wait to unbind it for fifty days or two months.	If the fracture be ugly and contused, do not unfasten it for fifty days or even two months.	0.8421575

chapter-3-subchapter-12.txt
Of the fracture of the arm	On setting a fracture of the forearm.	0.48882365
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two "foscile," one of which is small, and is the one that follows the thumb; and the other is large, and is the one that is below, towards the little finger; sometimes the large foscile breaks alone, or the small one, and sometimes both together.	The forearm consists of two bones and is sometimes called 'the two firesticks'. One of these bones is small and is in line with the thumb, the other is large; this is the one placed lower, under the smaller one. The larger alone may be broken, or the smaller alone, or both broken together.	0.8905698
When the small foscile is broken, the restoration and healing are easy; and when the large one is broken, the healing is difficult, and more serious than when they are both broken together.	When the small upper bone (radius) is broken it is easy to set and its mending is rapid. When the lower bone (ulna) breaks it is bad and its mending is difficult. Worst of all is when both bones break together.	0.7321259
If it is the small foscile that is broken alone, then it should be extended slightly and set evenly.	If the broken bone is the radius, the doctor when setting it must use light traction, gently, until he has it straight.	0.50044584
And if it is the large foscile, it must be tightened more firmly; and extend it on a cushion, and hold the thumb of the hand higher than the others, and the little finger lower than the other fingers, and let the patient be crossed over himself, with a cushion in front of him higher up, so that the patient does not suffer any strain; then let the attendant extend his arm below the hand, or with a bandage, and another attendant above.	During setting and extension the hand must be disposed on a cushion, spread out with the thumb uppermost, higher than all the fingers, and the little finger downmost, while the patient sits cross-legged upon the floor. The cushion should be on a level with him so that he does not suffer discomfort. Then let an attendant extend the arm from below, either by hand or by means of a band, while another attendant extends it from above similarly.	0.84246445
And then the physician sets it evenly, according to its best form.	Then the doctor may straighten the bone so as to restore it to the best possible shape.	0.6765565
And if there are pieces in the break, put each one in its place, and if there is any separated piece that pricks the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut open and remove it, as we have said before.	If there be any splinters in the fracture he must do his utmost to restore each splinter to its place. If a detached splinter appears there and is piercing the skin and you have no hope of restoring it, cut down upon it and remove it in the manner we have mentioned earlier.	0.69703615
And if there is a wound with the break, I have spoken of it in the specific chapter; so take care of it.	If the fracture is accompanied by a wound, we have devoted a separate section to this, so take the treatment of it from there.	0.6309629
And if at the beginning of the restoration hot abscesses arise, then glue on a cloth of cerate made of rose oil and white wax, that is neither too hard nor too soft; and tie a thin cloth over it, until the hot abscess is calmed.	If, when you begin to set the bone, an effusion occurs, smear a cloth with the wax made from oil of roses and white wax, of medium thickness, and bind the dressing on gently. When the effusion subsides, remove the wax and apply the plaster prepared from mill-dust and egg-white, then apply splints; the splint that goes on the actual fracture should be a little wider and stronger than the rest.	0.72101784
And examine the limb and the bandage after a few days. And if some bad condition comes to the limb, such as itching, then you should wash the limb with warm water, until the itching is soothed; and let the limb rest, not tightly bound.	Some days later, examine the limb and the bandaging and if anything has happened that should be put right, such as pruritus in the limb, the limb should be bathed in warm water until the pruritus has subsided. Let the limb be unbandaged for one night so that he may rest, then put the bandage on again.	0.8222997
And then begin the binding again, and if the bandage is loose and the bones separated, or something similar, then adjust it.	Let the limb be unbandaged for one night so that he may rest, then put the bandage on again. If the bandaging has become loose and the bone has shifted or anything of that sort, correct it all diligently.	0.5904504
And pay attention if nourishment cannot reach the limb, because it is too tight, then you should loosen it a bit, and leave it thus for a few days, until nourishment flows there, and then tighten it.	Look also to see if nourishment is being prevented from reaching the part on account of over-bandaging, in which case you will have to loosen it a little and leave it for a few days until nourishment flows to it; then bind it up.	0.78515303
And if none of these things that we have mentioned happens to the patient, then do not unbind it until twenty days.	But if none of those things that we have mentioned happens to the patient, it should not be loosened until after about twenty days.	0.8999412
or thereabouts, then he hangs his hands around his neck, and keeps his neck straight, and guards against movement and throwing, and sleeps on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-five, and perhaps in twenty days, according to the compositions and complexions of the humors.	Then the patient's hand is to be suspended from his neck, the arm being level, and he should guard carefully against agitated movements, and should sleep on his back. You should know that this fracture of the arm mends in thirty or thirty-two days, and sometimes in twenty-eight, depending on the individual's constitution and the condition of his strength.	0.73905945

chapter-3-subchapter-13.txt
of the fracture of the hand	On the repair of fractures of the palm and fingers.	0.41335034
Know that on the back of the hand and at the knuckles of the fingers, fractures rarely occur, and there is usually only swelling.	Fractures of the metacarpus and of the small bones of the fingers very rarely occur; the only frequent occurrence is contusion.	0.7020008
And when the palm of the hand is fractured or swollen, the patient should sit cross-legged, and sit straight and evenly before him; then place his hand on the stretched towel, and the practitioner extends the broken bones, and sets them evenly together, so that they are well joined; and apply the plaster and the padding, if no abscess develops, then put a splint according to the size of the area; and it should be wrapped in a linen cloth.	When a fracture or crushing of the palm of the hand occurs the patient should sit cross-legged with a chair of the right height in front of him, on which he should put his outstretched hand. Then an assistant is to extend the broken bones while the doctor straightens them so as to achieve a proper union. Then a plaster and a dressing should be applied, if an effusion do not occur; then a splint over that, measured to the site and wrapped in a soft cloth.	0.8799385
And if the fracture is inside, around the belly of the palm, make a ball of cloths, and instruct the patient to squeeze it against his fractured palm; and then tighten it with a long cloth, and let the splint be of soft leather, as large as the palm of the hand, and tighten it as needed.	If the fracture be lower down, near the inner part of the palm of the hand, make a ball of cloth, bid the patient grip on it with the fractured palm of his hand, and then bind it up with a long bandage. The splint should be of leather that is somewhat soft, so as to fit into all the folds of the palm; and bandage it on suitably.	0.8564006
And if the fracture is outside, you must put a splint on top, and another underneath in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie it all around the hand, and tighten the bond between the fingers.	But if the fracture be on the outside you will have to put one splint above and another beneath the palm of the hand, to keep the hand opened and straight; then put on the bandage, carrying it round the hand and in and out between the fingers.	0.8819181

chapter-3-subchapter-14.txt
The thigh bone is often broken, and it is easily seen when it turns forward and back; and the treatment is to tie one bandage above the fracture, and another below. And the patient lies on his face, then each assistant extends his bandage on his side equally; and this is when the break is in the middle of the bone.	The femur is often broken, and this is readily discernible, for it will rotate forwards or backwards. It is set by binding a bandage above the fracture and another below, while the patient lies flat on his face. Then each assistant should make an even extension in his own direction, by the bandage. This is when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.	0.90660614
And if the break is close to the hip joint, then one of the bandages should be towards the groin, and the other bandage below the fracture.	But if the fracture is close to the root of the thigh, you should tie on a soft bandage of wool or something similar, at the root of the thigh toward the groin, so that extension may be applied above, and another bandage below the fracture.	0.70375407
And similarly if it is close to the knee, then the bandage should be near the knee, and the extension downwards; then the physician sets the bone straight with his two hands, until it is in its natural form, and then applies the plaster, and bandages it, unless a hot abscess develops there.	Likewise if the fracture is near the knee the bandage should be near the knee, so that extension may be made downwards. Then the doctor should straighten it out with both hands until he has reduced it to the pattern of the natural form and the bone unites neatly.	0.8470811
And if there is a hot abscess, let it subside then return to your work and your treatment; the bandaging is done in this manner.	Then you will have to apply the plaster and bandage if there is no effusion in the limb, but if there is an effusion leave it for a few days until the swelling has gone down, then resume your treatment.	0.549277
And if it does occur, untie it, and address what develops, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone sticking out, they should be removed, if possible; and if not, then the area must be incised, and they must be pulled out; and treat it as we have described, until it is healed.	Then let the bandaging remain on as long as no pruritus or abscess or effusion or anything of that sort happens to the limb; but if any of these occur loosen it quickly and put right whatever has taken place, in the manner we have often mentioned. If there be a penetrating fragment of the bone, you must reposition it if you can; but if not then cut down upon it and remove it and treat the wound in the sort of way mentioned previously, until it heals.	0.76521206
And sometimes the thigh is broken in such a way that splints are applied, as in the shoulder and the arm; however, with the restoration done in this manner, the patient does not become lame.	This fracture of the thigh is sometimes bandaged without bringing the leg alongside with splints, in the way we spoke of for the humerus and the forearm. But setting after the former manner does not cause the patient any lameness; whereas if the femur is set alone without binding the leg to it the patient will inevitably be lame for always.	0.7251246
And know that the thigh is restored in fifty days, or a little less or a little more, depending on the differences in complexions.	You must know that the femur knits in fifty days or a little more or less, according to the different constitutions and other circumstances.	0.73527336

chapter-3-subchapter-15.txt
Know that in the kneecap, fractures rarely occur, but it often bends.	You should know that the patella is rarely fractured, but crushing often occurs.	0.8141883
And if it breaks, it is only a fissure, or a hole, and it occurs with a wound, as well as without a wound, and this one feels readily.	If a fracture does happen to it, it will be either a splitting or a shattering which may be simple or compound; and all these can be palpated.	0.63722426
And the restoration is that you put together what is round with your fingers, so that it is assembled as best as you can; then apply the plaster, and put a round splint on it, if you need one, and tighten it as needed, then consider all the conditions that we have mentioned in other fractures, such as hot abscesses and other similar things; then address each issue with what is appropriate for it, until it is healed.	Now the way to set is for the separated parts of it to be put right with the fingers, so that they unite and join as far as straightening and gentleness and skill can serve. Then apply the plaster and put upon that a circular splint, if need be, and over that a suitable bandage. Then keep an eye on it for all the conditions described for the other fractures, such as an effusion and the like, meeting whatever arises with what is good for it, until it is healed.	0.8321346

chapter-3-subchapter-16.txt
of the fracture of the leg	On setting a fracture of the leg.	0.55180144
Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is rightly called "tibia", and the other is called "fibula"; and fractures occur just as they do in the arm, and therefore the restoration is the same as that of the arm, and the procedure is all there.  And if both bones are broken together, the leg turns in all directions.	One of them is thick and is called 'leg bone' (tibia). The other is slender and is called 'fire-stick' (fibula). Both of these are liable to the same kinds of fracture as occur in the two bones of the forearm, therefore the repair of them will be like that of the arm, and the operation is one and the same. If both bones are broken together, the leg will turn in all directions.	0.83430505
And if the slender bone is broken, it turns forward.	If the fibula is broken there will be a forward deformity of the leg.	0.60943305
And if the large bone is broken, great pain is felt, and it is easily seen; and it turns underneath/inward.	If the tibia be broken, and that low down, it will be obvious to you. Employ levelling and extension and binding on of splints similar to that (sc.	0.5238798
Then apply traction, and set it evenly, and tie the splints evenly; but nevertheless, if the fracture is severe, and there are multiple pieces, the traction must be less and lighter; and adjust according to your skill.	But it will be necessary, if the fracture of the leg be a serious one with much fragmentation, for the extension to be gentler and lighter; and you must employ the utmost gentleness in setting it.	0.67213845

chapter-3-subchapter-17.txt
Of the fracture of the bones of the foot.	On fracture of bones of the foot and of the toes.	0.7751585
At the ankle, there is no fracture, but in the bones of the foot there is sometimes a fracture, and rarely in the toes, and there is only shattering in most cases.	The heel is never fractured; but the bones of the foot sometimes are. The toes too are rarely fractured; but mostly they get crushed.	0.82285273
And if a fracture occurs in the bones of the foot, and you see these bones overlapping each other, have the patient place his foot on the ground, as if he wanted to walk, and then immediately place your foot on his, where the bones are raised, then press until they return to their place; then apply the plaster and padding on top, and place a small board with two flat ends under the arch of the foot, then bind it to the foot tightly, after you have wrapped cloths around it, and other things you need.	If a fracture occurs to the bones of the foot, and you see the bones riding over one another, let the patient plant his foot flat on the ground as if walking. Then stand and put the sole of your foot on the prominent bones and with your foot put pressure upon them and level them to their proper place. Then apply a bandage and some tow on top, and put under the inner part of the sole of the foot a small board with two flat heads. After you have wrapped them in material and so on, bind them tightly to the sole of the foot.	0.9152643
And when three or four days have passed, untie the bandage, for you will find the bones even, whether broken or dislocated.	When three days or four have passed, loosen the binding and you will find the bones in position; whether they have been fractured or dislocated, the operation is (the same,) as you see.	0.8417113
And if any of the toes are broken, restore them as we have described for the fingers; then place a splint on the broken toe, along the length of the toe, and a little wider, then place the board that I mentioned under the foot, and bind it tightly; and if there are two or three, or more, broken, place a splint on each toe according to its size, wrapped in a linen cloth, and tighten the board under the foot; and the end of the board should extend past the arch of the foot, so that it holds it well.	If one of the toes be broken, reposition and straighten it in the way that I described for the fingers; then apply to the broken toe a splint of a length corresponding to the toe and a little wider than it. Then under the sole of the foot put the board that I have just described, and bandage it on firmly. If the broken bones number two, three, or more, then apply over each toe a single splint measured to it, wrapped in soft material, and bind the board on the sole and let the flat portion of each of the two heads extend beyond the end of the sole of the foot, so that it may be held firmly.	0.94215256
And you must not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, as we have explained; and treat each injury as appropriate.	And you must not forget to pay attention to all those contingencies that we have mentioned to you in other fractures; meet each contingency with the means proper to it.	0.8342255

chapter-3-subchapter-18.txt
Regarding the fracture of the wrist bone.	On fracture of the female pudenda and of the pubic bone and of the male organ.	0.45241386
And when the wrist bone of a man or woman is broken, restore it as we have described for the hip bone; and these fractures are not hidden from those who study and practice them, and understand my book.	Now when a man or woman has the pubic bone broken you can use for the setting and repair of it the method we gave for a fracture of the hip. The correct practice in these uncommon fractures, which very rarely happen, will be obvious, especially to one who has some experience and understands well this book of mine.	0.6766802
For the fracture itself indicates in many ways the right path to restoration: understand this then.	For the fracture itself will in most cases indicate the correct way to repair it and bind it up, so use your intelligence.	0.5692106
For the penis, when it is broken, take a goose feather and place the penis inside it; then wrap cloths around it, and leave it for three days or thereabouts, and it will be quickly healed.	When a man's organ is fractured, take a goose's neck and introduce the penis into it; then let it be wrapped and bandaged and left for about three days until it be healed.	0.8098222

chapter-3-subchapter-19.txt
Of a fracture with a wound.	On the repair of fractures accompanied by wounding.	0.61163825
It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that it be healed immediately, as the cures that we have described demonstrate.	When a man has a compound fracture, especially when it is a large bone such as the femur or humerus or the like, you should at once venesect him if the conditions are suitable for venesection as set out above.	0.77650154
And if the wound heals, staunch it with vitriol if you have nothing else, then begin to restore the fracture at that same hour, or that day, if no hot abscess develops.	If there is bleeding from the wound you must hasten to stanch it by sprinkling it with powdered vitriol if you have nothing else at hand. Then begin on the reduction of the fracture the very same day; do not put it off unless an abscess occur.	0.7720678
And if a hot abscess develops, leave the restoration until the ninth day, until the abscess has subsided, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would cause a bad outcome.	But if an abscess does occur, leave the reduction until the ninth day so that the abscess may subside, and in no circumstances touch it on the third or fourth day, for you will bring evil consequences on him.	0.8784777
And if the broken bone is apparent on the exposed flesh, you must set it gently with your hands, with slight extension.	If the fractured bone be overriding the skin you must try to reduce it and to straighten it out by hand, gently and with moderate extension.	0.7290239
And if the extensions are not prepared for you to apply with your hands, then set it with this instrument which is made of iron, which is seven or eight fingers long, and the width is according to the size of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary for the physician to have three or four, depending on what is needed in each fracture treatment; and let it be round and a little thick, so that it does not bend under the compression on the limb during your work, and let it be pointed in front, and thick from the middle forward, like this:	If reduction and straightening by hand is unsuccessful, then reduce it with this instrument; it is made of iron, seven or eight fingers' breadths long, and wide in proportion to the size of the wound; that is why the doctor should have three or four of them in the sizes he may need for treating every kind of fracture. It should be round and somewhat thick so as not to bend when pressure is put upon it at the time of operating. It should be sharp-ended with a bend at the end; the upper part should be of some thickness, but from the middle to the lower part it is a good bit thinner. This is its form.	0.8758592
And it is called a "lever," for which it is necessary that the curved head be placed on the head of the exposed bone; and push it at once, until it returns, and they are even with one another.	It is called in Greek bayram, meaning a small lever. You must place the sharp incurved end of it over the end of the protruding bone, and push it firmly with it. When the bone is repositioned and straightened in some measure, try to straighten the ends of the fracture, one to another.	0.63021874
And if the fracture is fine, and the instrument cannot grip the bone well, then you must cut the head of the bone, so that the instrument can have a hold.	If the fractured end be very thin and the instrument does not grip it firmly you will have to cut off that end so as to give purchase for the instrument.	0.6968442
And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, then cut it with a suitable instrument for this, either an incisor or a saw, as you are able; then smooth what remains of the bone's roughness and small splinters.	If you cannot reduce the bone at all by the means we have described, cut it off with any of the osteotomes we have mentioned that is suitable, or saw it off with one of the saws as best you may. Then strip away any remaining roughness of the bone and fine pieces of shell.	0.7775343
And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place.	If, when you have reduced the bone, the patient feels severe and troublesome pain, you may know that the bone has not returned to its natural site.	0.76098156
And if the wound is bad or large, and you fear that a bad outcome may occur, as we have said, and you find pain in the area, then you should not apply splints; but wrap around, instead of splints, hard cloths, and tie them.	If the wound be severe or of great size and you fear for it some one of the grave accompaniments such as we have described, and the patient feels a disturbing pain at the place, then you should not put on splints; but instead of splints make wrappings of a stiff material and bind them on.	0.83651996
And when you see after a day or two swelling appear at the wound, then remove what you have put on it completely with wine, and apply a wound-healing ointment, such as tetrapharmacum ointment and similar ones.	If, after one or two days have passed, you see that the wound is beginning to suppurate, remove the dressing with wine that you had put on it, and then apply the pads and ointments with which it is our custom to heal wounds, such as Tetrapharmacon ointment and the like.	0.83761895
And you must unbind the limb twice a day, morning and evening, until it is healed and healthy.	Every evening and morning you will have to loosen the bandaging and carefully examine the wound until it knits and is healed.	0.6633493
And the limb must be positioned in such a way that the swelling drains downwards easily.	You must also place the limb in such a position as to let the pus flow down easily.	0.78534174
And if many days pass, and it cannot heal but continues to swell, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which you must explore the wound with a probe, and remove all these separated pieces that cause this pain.	If, after many days, the wound is unhealed and it goes on suppurating, you may know that there are some little fragments of bone there; so you will have to examine the wound with a probe; and those fragments that are loose take and extract; and those that are not loose but nevertheless pierce the limb and cause pain, attempt to cut them out and extract them by whatever means you can.	0.80330473
And if a fistula arises there, or another kind of infection, then you must treat it, according to what it says in its chapter before.	If a defluxion or ulceration or other kind of corruption or putrefaction happen to the wound, you must meet all these occurrences with the proper remedy described before in its place.	0.63547885
And when the bone is broken, and exposed on the limb, such as the bone of the thigh or the shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not pull it, because many times death comes from it, but leave it until it rots; perhaps it will fall off by itself after 20 days or 30, then treat the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.	One thing that is necessary is that you should comply with my words and keep them in mind: when a large bone is broken and protrudes from the limb, such as the femur, the humerus, and the other bones of the long limbs, do not meddle with pulling or extracting it, for this often causes death; but leave it to suppurate. It may come away of itself in twenty or thirty days. Then dress the wound if you find occasion; if not, let be.	0.81378955

chapter-3-subchapter-20.txt
We often see, after the healing of a fracture, especially when it is near the joint, an ugly thing to see in the shape of the limb; and perhaps the limb cannot perform its natural functions.	This callus often occurs after the healing of a fracture, especially one near a joint, and thereby the shape of the limb is spoilt; and sometimes there is limitation of the natural function of the limb.	0.7708018

chapter-3-subchapter-21.txt
of the limb that is weak after healing	On the treatment of a fracture when, after repair, the limb remains unnaturally thin.	0.4784178
When the fracture of the bone is restored, and the limb remains weak and thin, it happens for many reasons: one of which is because it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bandages, and nourishment could not reach the limb; or because of excessive watering/irrigation; or because of too much movement, not at the right time; or because there is little blood in the body, so it is weak.	When a fractured bone has been repaired but the limb remains thin and weak, this may be due to many causes: the bandaging being too often loosened and not properly tightened; or excessive binding-up so that nourishment cannot flow to the limb; or excessive fomenting; or excessive and premature movement; or the thinness and weakness of the patient's blood.	0.8840046
And the treatment is that you make the patient eat, and make the body soft, so that the blood is multiplied in him; and administer a bath, and give him joy and happiness; then put pitch on the limb, so that the pitch attracts great nourishment to it, and water it often with warm water, so that the nourishment flows to the limb; and it returns to its natural shape.	The treatment of this consists in the nourishing and restoring of his body so there be plenty of blood; and the use of the bath; and cheering the patient and making him happy, and so on. Then apply pitch to the limb so that it may draw much nourishment to itself, or continue the massage to the limb with tepid water, so that nourishment flows in the limb and it returns to its normal shape.	0.8911668

chapter-3-subchapter-22.txt
And sometimes the knot is removed by rubbing continuously and for a long time with moist hands. And movement should be administered to the limb every hour.	Sometimes also the callosity is resolved by long-continued gentle friction with the hands; and constant movement in every direction should also be applied.	0.6777799
And if the crookedness is old and hardened, like stone, and it needs to be removed with an iron tool, it must be cut down to the bone, lightly with a fine scalpel; and put care and study into the treatment.	But if the deformity be long-standing and fixed and hardened and you are compelled to treat it operatively, you will have to cut down on it from above, and free the junction of the bone, and with fine chisels cut away the redundant callus or bone; be gentle in this, with diligence and care.	0.67628527

chapter-3-subchapter-23.txt
Dislocation is the displacement of a joint from its place, because of which it cannot move, and the limb is deformed, and the patient feels great pain and great injury.	A dislocation is a displacement of any of the joints from its place, whereby the movement of the joint is hindered, the member is deformed, and the patient is caused violent pain and hurt.	0.8505253
When a dislocation happens to someone, it must be reduced immediately without delay.	When anyone sustains a dislocation he should hasten to have it reduced, not delaying it at all.	0.789722
For if one delays, the place swells, and perhaps it is difficult to put it back in place; therefore, it should not be moved while it is swollen: it often causes spasms and other pains; however, when this happens, bleed the patient, then leave it until the swelling has subsided; then bathe the limb with warm water and oil, then reduce it gently, and treat each limb as the treatment comes to its place.	For if it is delayed the place will swell up and the reduction will be thereby made difficult. So it should not be delayed, nor moved or extended during the time it is swollen, for that often leads to spasm and excruciating pain. Instead, when this occurs, you must hasten to venesect the patient, and then let be until the swelling has subsided a little. Then massage the member with hot water and oil and let it be gently reduced.	0.8912549
And I have arranged the chapters on dislocations from the head to the feet.	I have disposed the chapters on dislocations in the same order as the foregoing ones on fractures, that is, from the upper part of the body to the lower part.	0.6037712

chapter-3-subchapter-24.txt
of the jaws It rarely happens that both jaws are dislocated, and the dislocation of both is according to two ways: either they are slightly out of place and somewhat softened; or they are completely dislocated, and hang down toward the chest, and saliva runs from the mouth which he cannot hold, nor can he close his mouth, and he mumbles his speech.	It is rare indeed for the jawbones to be dislocated. Their dislocation may be in one of two ways: either they may shift slightly from their place and be a little relaxed; or they may be completely and utterly dislocated so as to be relaxed down toward the breast so that the patient's saliva runs out and he cannot control it; nor is he able to close his mouth, and he stutters in speaking.	0.90749216
When the dislocation is minor, it returns by itself in many cases.	If it be only a slight displacement it will go back in most cases spontaneously without much trouble.	0.6703801
And if it is complete and total, you must reduce it quickly, and do not delay; and in such a way that the assistant holds the patient's head, and the surgeon puts the bag of one of his hands at the root of the jaw dislocation inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides; and the other two fingers are outside, to apply even pressure; and tell the patient to relax his jaws, and to move them in all directions.	But if the dislocation be complete and total it is necessary to set about the reduction of it at once without any delay. This is done thus: an assistant holds the patient's head and the doctor introduces into his mouth the thumb of one hand at the root of the jaw, if it be a dislocation on one side, or both thumbs if it be a bilateral dislocation, with the rest of the fingers outside to keep it straight.	0.8150343
And the surgeon sets it evenly, until it returns to its place.	Then let him bid the patient relax his jaws and allow them to move in any direction; while the doctor sets the dislocation, thrusting the jaw until it return to its proper place.	0.5479976
And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated together, then moisten them with warm water and oil, until you reduce them easily; and do not delay in reducing them, as we have said.	If the reduction be difficult, especially if it be a bilateral dislocation, administer a fomentation with hot water and oil, so that the reduction of both sides may be facilitated. And on no account delay the reduction, as we have said.	0.8270956
And when they are reduced evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well without difficulty, then apply cloths soaked in a cerate made of rose oil and wax, then bind it lightly with soft bandages; and let the patient sleep on his back, and his head be placed between two cushions, so that he does not move it to the right or left, and does not try to chew, but takes light food, until the pain is gone, and the jaws are strengthened; and then chews what he wants lightly, and does not strain to open his mouth to eat and drink, until the jaw is well strengthened and healed.	When the reduction and straightening have been done and the patient's mouth closes and is not relaxed, then apply to both sides dressings steeped in wax prepared from wax and oil of roses. Then bind it up gently, with a loose bandage. The patient should sleep lying on his back with his head held between two pillows so that he does not move it either to right or to left; nor should he burden himself with chewing but should be on a diet of broth of corn starch until the pain is gone and the jaw is firm; then he may eat whatever he wishes. Let him use it gently; let him not work his mouth heavily in eating or drinking or yawning until the jaw is firmly knit and healed.	0.91903543
And if the two jaws cannot be reset at the same time, and are not returned to their places, fevers and sudden chills usually occur, and perhaps diarrhea, and perhaps vomiting of pure bile.	If the reduction of both sides is hard when it is a simultaneous bilateral dislocation, and there is no return to the proper position, then thereby in many cases fevers and perpetual headaches occur; sometimes the patient's belly is loosened and he vomits actual bile.	0.7271733
And when you see this, then know that it is a dangerous situation; and often the one to whom it happens dies within nine days.	When you see this you will know that he is doomed; in most cases in which this happens death follows in ten days.	0.82857203

chapter-3-subchapter-25.txt
The clavicle cannot be dislocated from the rib cage internally at the joint and breastbone, and is sometimes dislocated externally, and it is easily felt.	On the reduction of a dislocation of the clavicle and of the head of the humerus. The clavicle is never dislocated inwards because of its continuity with the breast-bone; but sometimes it is dislocated outwards, and then it is detected by palpation.	0.71128947
And the restoration is as follows: the patient lies flat on his back, and extends his arms; and then press firmly on the area with your palm, and it will return; then apply the plaster and bandage, and tighten it; and the part that is near the elbow cannot be dislocated; if however, it is dislocated, reposition it, as we have said; then apply the plaster and bandage, and tighten it, and tell the patient to rest until he is healed; and the same is done for the head of the shoulder, when it is separated from its place.	The replacement is thus: the patient is to lie on his back and stretch out both arms; then with the palm of your hand press heavily upon the place and it will go back. Then apply to it the plaster and pads, and bandage it up. As to the extremity of the clavicle, which is close to the shoulder and joined to it, it is only rarely dislocated; but if ever it is dislocated you must reduce it and set it straight as we have mentioned, by any convenient means. Then apply the plaster, pads, and bandages, and bid the patient keep quiet and still until it is healed.	0.9147691

chapter-3-subchapter-26.txt
of the dislocation of the shoulder	On the reduction of a dislocation of the humerus.	0.49773416
Know that the shoulder can only be dislocated in three ways: one of which is that it dislocates downwards towards the armpit; and the second is towards the breast; and sometimes it dislocates upwards, but this happens rarely; and it does not dislocate backwards because of the shoulder blade, and it does not dislocate inwards because of the nerves; and it often dislocates downwards towards the armpit, especially in those who have little flesh, for in them it slips out easily; in those who have enough flesh, it dislocates with difficulty, and is reduced with difficulty.	You should know that there are three ways in which the humerus may be dislocated. One is a dislocation down into the axilla, another is a dislocation toward the breast; it may also be dislocated upward, which is rare. It is not dislocated backward, because of the scapula; nor is it dislocated forward, on account of the tendons. Mostly it is dislocated and displaced down into the axilla, and particularly in those of a spare build; in such it quickly comes out and quickly goes back.	0.8782434
And sometimes it happens to some men that they receive a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.	Sometimes a man suffers a blow or a fall, so that the upper arm swells up with an effusion, whence he forms the opinion that there is a dislocation.	0.76168454
You must therefore examine it, until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.	So you must examine it to make sure of it and then proceed to treat it.	0.865415
And the method is that the practitioner raises the patient's hand upwards, then puts their fists under the armpit, and forcefully lifts the joint upwards into place; and the practitioner raises the hand, and extends it upwards, then brings it downwards; it will return quickly.	To reduce it, his hand should be lifted up by an assistant, then you should put both your thumbs under his axilla and lift the joint up powerfully into its place, while the assistant lifts and stretches his hand upward; then he puts it down and the dislocation will at once go back.	0.74685353
And if it does not return as we have said within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in hot water; and the practitioner should apply softening and soothing poultices, such as a decoction of marshmallow, fenugreek, and melilot in water; then the patient should lie on their back, and a pad of wool, even, neither too soft nor too hard, should be placed under the armpit, then the practitioner puts their heel on the pad, and skillfully lifts the head of the shoulder, and pulls the patient's hand; and another practitioner holds the patient's head, so that it does not move downwards; that shoulder will return immediately, and if you wish, reduce it in this way: have a man present who is larger than the patient; and he should stand straight at the side, and put his shoulder under the patient's armpit, and lift the armpit upwards, so that the patient hangs in the air; and another practitioner pulls the patient's hand down towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, hang something heavy with him, and the dislocation will return immediately. And it can also be reduced in another way: a long stick is driven into the ground, the head of which should be as round as a pestle, and neither too thick nor too thin; then it is placed under the patient, but with soft cloths on top, and the patient lies along the length of the wood; then their hand is extended downwards strongly on the other side, and the joint will quickly return to its place; and if it does not want to return after all these things that we have said, then do this treatment: take a stick two cubits long and four fingers wide, which has a round end to be able to enter deep under the armpit, in this way:	Then the patient should lie on his back and you put under his axilla a ball of wool of moderately hard consistency. Then the doctor should put his heel on the ball and grasp the patient's hand and draw it downward, while pushing the ball with his foot, and it will straightway be reduced. Or, if you prefer, reduce it in this way: get a man taller than the patient to stand on one side and pass his shoulder under the patient's axilla and lift it up until the patient is suspended in mid-air, while another assistant pulls the patient's hand down towards his lower abdomen (if the patient is light it will be necessary to hang a weight from him); then the dislocation will straightway be reduced. It is also reduced by another method: that is, to fix in.	0.8167548
Then tie soft cloths over the end of the stick so that the stick does not injure the patient, then place it under the patient's armpit; and extend their arm along the stick, and tie the shoulder to the stick, and the arm at the end of the hand, then place the arm on a rung of a ladder lengthwise, and the hand should be extended downwards, and the body left hanging on the other side: the joint will go back in immediately.	Then you bind on the round head soft rags so that the wood will not hurt the patient. Then it is placed under the patient's axilla, and his whole hand and arm are stretched down over the spar, which is to be bound down to the upper arm, the forearm, and the tip of the hand. Then let the arm be placed cross-wise over the rung of a ladder and the hand stretched downward, and let the rest of the body hang down on the other side; then the joint will very quickly go back.	0.88646674
And when it is in, in whatever way, you must place a ball of wool evenly under the armpit, then apply the prepared plaster of mill dust, with incense and egg white, over the entire shoulder and around it, then tighten it suitably under the armpit, and wrap the bandage over the plaster, and bind the arm to their neck, and the arm should remain like this.	Once it has gone back properly, in whatever way is possible, there should be put under the axilla a ball of wool of moderate size; then apply the plaster prepared from mill-dust with olibanum and egg-white, all round the shoulder. Then firmly bandage the ball under the axilla and carry the bandaging round over the plaster.	0.80186987
And they should eat little, until the limb is strengthened, because it will heal faster; and then eat more after five or seven days, and move it; and if it is firm and not soft, then it is healed.	The patient's diet should be light until the limb gets strong, for that will hasten the cure. After five or seven days it can be unfastened and he can make trial of its movement; if it is firm and not slack then it is healed.	0.7994379
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come there, or for another reason, you must apply cauteries with three holes, as described above in the chapter on cauteries.	If the joint is frequently dislocated, on account of a humidity arising in it or some other cause, then use should be made of the cautery with three prongs spoken of earlier, in the book on cauterizations.	0.77076256
And if you do all this, and it loosens after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and they cannot lift their arm up, then know that the nerves at the top of the shoulder are cut or stretched or weakened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.	If you do all this and loosen the bandaging after a week and the joint is still not firm, and you repeatedly plaster it and bandage it, and it is still loose and comes down and dislocates and you are unable to raise it up, then you may know that the tendons at the head of the humerus are either cut through or stretched or loosened; in which case you may know that the joint will never stay firm in its place.	0.8271177
The dislocation which is towards the chest, and the breasts, or behind, is caused by a push, and stretching of the hands, and another bandage is applied there; and treat it until it is healed.	As to the dislocation toward the chest and breast, and posteriorly, the reduction of this is done by thrusting and extension with both hands until it goes back. And apply the usual bandaging and treatment until it is healed.	0.7518904
And if after healing, stiffness comes to the limb, and slowness in movement, the patient should use baths many times, until that stiffness is relieved, and it returns to its original nature.	If, after it has healed, a callosity arises in it, and it is slow in movement, the patient should take frequent hot baths until that callosity is softened and the member returns to its original condition.	0.801806

chapter-3-subchapter-27.txt
Of the dislocation of the elbow	On the treatment of a dislocation of the elbow.	0.6050689
Know that the elbow joint is dislocated with difficulty, and with difficulty returns; and it is dislocated in all directions, and especially forward and backward, and the dislocation is not hidden, for it is easily seen and felt; and dislocates according to each position. And when you compare the injured elbow with the healthy one, you can see it clearly. For the joint is locked, and he cannot bend his arm, nor touch his shoulder at all.	The elbow is with difficulty dislocated and with difficulty put back. Now dislocation may be in all directions, and particularly forward and backward. Whatever way it is dislocated it will not be concealed from you, because it is both visible and palpable, and whenever you compare the dislocated elbow with the sound one it is quite openly and plainly manifested; for the elbow joint is hollow and the patient cannot flex the forearm back or touch his shoulder with it.	0.89936143
And you must reduce it before a hot abscess develops, because if a hot abscess were to develop, it would be difficult to reduce; and perhaps it cannot be reduced completely, especially when it is backward; it is worse than other dislocations, and is more painful, and perhaps death results.	You must hasten and reduce the dislocation as rapidly as possible before an abscess occur. For if an abscess occur the reduction of it is difficult and maybe it will never be healed; especially when it is a posterior dislocation, for this is the worst and most painful of all the kinds of dislocation, and often it is fatal.	0.83201385
And the restoration, if it is such that it can be reduced, is that you extend his hand with your two hands; and his arm should be extended, and the physician's hands around the elbow, above and below, and push the joint together at the base of his thumb or at the base of his palm, until it returns to its place.	Now when it is one of those that can be reduced, the way to reduce it is for an assistant to perform a two-handed extension of the patient's hand, the patient's forearm being opened out, while the doctor's hands are above and below the elbow joint and he thrusts the joint with both thumbs together or with the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.	0.80682987
And if the dislocation is forward, it returns when he folds his hand over, and strikes the dislocated elbow with the base of the palm.	If it be an anterior dislocation, it may go back if the hand is bent sharply back until it strikes its own shoulder with the root of the palm.	0.7352823
And if the joint is firm in its place, untie the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint is not tight, reapply the plaster and the bandage, and leave it like that for a few days, until it is firmly set; then untie it.	Then undo it; and if the joint remains fixed in its place, then untie the bandaging and leave it. If you see that the joint is not thoroughly firm, replace the plaster and bandaging and leave it for a few more days until it is firm; then untie it.	0.9418758
And if he feels severe pain after the reduction of the joint, and it moves, bathe and rub it gently, and compress it until the pain subsides; or you can put a fatty sheep's caul on the joint, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and have him enter the bath; and when he sweats, rub the joint temperately, then put the caul back on, and then have him enter the bath; and do this two or three times, until he is healed; and if you wish, apply warm, moist cow dung with butter, and bind it on; it will return to its normal state.	If, after the reduction and unbandaging of the joint, it becomes stiff and is difficult to move, soften it in the bath and apply gentle friction and massage until it is softened, or apply to the joint the tail of a fat-tailed sheep; bind it on and leave it on for a day and a night; then remove it and send him to the bath, and when he sweats apply moderate friction to the joint; then replace the tail and again and again, alternating with the bath, until the joint softens. If you prefer, apply to it, and bandage on, fresh cow-dung lightened with butter. Do this a number of times and it will soften and return it to its original state.	0.9123198

chapter-3-subchapter-28.txt
The dislocation of the hand.	On the treatment of a dislocation of the wrist.	0.5533913
The joint of the hand dislocates, and its reduction is easier than other joints. However, it must be put back in place quickly, in the same hour that it is dislocated, before the area swells, or a hot abscess develops there.	The carpus of the hand is often dislocated. Unlike other joints, the reduction is easy, but there should be haste to reduce it as soon as it is dislocated, before the place swells or an abscess occur.	0.8172561
And the reduction is done by placing the injured hand on a table, and the practitioner extends the hand and aligns it evenly, placing their palm on the prominence of the joint, and pushes until it returns to place. However, you must check if it is correctly positioned; then the patient should put the back of their hand on a table during the extension and reduction.	The way of reducing the dislocation is to place the patient's wrist upon a board while an assistant stretches the hand, and the doctor puts the palm of his hand upon the prominence of the joint and applies pressure on it until it goes back.	0.78394884
And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, the patient should place the back of their hand on the table, and the practitioner puts their hand on the prominence of the joint.	But he should examine: if it is a displacement toward the ventral aspect of the hand, the patient should place the back of his hand upon the board for extension and reduction; but if it be a luxation toward the dorsum of the hand, then the inner part of the hand should be laid upon the board so that the doctor's hand may come upon the prominence of the joint itself.	0.6613286
If it returns to place immediately, that is good. If not, then apply soothing plasters for hot abscesses, and leave it like that without trying again.	If it go back at once, good; but if not, bandage it with a plaster that settles swelling and let it be.	0.7290856
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after a few days, the joint will remain crooked; and it does not harm the patient except that the hand is weakened, and cannot grip anything at all: then know that the nerves or arteries are cut; there is no other solution but to apply a cautery next to the injury, and perhaps nothing else will work.	Do not revert to it, for it will not tolerate that, and you will not be able to effect its reduction after some days have passed. But the joint will retain its deformity; and the patient will in no wise be harmed except if his hand is slackened so that he be unable to grip anything; then you may know that the tendons are either severed or bruised.	0.8458803
And when the hand is in place, apply the plaster that we have mentioned, then bandage it and leave it for five days, then unbind it and leave it like that.	When the reduction of the joint is complete, apply to it the plaster we have described, then bandage it and leave it for five days; then loosen it and try out the hand.	0.8187828
And if he cannot move it well, and there is some stiffness, moisten it with warm water, and rub it until it is healed.	If movement be hampered and any hardness occur in it, soften it repeatedly with hot water and sweating until it be softened.	0.71567297

chapter-3-subchapter-29.txt
On the dislocation of the fingers of the hand	On the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.	0.72865224

chapter-3-subchapter-30.txt
On the dislocation of the spine of the back	On the treatment of dislocation of the spinal vertebrae.	0.7260479
When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, or if there are several dislocated, there is no cure, for death quickly takes the patient.	When any of the vertebrae of the back or the neck are completely dislocated or a number of vertebrae are displaced, there is no treatment in this case for death is hastening toward the patient.	0.85889876
And the sign is that the excrement comes out involuntarily, and cannot be held, and often some limbs are weakened, either both thighs or both arms or one.  And often the spine is distorted in four ways; that which is distorted backwards is called "gibbosity": the treatment is that you see if the gibbosity has come from childhood: if so there is no cure or healing at all.	The sign of this is that the injured man passes a motion involuntarily, being unable to hold it back; often too some of his limbs go limp, either both legs or both arms or one of them. If, as often happens, a single vertebra is displaced, the displacement may be in any of four directions. When there is a displacement backwards it is called 'curvature of the spine'. As to its treatment: examine it; if the curvature dates from childhood then there is no treatment or cure at all for it.	0.835485
And that which comes from a fall or blows or similar things, the ancients spoke of methods of treatment with grand words, where there is not much benefit in any of them; but I have shortened it according to my understanding, and have designed instruments in various ways.	As for the sort that occurs from a fall or a blow or the like, the Ancients indulged in lengthy dissertations thereon, giving many kinds of treatment, the greater part of which is of no use. But I have abbreviated from it, making a little which will serve in place of their much, consisting in my clarification and exposition of the sense. I have also depicted the instrument differently from their account and their explanation.	0.81476295
And if it does not return with this treatment, then take a board three cubits long, and wedge it under the wall, and the patient should be on their side, and put the end of the board under the wall, then place the middle of the board on the spine; and the physician places his feet on the other end of the board, and presses well, until it returns to place; and if you wish, do it with a winch that turns by hand.	But if it does not go back under this treatment then let a board be taken, about three cubits long, and let a place be hollowed out in the wall, which, as we said, should be near the patient, into which you put the end of the board; then place the mid-point of the board upon the hump, and he—the doctor—should place both his feet on the other end and strongly thrust upon the spine until it is forced back into position.	0.8825153

chapter-3-subchapter-31.txt
Know that at the joints of the hip and at the joints of the shoulder, only dislocations occur, and they do not occur as in other joints; and the hip joint is dislocated in four directions: inwards and outwards, and forwards and backwards; and more inwards than elsewhere, and rarely dislocates forwards and backwards.	You should know that a complete dislocation alone is sustained by the hip and shoulder joints; they do not sustain the lesser displacements, with concavity, as do the other joints. Now the hip joint is dislocated in four directions, interior, exterior, posterior, and anterior. Most commonly it is dislocated interiorly; and rarely is it dislocated anteriorly or posteriorly.	0.86800027
And the sign of its inward dislocation is that when the injured leg is compared with the healthy one, it is longer, and the patient's knee appears more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee towards the buttock; and the place nearby is swollen with a hot abscess, because the head of the femur goes there.	The indication of an internal dislocation is that when you compare the patient's sound leg with the injured leg it will be longer and the knee will be prominent as compared with that of the sound leg; nor will it be possible for the patient to flex the foot back on the groin; and there will be an obvious swelling near the groin because the head of the femur has moved there.	0.8826363
And the sign of the one that goes outwards, is that the symptoms are opposite to the previous ones.	The sign of the occurrence of an external dislocation: the symptoms will be the exact contrary to these.	0.61647105
And the signs of the one that goes forwards is that they extend their leg fully; however, they do not bend the knee without pain, and if one wants to make them walk, they cannot go forward, and they retain their urine, and the groin swells, and when they walk, they step on their heel.	The sign of an anterior dislocation is that the patient can stretch his leg out fully but cannot flex it without feeling pain in the knee; and if he tries to walk he will be unable to walk forward; and he has retention of the urine and his groin swells, and in walking he hobbles upon his heel.	0.8520026
And the signs of the one that goes backwards is that they cannot extend or bend their knee, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the femur is located beneath the ribs.	The sign of a posterior dislocation is that he cannot extend the knee, nor can he flex it before flexing the hip; also the leg will be shorter than the other, the groin will be relaxed, and the head of the femur will be evident at the lumbar region.	0.7892684
The reduction of this type of dislocation is as follows: you consider if the dislocation is old, and it remains fixed in its position, there is no cure; and one should not be presumptuous.	As to the reduction of the various forms of this dislocation, you must examine the case and if it be an old dislocation which the patient has suffered from for a long time and the reduction of which has not been contrived and which remains as it was, there is no treatment for it at all, nor should any be attempted.	0.68294096
And in the one whose dislocation is fresh, and it is of the four types of dislocation, hurry to turn the joint, and stretch it inwards and outwards, and move it right and left; perhaps it will return, and no other treatment will be necessary.	But in that case whose dislocation is recent, whichever of the four kinds of dislocation it be, hasten to rotate the joint and extend it internally and externally and move it to the right and the left; for often it will return and no further treatment will be needed.	0.8629794
And if it does not return in this manner, you must prepare a strong assistant, and strongly extend the leg with two hands, or with a strap tied above the knee; and another assistant extends their hand from above in such a way that they place their hands under the armpits, then gently tighten a strap on the thigh; and another holds the end of the strap; and they all pull upwards and downwards at the same time, until the patient is lifted from the ground all at once, and hangs suspended.	But if it does not go back thus, you must have ready a sturdy and powerful assistant to extend the leg from below, either with both his hands or with a wrapper bound upon the leg above the knee; while another assistant pulls from above by putting his hands under the patient's axillae; then you should bind a soft wrapper upon the root of the thigh, with a third assistant to hold the end of the bandage. Then extension should be made either anteriorly from the direction of the groin to the direction of the clavicle, or posteriorly toward the dorsal spine. Let them all make their extension simultaneously so the patient is lifted up bodily and remains suspended.	0.9034256
This method of extension is common to the four types, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, that is good.	This kind of extension is common to all four kinds of dislocation. If the dislocation goes back by the way we have said, good.	0.86997116
If not, then a treatment specific to its type must be applied. When the dislocation is inwards, you should lay the patient on their healthy side, then place the strap on the top of the thigh, and the place that is below the groin, then stretch the strap upwards towards the groin, and towards the cleft; then another assistant takes their arms, and embraces the thick part of the affected thigh, and extends it outwards strongly: it will return to its place immediately; and this type of dislocation is easier than the others.	Otherwise, each kind must have the special treatment I shall describe. When it is an internal dislocation then the special reduction is for the patient to lie upon his sound side; then apply a wrapper to the root of the hip in the space between the head of the femur and the part below the groin; then carry the bandage upward from the groin toward the upper part of the body, in the direction of the clavicle. Then another powerful and sturdy assistant is to take hold of his arms while the thick part of the afflicted thigh is clasped and strongly extended outward; then it will return to its place. This kind of treatment is easier than the others for the reduction of this limb.	0.88980126
And if you cannot reduce it in this way that we have described, you must tie the patient's two feet together with a strong, soft strap above both heels, and above both knees, and the injured leg should be extended two fingers' breadth more than the other; then it should be hung from the end of a wooden beam, and be two arm-lengths above the ground; then instruct an assistant to embrace the top of the thigh, and let another assistant hang with the patient, who firmly embraces the thigh, for the joint will return to its place quickly and immediately.	But if you find it refractory and it does not answer to this method of treatment, then the patient's two feet will have to be bound together with a strong soft bandage round his two ankles and his two knees. The distance from each to the next should be four fingers, and the injured leg should be stretched two fingers beyond the other. Then the patient is to reach upward and grasp any beam that may be in the house; he should be about two cubits from the floor. Then tell a powerful servant to clasp the head of the hip and another servant to hang from the patient; and the other servant, the one who is clasping the hip, should thrust powerfully; then the hip will speedily go back.	0.87584317
And when the dislocation is outwards, the patient lies as we have described for the one with a gibbosity, and tighten a strap securely on the affected leg, and on the foot also; then place two sticks, one at the head and the other at the feet, then insert a stick between the patient's thighs in the middle of the buttocks; and have damp cloths placed around, so that it does not injure the patient, then each assistant extends towards themselves, and the surgeon replaces the dislocation with their hand.	The special method of reduction in the case of an external dislocation: it will be necessary for the patient to be lying on a bench after the manner described for the one with a curvature of the spine; but wrappers are to be tied only on the injured leg and the chest. Then the two spars are to be set in position, one at his feet and another at his head; and have an additional spar firmly fixed in the middle of the bench and wrapped in soft cloth so as not to injure the patient; this spar is to be between his thighs so that he will not be dragged down during extension. Then each assistant is to pull in his own direction while the doctor sets the hip with his hands.	0.85554755
If it returns (to its place), that is good.	And if it goes back, good.	0.7002329
If not, place (him) on a table, and press as we have described for the gibbosity, and the patient lies on their healthy side.	But if not, place the board upon it and put pressure upon it just as we prescribed for curvature, except that the patient will have to lie upon his sound side.	0.74106634
And when the dislocation is forwards, it is necessary to extend the injured leg quickly, and according to what I have said; and the surgeon puts their effort on the injured groin, then presses with the other hand, and extends it downwards towards the knee.	When it is an anterior dislocation, extension will have to be applied forcefully to the patient's leg, on the bench, exactly as described; the doctor should place the palm of his right hand upon the injured groin and then apply pressure with the other hand, directing the pressure so as to make extension downward toward the knee.	0.82077014

chapter-3-subchapter-32.txt
of the dislocation of the knee	On dislocation of the knee.	0.6934056
The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inwards and outwards, and backwards; and it does not dislocate forwards.	The knee is dislocated in three ways; it is dislocated interiorly and exteriorly and inferiorly, that is, posteriorly. It is never dislocated anteriorly.	0.9172255
And if the limb is not right, then administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.	But if you cannot effect reduction by this method, apply powerful extension by bandages as we have described above for the treatment of the hip, until it goes back.	0.6668669

chapter-3-subchapter-33.txt
of the dislocation of the heel	On the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.	0.51851606
The heel is sometimes sprained, and sometimes fully dislocated, both inwards and outwards.	The ankle is sometimes slightly displaced, sometimes fully dislocated, the dislocation being either internal or external.	0.8651607
And the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and leans forward on the side where it is dislocated: the reduction is easy, and one should extend it gently with their hands when it is only sprained.	The sign of its dislocation is that you will see the ankle swollen, and projecting on the side to which it is dislocated. As to the treatment of its displacement, the reduction of it is easy: if it is gently extended with the hands and straightened, it will go back.	0.8457961
And when it is in place, apply the plaster and padding on it, and bandage it tightly, and tie the foot to the leg, and be careful of the nerves that are on the ankle behind, that the bandage is not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the bandage loosens, tighten it; then untie it on the third or fourth day, and forbid the patient from walking for four days; and if he walks before that time, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.	Then when the dislocation is reduced and the soundness of the reduction is manifested to you, apply a plaster and packing, bandage firmly and bind the foot downwards. You will have to be careful of the tendon above the ankle at the back, not to bandage tightly over it so as to injure it. Then leave him for two or three days; and if the binding works loose, tighten it up. Then on the third or fourth day loosen it, but the patient is to abstain from walking for forty days, for if he tries to walk before this lapse of time you cannot be sure that the dislocation will not collapse and corruption set in and thereafter be incurable.	0.92457485
And if a hot abscess develops there, you must treat it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.	If an abscess occur you must allay it by the application of such dressings and embrocations as we have already described more than once, until it is gone.	0.57226557

chapter-3-subchapter-34.txt
When the fingers or toes are dislocated, they should be gently extended without force, and this is an easy thing.	On the treatment of dislocation of the toes. Any that are dislocated must be straightened by means of gentle extension, without violence; that is not hard but positively easy.	0.6789979
And if the dislocation is in any joint of the back of the foot, you should have the patient sit on a flat surface or on a table, upright, and place your foot on the part of the joint that protrudes, then press firmly with your foot until it returns to place; and when it is even, and nothing protrudes, place a two-headed board under the sole of the foot, then bandage it tightly, and leave it for three days, then untie it; and have him rest until he is healed.	If the dislocation be in one of the joints of the dorsum of the foot, the patient must set his foot on level ground or upon a board, standing as though walking. Then you must stand and put your foot on what protrudes of those joints, and put strong pressure upon it with your foot until it goes back and you see that it is evened out and there is no prominence at the place. Then put under the sole of his foot a flat splint with two heads to take the whole foot, and bind it on with a tight and secure bandage for three days; then loosen it; but keep him from walking for a good many days until it binds and you are sure it will not revert, God willing.	0.9103126

chapter-3-subchapter-35.txt
of a wound and a dislocation together	On the kinds of dislocation that accompany a wound or a fracture or both. When anything of this kind happens and you attempt treatment and restoration, death is a frequent sequel.	0.46379596

