preface.txt
The author of this book said: When I completed for you, my son, this book, which is the theoretical part of medicine in its entirety, and reached the limit in its clarity and explanation, I decided to complete it for you with this treatise, which is the practical part, because practical work and its practitioners are completely nonexistent in our country and in our time, so that its knowledge almost disappeared and its impact vanished.	AFTER finishing for you, my sons, this book which is the part of knowledge dealing with medicine in its entirety; and having made it as clear and explicit as possible, I thought it well to complete it for you by adding this treatise which concerns surgical operating. For the skilled practitioner of operative surgery is totally lacking in our land and time; so that the knowledge of it is on the point of being blotted out and its remains lost; and there is nothing left of it except a few traces in the books of the Ancients; where, however, it has been so corrupted by the hands of scribes, and subjected to error and confusion, that its meaning has become obscured and its value diminished.	0.70847714
Only minor traces of it remained in the books of the predecessors, which have been distorted by hands and affected by errors and confusion, so that its meanings became obscure and its benefit distant, so I decided to revive it and compose this treatise in the way of explanation, clarification, and brevity, and to provide images of cautery irons and other surgical instruments, as this is an addition to the explanation and among the most important things needed.	For the skilled practitioner of operative surgery is totally lacking in our land and time; so that the knowledge of it is on the point of being blotted out and its remains lost; and there is nothing left of it except a few traces in the books of the Ancients; where, however, it has been so corrupted by the hands of scribes, and subjected to error and confusion, that its meaning has become obscured and its value diminished. Therefore I decided to revive this art by expounding, elucidating, and epitomizing it in this treatise; and to present the forms of the cauterizing irons and other operative instruments, since this is an adjunct to explanation and a vital necessity.	0.8328652
The reason why there is no skilled practitioner in our time is that the study of medicine is long, and its student should be trained beforehand in the science of anatomy described by Galen, until he understands the benefits of the organs, their structures, temperaments, connections, separations, knowledge of the bones, nerves, and muscles, their number and exits, and the pulsating and static veins, and the locations of their exits.	Now this is the reason why there is no skilful operator in our day: the art of medicine is long and it is necessary for its exponent, before he exercises it, to be trained in anatomy as Galen has described it, so that he may be fully acquainted with the uses, forms, and temperament of the limbs; also how they are jointed, and how they may be separated; that he should understand fully also the bones, tendons, and muscles, their numbers and their attachments; and also the bloodvessels, both arteries and veins, with their relations.	0.86553496
Therefore, Hippocrates said that doctors are many in name but few in practice, especially in surgery.	And so Hippocrates said: 'Though many are doctors in name, few are in reality, particularly on the surgical side.'	0.86688924
We have mentioned some of this in the introduction of this book, because whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have mentioned of anatomy will inevitably fall into an error that kills people with it, as I have seen many of those who imagined themselves knowledgeable in this science and claimed it without knowledge or skill.	We have already spoken of this in the introduction to this book. For he who is not skilled in as much anatomy as we have mentioned is bound to fall into error that is destructive of life. Thus I have seen many laying claim to this knowledge and boasting of it, but having neither knowledge nor experience.	0.8170083
This is because I saw an ignorant doctor who incised a scrofulous swelling in a woman's neck, so he pierced some of the arteries of the neck, and the woman's blood flowed until she fell dead between his hands.	I saw an ignorant doctor incise a scrofulous tumour in a woman's neck; and he cut certain arteries in the neck so that the woman bled until she fell dead before him.	0.8534076
And I saw another doctor who proceeded to extract a stone from a man who had been stabbed in the bladder, and the stone was large, so he rushed and extracted it with a piece of the bladder, so the man died after about three days.	And I saw another doctor presume to take out a stone from a man of advanced age. The stone was large; he rushed blindly at the task and extracted the stone and with it a piece of the bladder itself; and the man was dead in about three days.	0.894428
I was called to extract it, and I saw from the size of the stone and the condition of the patient what I estimated about it.	I had myself been previously called in to extract the stone but from what I saw of the size of it and the condition of the patient I judged that the outcome would be so.	0.7756498
And I saw another doctor who cauterized a cancerous tumor, so it ulcerated after days until his affliction worsened, and this is because if cancer is purely of melancholic humor, then it should not be exposed to iron at all, unless it is in a limb that can be completely amputated.	And I saw another doctor incise a malignant tumour; after some days the place broke out in open ulceration, thereby adding to the misery of the patient. For a cancer that arises from a melancholic humour should never be touched by the knife unless it should happen to be in a part of the body which may be removed thoroughly and in its entirety.	0.8166898
Galen said in some of his advice: Do not treat a bad disease, so you are called bad doctors.	For Galen once said in certain of his admonitions: 'Do not treat mischievous maladies lest you get the name of mischievous doctors.'	0.85220146
I have divided this treatise into three chapters.	I have divided this treatise into three books:	0.9002188
The first chapter is about cauterization with fire and cauterization with strong medicine, organized and arranged from head to toe, with images of instruments, cautery irons, and everything needed for surgery.	BOOK ONE. Concerning the actual cautery; and cauterization by caustics. It is divided into chapters set in order from the head to the feet. The shapes of the instruments are shown and the iron cauteries and all things necessary for operating.	0.7021238
The second chapter is about incision, lancing, bloodletting, cupping, surgeries, removing arrows, and so on, all organized and arranged with images of instruments.	BOOK TWO. Concerning incision and perforation; blood-letting and cupping; wounds and the extraction of arrows and the like. The whole is divided into chapters in order; and illustrations of instruments are given.	0.73964244
The third chapter is about bone setting, dislocations, treatment of tendons, and so on, organized and arranged from head to toe with images of instruments.	BOOK THREE. Concerning the setting of bones; dislocations; the treatment of sprains and the like. This is similarly divided into chapters set in order from head to feet, with illustrations of instruments.	0.77436197

chapter-1.txt
And before we mention the procedure with it, it is necessary that we mention the nature of its benefits and harms, and in what temperament it is used.	Before we expatiate on the actual operation of cautery it is necessary to mention its advantages and disadvantages and the temperament upon which it is to be used.	0.8043557
So I say that the discussion about the nature of the benefit and harm of cautery is a long discussion, a precise science, and a hidden secret, and a group of sages have spoken about it and differed about it.	I say that a discourse on the advantage and disadvantage of cautery is a long one, a subtle learning, a hidden secret. A great number of wise men have spoken on the subject with differing opinions.	0.8262423
And I have summarized from their words the little, for fear of prolixity.	Lest I should be over long I have reduced their opinions to a summary.	0.44901335
So I say that cautery is generally useful for every bad temperament that is with matter and without matter, except for two temperaments, which are the hot temperament without matter and the dry temperament without matter.	Now I say that the cautery has universal application for every ill constitution, whether organic or functional, with the exception of two: the functional hot temperament and the functional dry temperament.	0.72814155
As for the dry temperament with matter, they have differed about it, so some of them said that cautery is beneficial in it, and others said the opposite of that, that cautery is not suitable for a disease that is from heat and dryness, because the nature of fire is heat and dryness, and it is impossible to be cured from a hot dry disease with a hot dry remedy.	About the organic dry temperament the Ancients differed, some saying that cautery helps in a constitution of this kind, while others said the opposite: that cautery is of no use in a disease caused by heat or dryness; for fire is naturally hot and dry and it is obviously absurd to treat a hot dry sickness with a hot dry remedy.	0.83829606
And the one who says the opposite of that said that cautery with fire may benefit from a hot dry disease that occurs in people's bodies, because when you add the human body and its moisture to the temperament of fire, you find the human body cold.	But he who holds the opposite view says that actual cautery may help in the case of such hot dry illnesses as arise in the human body; for when you compare the human body, humid as it is, with the nature of fire you find the human body cold.	0.8396865
And I say according to his saying because experience has revealed that to me many times, except that it is not appropriate for anyone to imagine about that matter except one who has practiced and trained in the field of cautery with extensive training and has observed the difference in people's temperaments and the state of diseases in themselves, their causes, their symptoms, and their duration.	I myself from much experience agree with this last opinion. However, no one should attempt this operation unless he has had long training and practice in the use of the cautery, and is fully acquainted with the various human temperaments, and the character of the complaints in themselves; their causes, symptoms, and duration.	0.7175012
And as for the other temperaments, there is no fear for you from them, especially the cold, moist diseases, for all the physicians have agreed on them and have not differed about the benefit of cautery in them.	Concerning the rest of the temperaments there is no reason for fear, particularly the cold and humid distempers; all medical men are agreed and none differs concerning the utility of the cautery in such cases.	0.8034338
And know, my sons, that among the secrets of treatment is cautery with fire, and its superiority over cautery with burning medicine, because fire is a simple substance whose action does not exceed the organ that is cauterized, and it does not harm another organ connected to it except with slight harm.	Now you should know, my sons, that the actual cautery and its superiority over cauterization with chemical caustics is one of the secrets of medicine. For fire is a simple substance having no action except upon the actual part cauterized; nor does it do more than slightly harm any adjacent part.	0.8657717
And cautery with burning medicine, its action may extend to what is beyond the organs, and perhaps it causes in the organ a disease whose treatment is difficult, and perhaps it kills.	But the effect of cauterization with caustic may spread to parts at a distance from that burnt; and also in the part cauterized it may give rise to a disease difficult to cure or even fatal.	0.72134715
And fire, due to its nobility and the generosity of its substance, does not do that unless it is excessive.	Whereas fire, on the other hand, on account of the nobility of its nature and its superiority has no such effect unless it is overdone.	0.8126112
And that has become clear to us through experience, due to the length of service and care for the craft and observing the realities of the matter, and for this reason I have dispensed with lengthy speech.	That has become clear to us by experience through length of service, devotion to the art, and acquaintance with the facts of the matter. So I need not prolong this discourse.	0.8048677
And were it not that it is not appropriate for this book of mine, I would have presented to you regarding fire a mysterious secret and the nature of its action in bodies and its expulsion of diseases, with philosophical, demonstrative words that are too subtle for your understanding.	Were it not inappropriate to this my book I should relate to you a deep secret concerning fire, the manner of its action on bodies and its expulsion of diseases; with a reasoned philosophical discourse too subtle for your understanding.	0.8949469
And know, my sons, that they have differed about the time in which cautery is suitable, and they have considered the best time to be the time of spring.	Know also, my sons, that the Ancients disagreed also as to the fit time for cautery, affirming that spring was the best.	0.80433714
And I say that cautery may be suitable in every time, because the harm that occurs from the time is absorbed in the benefit that is brought about by cautery, especially if the cautery is for necessary, strong, urgent pains that do not tolerate delay, because it is feared that they will be followed by a calamity that is greater than the slight harm that comes from the time.	Myself, I say that the cautery is suitable at all times; for whatever harm may arise from the season of the operation is utterly outdone by the benefit deriving from the cauterization itself; especially if the cautery is applied to pains that are severe, grievous, and swift, brooking no delay, because of the fear that the consequences may be more grave than the slight harm from the season.	0.87781686
And do not let it occur to your minds, my sons, what the common people and ignorant physicians imagine, that the cautery that cures from a certain disease will never return, and you consider it blameworthy.	Nor let enter your minds, my sons, the groundless notion of the laity and of ignorant doctors, that the complaint cured by the cautery never comes back later; do not cleave to this opinion.	0.82462025
And the matter is not as you thought, because cautery is just like the medicine that alters the temperament and dries the moistures that are the cause of the occurrence of pains, except that cautery is superior to medicine in the speed of its success, the strength of its action, and the intensity of its power.	The fact is not as they think; for the cautery is homologous to the drug which alters the constitution and dries up the humidities that give rise to disorders. But the cautery excels the drug by the rapidity of its success, the strength of its action, and the potency of its powers.	0.84123373
And it is possible that the disease will return at some point in time, depending on the temperament of the patient, the establishment of his disease, its strength, and what is prepared in his body from the accumulation of superfluities in it, and his neglect of himself in acquiring them from foods and such causes.	It may be that the disease will return at some time according to the temperament of the patient, and the persistence and virulence of the disease; and from the formation of a mass of superfluities in the body; from his neglect of himself in acquiring them from food; and from causes of a similar nature.	0.86384416
However, unless the disease in which cautery is used is a mild disease and in an organ with few superfluities and moistures, such as cauterizing the tooth for pain and the like, it is possible that the pain will not return in it, and that is in the minority of cases.	Of course, if the disease to which the cautery is applied be a slight one, and in a part only slightly liable to superfluities and humidities, as, for example, the cauterization of a molar tooth for toothache, and the like, then it may happen that the pain does not return; but that happens rarely.	0.83809817
And I have arranged this chapter on cautery into sections that I have organized from head to toe, to facilitate for the student what he wants from it, God willing.	Now I have arranged this book on cauterization by chapters, set in order from the head to the foot, to make it easy for the seeker to find what he wants.	0.7252053

chapter-1-subchapter-1.txt
The first chapter on cauterizing the head with one cauterization.	CHAPTER ONE. On the single cauterization of the head.	0.7422178
This cauterization is beneficial for excess moisture and coldness on the brain, which are the cause of headaches, frequent catarrh from the head towards the eyes and ears, excessive sleep, toothache, throat aches, and in general, for every disease that arises from coldness, such as paralysis, epilepsy, muteness, and similar ailments.	This cauterization helps against excessive humidity and coldness on the brain, which cause headache, abundance of defluxions from the head to the regions of the eyes and ears, excess of sleep, toothache, sore throat, and in general any sort of disorder arising from frigidity, such as palsy, fits, apoplexy, and diseases similar to these.	0.914333
The method of this cauterization is that you first order the patient to vomit using a purgative medicine that cleanses the head for three or four nights, depending on the patient's strength, age, and habit. Then you order him to shave his head with a razor, then sit him cross-legged between your hands, having placed his hands on his chest. Then you place the base of your palm on the base of his nose between his eyes. Where your middle finger ends, mark that place with ink. Then heat the olive-shaped cautery, which is like this:	The manner of performing this operation is first to bid the patient open the bowels with an evacuant which will also clear his head, for three or four nights, according to the strength, age, and habits of the patient. Then tell him to have his head shaved; then seat him cross-legged before you, with his hands on his breast. Then place the lower part of your palm upon the root of his nose between his eyes; and where your middle finger reaches mark that place with ink. Then heat an olivary cautery.	0.9219616
Expose from the bone the size of a toothpick head or the size of a cherry pit, then lift your hand. Otherwise, repeat with the same iron or another one if it has cooled down, until you see the bone as I mentioned to you. Then take some salt, dissolve it in water, soak cotton in it, place it on the spot, and leave it for three days. Then apply cotton soaked in ghee and leave it on until the burn from the fire disappears. Then treat it with the quadruple ointment until he recovers, God willing.	If you see that some bone is exposed, the size of the head of a skewer or a grain of vetch, then take your hand away; otherwise repeat with the same iron, or, if that has got cold, with another, till the amount of bone I have mentioned is exposed. Then take a little salt dissolved in water; soak some cotton in it, apply to the place and leave for three days. Then apply some cotton soaked in butter and leave it on till the eschar falls off; then dress with Tetrapharmacum ointment till healed.	0.86411846
They have said that the longer the wound remains open and suppurates, the better and more beneficial it is.	The Ancients said that the more a wound is kept open, discharging pus, the better and more efficacious.	0.7870519
Some have mentioned that the skin should be cauterized to the bone, and the cautery should be held until some of the thickness of the bone is burned. Then the burned part of the bone is scraped, and then treated.	Some said the skin was to be cauterized through to the bone and the cautery held until some of the thickness of the bone was burnt. Then the burnt bone was to be scraped out, then dressed.	0.9216146
Others have said that the cauterization should be exaggerated until it has a strong effect on the bone, so that something like a carat or a small disk falls off the bone. They claimed that it vents the vapors of the head from that place, and the wound is left open for a long time, then treated until it heals.	Others said that the cautery should be carried through to burn a deep impression in the bone so that there should come out of the bone a piece shaped like a grain of a carob tree or a small spindle-whorl; they asserted that the vapours of the head would be exhaled through this place. The wound should be kept open a long while, then dressed until healed.	0.8669294
I do not see these two types of cautery at all except in some people, and by way of risk, and leaving it is better in my opinion. And safety, if it exists, is because the head weakens when its natural connection is severed, as we have seen in other organs, especially when the patient's head is naturally weak. The first type of cautery is safer and better in my opinion, and I use it, so work with it, and you will be safe, God willing.	But these two methods of cauterization I do not consider right except on certain men; and I regard them as risky. In my opinion, to let the patient alone is preferable and safer, if it is to be. For the head is weakened when its natural continuity is broken, as we see in other parts, and particularly when the patient's head is weak by nature. In my opinion the first type of cauterization is safer and better; therefore use that and be safe.	0.85846865

chapter-1-subchapter-2.txt
The second chapter on cauterizing the head also.	CHAPTER TWO. On cauterization of the head (continued).	0.690679
And I will mention this cautery in its place.	I shall describe this cauterization in its own place.	0.7554114
It is appropriate that the cautery iron used to cauterize the horns of the head and its back be gentler than the cautery iron used to cauterize the middle of the head.	The cautery for the frontal prominences and occiput must be more slender than that for the middle part.	0.5887979

chapter-1-subchapter-3.txt
The third chapter on cauterizing non-chronic migraine.	CHAPTER THREE. On the cauterization of non-chronic migraine.	0.91819143
If pain occurs in the fissure of the head along with a headache, and the pain extends to the eye, then induce vomiting in the patient with medicines that purify the head, and employ all the other treatments that I mentioned in the classification of diseases. If that is not effective, then cauterization is done in two ways.	When there occurs pain with headache in one side of the head and the pain extends to the eye; and the patient has cleared his head with purging drugs and there has been applied the other treatment that I have mentioned in the sections on diseases, but to no avail; in this disorder cauterization is of two sorts, either with caustic or with the actual cautery.	0.83796227
As for cauterization with a burning medication, it is that you take one clove of garlic, peel it, and cut off its ends from both sides. Then incise the place of the pain on the temple with a wide scalpel until there is a space under the skin that can accommodate the clove, so it enters under the skin until it disappears.	This is the manner of cauterization with caustic: take one clove of garlic; peel it and cut both ends off; then cut open the site of the pain in the temple with a broad scalpel till there is room to contain the clove under the skin; then introduce it under the skin till it lies completely hidden.	0.8095845
Then tighten it with a bandage, tightly, and leave it for about fifteen hours. Then untie it and take out the garlic and leave the wound for two or three days. Then apply cotton dipped in ghee to it until the place suppurates.	Then bind up the wound tightly over it with pads and leave for fifteen hours; then unbind it, remove the garlic, and leave the wound open for two or three days; then apply cotton wool soaked in butter till it suppurates.	0.94686127
Then treat it with the ointment until it heals, God willing.	Then dress with ointment till it heals.	0.7515054
And if you wish, you can do this with some of the burning medications that I provided in the eighteenth article on burning medications.	If you would rather, you may carry it out with one of the caustic drugs that I have included in the eighteenth treatise, on caustics.	0.7616179
And as for cauterizing it with iron, it is in this manner: you heat the cautery iron, which is of this form:	The actual cauterization with iron should be done in this way: heat a cautery of this shape.	0.6968454
And it is called the nail-shaped cautery because its head is like the shape of a nail, with some curvature and a small protrusion in its middle.	It is called the claviform; the head is nailshaped in that there is a slight curvature with a small protuberance in the middle.	0.7338214
Then you place it on the painful area and hold your hand while you rotate the iron little by little.	Apply it then to the site of the pain, hold your hand steady and revolve it little by little.	0.80803454
And the amount you burn of the skin's thickness should be like half of it, and you lift your hand so as not to burn the artery that is underneath, causing bleeding.	Let the thickness of skin burnt be about half; then remove your hand so as not to burn a subjacent artery, for thus a haemorrhage arises.	0.811127
Then you soak cotton in salt water and place it on the area and leave it for three days, then you load the cotton with ghee, then you treat it with the ointment until it heals, God willing.	Then soak some cotton wool in saline, apply to the place, and leave three days; then apply cotton wool with butter; then treat with ointment till it heals.	0.8775761
And if you wish, cauterize this migraine with the knife-like edge coming from the cautery, and be careful of cutting the artery in this migraine, especially if it's not chronic.	Or if you prefer you can cauterize this migraine with the knife-edge that juts out from the cautery; but be careful not to cut an artery, specially in this kind of migraine that is non-chronic.	0.8710358

chapter-1-subchapter-4.txt
Chapter four on cauterizing chronic migraine.	CHAPTER FOUR. On the cauterization of chronic migraine.	0.9250057
Be careful and vigilant about bleeding from the artery that you cut, as there is danger in cutting it, especially for those who are ignorant of what they are doing and have not been trained and experienced, and it is better to leave the procedure.	Have the utmost care of haemorrhage from the artery you have cut, for the occurrence of that is dangerous, specially with one who does not know what to do, having no experience or practice; it is better to refrain from operating.	0.85699457
The management of accidental bleeding from the artery will be mentioned in its place in the book, God willing.	We shall later on mention a treatment for accidental haemorrhage of the artery, in due detail, in its proper place in this book.	0.6437214
If you find that the ailment is not resolved by this cauterization and you see that the patient's body can tolerate it, cauterize him in the middle of the head as we described, and treat the wound until it heals, God willing.	But if you see that this cautery is not enough for this disorder and you see that the patient is of bodily fitness for it, cauterize him in the middle of the head as we have described, and treat the wound till healed.	0.8194093
And if you wish, use the cauterization that we mentioned in the chapter on dissecting the artery with the two-bladed cautery iron, for it is a better and more effective cauterization than this.	If you prefer, employ that cauterization which we have described in the chapter on the extraction of an artery, with the cautery of two blades; for that is a cauterization better and more effective than this.	0.8796979

chapter-1-subchapter-5.txt
The fifth chapter on cauterizing earaches.	CHAPTER FIVE. On cauterization of pain in the ears.	0.8104253
If there occurs in the ear pain from cold. And it is treated with laxatives and all the other treatments that we mentioned in the division, and the pain does not go away. Then heat the cautery iron that is called "the point," which is of this form:	When the ear gets a pain from the cold and is treated with laxatives and other medicine as mentioned in its section and the pain nevertheless persists, heat the cautery termed 'punctate'.	0.7725185
Then you apply drops with it, after heating it, around the entire ear as you go around, or around both of them if the pain is in both. And you keep the cautery a little away from the base of the ear, after you mark the place with ink.	Then after it has been heated prick with it in a circle right round the ear, or around both if there is pain in both, after the place has been marked with ink; the cauterizations being a little away from the ear.	0.89102566
And the cautery should be the size of ten dots in each ear, or about that.	Let the cauterization be of ten punctures or thereabouts round each.	0.71170807
Then you treat the places until they heal, God willing.	Then dress the places till healed.	0.7195919

chapter-1-subchapter-6.txt
Chapter Six on Cauterizing the Jaw Muscle.	CHAPTER six. Cauterization of the twisted mouth.	0.7215959
The facial paralysis that is treated with cautery is of the type that arises from phlegm, as I mentioned in the classification of diseases.	The twisting of the mouth which is curable with the cautery is of that nature which arises from phlegm, as we have already noticed in the sections on sicknesses.	0.7476913
And avoid cauterizing the type that arises from dryness and nerve spasm.	But cauterization is to be carefully avoided in that type which is due to dryness or spasm of the tendon.	0.6636627
When you treat this type of facial paralysis with errhines, sternutatories, and gargles, and your treatment does not succeed, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one at the base of the ear, the second a little below his temple, and the third at the joining of the lips.	When this kind of deformity has been treated with electuaries, errhines, and gargles, and your treatment is ineffective, you should use three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear; the second a little below the temple; and the third at the junction of the lips.	0.8731359
And make your cauterization on the opposite side of the affected area, because the relaxation occurs on the side that appears healthy.	Let your cauterization be on the opposite side to the affected side, for the relaxation will arise in the side which seems normal.	0.81934035
And the method of cautery is to cauterize with a cautery opposite the upper tip of the ear, a little below the horn of the head, and another on the temple, and its length should be the length of the thumb. Apply the cautery down with your hand until you burn half the thickness of the skin.	The form taken by the cauterization is that you burn him a little below the frontal prominence, on a level with the upper tip of the ear, and also on the temple the length of the thumb; carry the burning to a depth of about half the thickness of the skin. The shape of the cautery.	0.8152628
And this is the image of the cautery instrument, and it is a type of scalpel-like instrument whose image has been presented, except that it is a little gentler, as you see.	The shape of the cautery. It is a variety of the bladed cautery such as has already been described, but is rather more slender as you see.	0.61286145
And the knife should have a little extra thickness.	Its blade should have a certain thickness.	0.67710763
Then treat the area with what was mentioned previously until it heals, God willing.	Then dress the place with what we have mentioned till healed.	0.6888617

chapter-1-subchapter-7.txt
The seventh chapter on cauterizing chronic stroke.	CHAPTER SEVEN. On the cauterization of a chronic apoplexy.	0.8081682
If the stroke becomes chronic and you have treated it with what we have mentioned, and your treatment has not been successful, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize him with four cauterizations, one on each side of his head. And a cauterization in the middle of the head, as we have mentioned. And a cauterization at the back of the head, as has been stated previously.	When an apoplexy has lasted a long while and has been treated by those methods we have given and your treatment has been ineffective but the patient has no fever, then burn him with four cauterizations: one on each frontal prominence; one in the middle of his head as we have described; and one at the back of the head as has been said.	0.8370464
And the description of the cauteries is as previously mentioned.	The shape of the cauteries to be as before.	0.44138166
And he may also be cauterized at the pit of the stomach, which would be more effective.	He may also be given one burn over the cardia of the stomach; that will be more efficacious.	0.7770691
Then treat with what has been previously mentioned.	Then treat as described.	0.7558805

chapter-1-subchapter-8.txt
The eighth chapter on cauterizing forgetfulness that is caused by phlegm.	CHAPTER EIGHT. On cauterization for lethargy due to phlegm.	0.749238
The patient should first be given to drink from the major electuaries and brain-purifying pills.	First, great electuaries should be given to the patient to drink; and pills to clear the head.	0.8014192
Then his entire head should be shaved. And the mustard poultice described in the chapter on poultices should be applied to his posterior.	Then let his whole head be shaved and apply a mustard plaster to the hinder part as described in the treatise on plasters.	0.7951555
Apply it several times, for it is a kind of cautery. And do that in the same order that I mentioned there.	That should be applied several times as it is a kind of cauterization; do it in the very way described there.	0.8588237
If he is cured by that, then fine, otherwise cauterize him with three cauterizations on the back of his head, aligned from the top of the head to the bottom of the neck. And make the distance between each cauterization the width of a finger.	If he is cured, well and good; but if not, burn him with three cauterizations on the back of the head, arranging them in a row downward from the upper part of the head to the base of the neck; and make an interval between each pair of one finger's breadth.	0.89008087
Then treat the cautery with what was mentioned previously.	Then treat as aforesaid.	0.7809011
If you want to increase it, and the patient can tolerate it, cauterize the middle cauterization. If you want to increase it further, cauterize him on the two temples.	If you wish to add to these cauterizations and the patient be fit to bear it, give him a burn in the middle; and if still more, then burn him on the two frontal prominences.	0.7944485
Then treat him until he recovers.	Then dress till healed.	0.72536534
And the cautery iron should be olive-shaped, in the form that was described before.	Let the cautery be an olivary as described before.	0.6256944

chapter-1-subchapter-9.txt
Chapter nine on cauterizing paralysis and the relaxation of the entire body.	CHAPTER NINE. On cauterization in palsy and flaccidity of the whole body.	0.83188015
It is necessary to proceed in purifying the head with the irriagations and what we have mentioned.	Purgation of the head should come first, with electuaries and the other things we have mentioned.	0.6782448
Then shave the head of the sick person. Then cauterize him with a cautery in the middle of the head and a cautery on each horn of the head and a cautery on its back and three on the vertebrae of the neck.	Then shave the patient's head; and then burn him with one cauterization in the middle of the head and one on either frontal prominence and one on the occiput, and three on the vertebrae of the neck.	0.88543516
If you need more than that in the illness of relaxation of the body and the patient can tolerate it and the disease is strong and entrenched. Then cauterize him with four cauteries on the vertebrae of his back. And intensify the cautery until you burn most of the skin. And lift your hand.	And if the malady of flaccidity of the body require still more and the patient be fit to bear it, and his disease be severe and have a strong hold on him, burn him with four more cauterizations on his dorsal vertebrae and carry the cautery to burn almost through the thickness of the skin; then remove your hand and treat him in the aforesaid manner till he is healed.	0.85805094
And the cautery iron should be olive-shaped.	Let the cautery be olivary.	0.47769114

chapter-1-subchapter-10.txt
The tenth chapter on cauterizing epilepsy.	CHAPTER TEN. On cauterizing for epilepsy.	0.85146844
Only cauterize the epileptic whose epilepsy is caused by phlegm.	The epileptic who may be cauterized is he whose epilepsy arises from phlegm.	0.69666666
It is necessary to first purify his brain with major purges and with all the treatments that we mentioned in the section if the patient is an adult and can tolerate taking medications.	When the patient is an adult and can stand taking the drugs, he should first purify his brain by great electuaries and the rest of the treatment mentioned in that section.	0.82178223
But if he is a child who cannot tolerate the medications, then he should use gargles and masticatories that purify the brain for many days before that, along with improving his nutrition, then shave his head, then cauterize him with a single cauterization in the middle of the head as described previously, and another cauterization on his posterior, and a cauterization on each side of his head.	But if it be a boy unable to tolerate the drugs he should employ gargles and medicaments to chew, to clear his brain, for several days beforehand, with an improvement in his diet.	0.8021239
If the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then cauterize him with the cauterizations that were mentioned for the one with paralysis and body relaxation on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.	Then let his head be shaved and burn him with the single cauterization on the middle of the head in the manner described before, and with one cauterization on the occiput, and one on each frontal prominence; and, if the patient be fit and able to bear it, add those additional cauterizations on the cervical and dorsal vertebrae that we have already described for paralysis and for flaccidity.	0.58513093
And the cautery iron should be olive-shaped according to the description that was presented earlier.	The cautery should be olivary, the shape before described.	0.7024877
If the patient is a child, then make the cautery iron gentle in this way:	If the patient be a boy, use a fine cautery.	0.62597334

chapter-1-subchapter-11.txt
Chapter eleven on cauterizing melancholia	CHAPTER ELEVEN. On cauterization for melancholy.	0.7131067
If the cause of melancholia is corrupt humors and thick phlegm, cauterize him with the cauterizations that we mentioned for the stroke patient.	When the cause of the melancholy be corrupt humours and a thick phlegm, burn him with those cauterizations mentioned in the case of the paralytic.	0.8128308
And if the cause of melancholia is an excess inclining towards black bile, and the patient's body is moist, give him to drink what purifies his brain as mentioned previously in the classification. Then shave the patient's head.	If the cause of the melancholy be a redundance of humour turning to black bile, and the patient's body be humid, make him drink that which will purge his head as described in a previous section.	0.88245183
Then make a well-sealed ring-like cake of linen. Then place it in the middle of his head while the patient is sitting cross-legged, holding it from all sides.	Then shave the patient's head and apply a compact ring-bandage of linen and put it round the middle of his head. Have him sit cross-legged, held firmly on all sides.	0.8031982
Then take one pound of old sheep fat. Then heat it on the fire to a moderate heat, as much as the finger can bear when inserted in it. Then pour it into the middle of his head within the circle, and leave it until it cools.	Then take a pound of stale sheep's butter and warm it on the fire to a moderate heat so that a finger put in can bear it; then pour it out on the middle of the head inside the circle of the bandage and leave it till it has cooled.	0.91810143
Do this to the patient once every week, along with all his other good management, until he recovers, God willing.	Do this once a week with other efficacious treatment till he is cured.	0.74195737
And if you wish, cauterize him with many small, dotted cauterizations, without holding your hand on the cautery iron, but rather with a quick touch.	If you wish, burn him with multiple small puncture cauterizations; nor press long on the cautery but let this cauterization be only just punctured.	0.6566335
For this type of cauterization moistens the brain moderately.	For this kind of cauterization will moderately moisten the brain.	0.9626758
Then apply cotton soaked in the fat or in chicken fat.	Then let cotton soaked in butter or hen's grease be applied.	0.9228576

chapter-1-subchapter-12.txt
If the beginning of the descending water in the eye is clear to you by the signs that were mentioned in the classification, then hasten to give the sick person what purifies his head, and protect him from all moistures, and make him sweat in the bath on an empty stomach for days.	When by those signs I have mentioned in the relevant section there is brought to your notice the beginning of a cataract of the eye, start with draughts for the patient such as shall cleanse his head; and guard him from all humidities. Make him also sweat for some days, fasting, in the bath.	0.79381335
Then order him to shave his head and cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head. Then cauterize him with two cauteries on the temples if the beginning of the descent of the water is in both eyes, or from one side if it is in one eye.	Then tell him to have his head shaved; and burn him with one cauterization in the middle of the head; then cauterize him with two burns on the temples if the cataract is beginning in both eyes; or on the one side only if it is in one eye.	0.8955943
Then cut with the cautery all the veins and arteries that are under the skin, and let the cauteries be long across the width of the temples, and beware of bleeding, so if you see any of it, stop it immediately with any treatment you can, and we will come to the wisdom in stripping the arteries and cutting them and guarding against bleeding.	And with the cautery cut all the subcutaneous veins and arteries; and let the cauterizations be long, across the breadth of the temples. Beware of haemorrhage; if you see any, stanch it straight away with any means you can. We shall deal later on with the method of extraction and cutting out of arteries, and provision against haemorrhage.	0.8472731
And he may be cauterized on the nape of the neck under the two bones with two deep cauteries.	Two strong cauterizations are sometimes made on the back of the neck below the two bones.	0.61533415

chapter-1-subchapter-13.txt
The thirteenth chapter on cauterizing chronic tears.	CHAPTER THIRTEEN. On cauterization of persistent lachrymation.	0.75327575

chapter-1-subchapter-14.txt
The fourteenth chapter on cauterizing the stinking nose.	CHAPTER FOURTEEN. On cauterization for foetor of the nose.	0.7310343
If you treat him with what we mentioned in the classification and the treatment is not successful, then quickly give the sick person nutmeg for three nights. Then shave his head. And cauterize him with the middle cautery using the olive-shaped cautery iron. Then cauterize him with the nail-shaped cautery iron two cauterizations above the eyebrows slightly under the hair.	When you have treated foetor by those methods given in its section and your treatment is unsuccessful, give the patient laxative draughts for three days; then shave his head; and burn with a median cauterization with the olivary cautery; then cauterize him twice above the eyebrows a little below the hair with a claviform cautery.	0.84083426
And be careful of the artery, do not cut it.	Beware of cutting the artery.	0.6332793

chapter-1-subchapter-15.txt
Chapter fifteen on cauterizing the relaxation of the eyelid.	CHAPTER FIFTEEN. On cauterization for relaxation of the eyelid.	0.8564913
If the eyelid becomes flaccid due to illness or moisture, then cauterize the eyelid once with this crescent-shaped cautery iron.	When an eyelid droops either from disease or humidity, then burn the lid with a single cauterization with this crescent-shaped cautery.	0.86267567
And if you wish, cauterize him slightly above the eyebrows, two cauterizations on each side, and keep away from the temples. And the length of each cauterization should be the length of the eyebrow.	And if you wish burn him also a little above the eyebrows with two cauterizations (; that is, one) on each side; but keep clear of the temples; and let each cauterization be of the length of the eyebrow.	0.8685297
And do not overdo your hand with the cautery, but only to the extent that a third of the skin is burned.	Nor let your hand apply the cautery longer than to burn a third of the way through the skin.	0.7651193

chapter-1-subchapter-16.txt
Chapter sixteen on cauterizing the eyelid if its lashes turn inwards and prick the eye.	CHAPTER SIXTEEN. On cauterization of the eyelid when the eyelashes are turned inwards, irritating the eye.	0.78383434
So cauterization in it is of two types: either cauterization by fire or cauterization by a burning medication.	The cauterization is of two kinds, by fire and by caustic.	0.6820784
As for cauterizing it with fire, you order the patient, before that, to leave his eyelashes, if he is among those who pluck them, until they grow long and even. If it pricks him when they are growing, you tie his eyes with a bandage so that they do not move until they grow.	Cauterization by fire will be thus: tell the patient previously, if he is one of those who pluck the lashes, to let them grow till they are long and straight; and if during growth they irritate him, bind the eyes with a fillet so as not to move till they have grown.	0.8373584
When they have grown and are even, place the patient's head in your lap. Then mark on the eyelid with ink a mark in the shape of an ace of leaves. And the beginning of the mark should be near the eyelashes.	When they have grown and are straight, put the patient's head in your lap and mark upon the eyelid with ink the shape of a myrtle leaf, beginning near the lashes.	0.8732815
Then you place under the eyelid cotton soaked in egg white or in psyllium seed mucilage.	Then apply cotton wool soaked in egg-white or mucilage of psyllium seeds.	0.8876343
Then you heat a cautery iron, this is its image:	Then heat a cautery of this form.	0.5255474
Then cauterize on the shape that you marked, little by little, in many times until the surface of the skin, which is like the shape of a myrtle leaf, is completely burned, especially its surface.	Then burn over the shape marked out, slowly, with many small strokes, till the whole surface of the skin marked out to the shape of the myrtle leaf be cauterized, specially the outer part of it.	0.8808497
And the sign of the correctness of your work is that you see the eyelid has curled up and the hair has risen from the flesh of the eye, so lift your hand then and leave it for three days.	It will show the correctness of your work if you see the eyelid contracted and the lashes risen away from the white of the eye. Then remove your hand and let him be for three days.	0.84788525
Then apply cotton with ghee on it until the eschar falls off, then treat it with the ointment until it heals, God willing.	Then apply cotton wool soaked in butter till the scab falls off; then treat the place with ointment till healed.	0.7807165
If any of the hair returns after a while and the eyelid relaxes, repeat the cauterization on that place as you did first.	But if after an interval there be a return of the same condition of the eyelash and of drooping of the eyelid, repeat the cauterization in the same place just as you did before.	0.7664653
If the hair is on the lower eyelid, cauterize it until it returns to its natural position and the hair does not prick the eye.	And if it be in the lower lid cauterize this also till it falls back to its normal position and the hairs do not irritate the eye.	0.8422089
And it is necessary for you, when working, to be extremely careful that nothing of the medication falls into the eye.	But in your operative procedure take the utmost care lest the least bit of caustic get into the eye.	0.64494526
If the eyelid relaxes after days and we fear something from the hair in the eye, reapply the medication on that area of the eyelid that relaxed, specifically as you did first, then treat it until it heals.	And if, after some days, the eyelid be relaxed and some eyelash irritate the eye, then repeat the application, particularly in that part of the lid that has dropped, in the same manner as before; and treat till cured.	0.80555356
And this is a picture of a myrtle leaf:	This is the shape of the myrtle leaf.	0.62666637
And know that people's eyes may differ in smallness and largeness. So according to that should be your rolling up (of the eyelids).	You should know that the human eye varies in size; so let your contracture be in proportion to this.	0.67088985
And the correct way is not hidden from one who has practice in this profession.	The right procedure is well known to him who has experience in this art.	0.65609825

chapter-1-subchapter-17.txt
The seventeenth chapter on cauterizing the fistula that appears in the corner of the eye.	CHAPTER SEVENTEEN. On cauterization of a fistula in the angle of the eye.	0.7946731
If you treated the fistula with what we mentioned in the classifications of diseases and your treatment was not successful, then it should be cauterized in this manner.	When you have treated a fistula in those ways mentioned in the sections on diseases, without success, it should be cauterized after this manner.	0.8499142
You order the patient to place his head in your lap, and an assistant holds his head between your hands, holding it firmly so that he does not move or shake his head.	Bid the patient put his head in your lap; and let an assistant hold his head in front of you without moving or stirring.	0.8325242
Then you place cotton moistened in egg white or in psyllium mucilage on his eyes.	Then place on his eyes cotton wool damped with egg-white or mucilage of psyllium seeds.	0.9287431
Then you heat the cautery iron, which is of this shape:	Then heat a cautery shaped thus.	0.7540455
It should be hollow, like the quill of an eagle's feather, from the one end which will be cauterized.	It should be hollow and in shape like a fine tube, like an eagle's quill, at the one end that is used as a cautery.	0.7820937
And if you wish, it can be perforated at the other end. And if you wish, it can be solid like a bodkin.	And if you wish it may be perforated to the other extremity; or it can be solid like a probe.	0.82481337
But this hollow one is better for your work, God willing.	But this hollow instrument will be better for your operation.	0.7265792
Then squeeze the fistula if it is open and remove the pus and dry it. Or if it is not open, open it and remove its pus.	Then press on the fistula if it be open and get the matter out of it and wipe it away; or if it is not open, then open it.	0.9104395
Then apply the cautery, which is very hot. Hold it with your hand until it reaches the bone.	Then apply to it the cautery, which should be very hot, and press it in with your hand till it reaches the bone.	0.8952168
And move your hand a little during cauterization from the eye towards the nose, lest your hand err or the patient fidget, and the cautery falls into the eyelid and damages it.	While you are burning keep the hand away from the eye slightly toward the nasal side, lest your hand slip or the patient draw away so that you put the cautery into the ball of the eye and destroy it.	0.85322
If it reaches the bone with the first cauterization, otherwise, repeat the cauterization a second time if needed.	And if you reach the bone at the first cauterization, good; if not, repeat the cauterization if necessary.	0.8563414
And leave it for three days. Then apply cotton with butter and treat it with a drying ointment until it heals.	Leave it a few days, then put on cotton wool with butter and treat with hygroscopic ointment till it heals.	0.6948818
If forty days pass and it does not heal, then apply a strong corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed. And treat it according to what will be mentioned in its chapter, God willing.	And should forty days have passed and it does not heal, apply a sharp corrosive ointment so as to expose the bone, and strip it as will be explained in the appropriate chapter.	0.8108069
And another method of cauterizing the fistula, mentioned by some of the ancients, you aim at the location of the fistula, incise it, then place in the incision a thin funnel, its form is this: And you pour into it molten lead, the weight of a dirham. And you hold your hand firmly on the funnel, tightly closed.	Another method of cauterizing a fistula is that which some of the Ancients mentioned: apply yourself to the site of the fistula and incise it; then insert into the incision a fine funnel, this being the figure of it, and pour into it a drachm of molten lead; and keep your hand on the funnel, holding it firm all the time, and do not let the patient move at all, lest the molten lead run into his eyes.	0.81742823
And it is advisable that you place on the patient's eye cotton soaked in egg white or in water.	Then you should put cotton wool soaked in egg-white or water upon the patient's eye.	0.8355115
For the lead cauterizes the fistula's location and heals it wonderfully.	For the lead cauterizes the site of the fistula and acts as a marvellous cure.	0.85122067
If the fistula is healed by what we have mentioned of cauterization and treatment, then good; otherwise, it is necessary to use perforation of the nose and return the fistula to the nasal passage as will come in its specific place.	If the fistula heals by the cauterization and medication we have described, well and good; otherwise perforation of the nose will undoubtedly have to be undertaken to lead the fistula into the meatus of the nose, by the technique that will come in its own place.	0.8830571

chapter-1-subchapter-18.txt
Chapter Eighteen on Cauterizing Cleft Lip	CHAPTER EIGHTEEN. On cauterization of hare lip.	0.7314386
Often there occurs a fissure in the lip called the hair. And especially in the lips of boys, it often occurs.	There often occur fissures in the lip to which are given the name 'hairs'; they are particularly common in the lips of boys.	0.89382243
If you treat this fissure with what we mentioned in the division and the treatment does not succeed, then heat a small knife-shaped cautery in this way:	When you have ineffectually treated these clefts with those things that we have mentioned in their section, then heat a small edged cautery of this shape.	0.71702933
Its depth should be as thin as a knife.	The hollow should be as sharp as a knife.	0.7828086
Then you place it hot, quickly, in the same fissure. Until the cautery reaches the depth of the fissure.	Then quickly place it, hot, right on the fissure till the burning has reached the depth of the lip.	0.78964853
Then you treat it with cerate until it heals, God willing.	Then treat with wax plaster till healed.	0.6803931

chapter-1-subchapter-19.txt
Chapter nineteen on cauterizing fistula occurring in the mouth.	CHAPTER NINETEEN. On the cauterization of fistulae occurring in the mouth.	0.8796883
Then you treated it, but the treatment was not successful. It is necessary to heat a cautery iron to the extent that it fits in the fistula. Then insert it hot into the fistula's opening. And hold your hand steady until the hot iron reaches its depth and end.	When there comes a tumour in the base of the gums or in the palate or in the roots of the molar teeth, and it becomes purulent and breaks out and a fistula comes from the flow of pus, and you have treated this without effect, you should heat a cautery of a size to fit the fistula; then introduce it hot into the fistula opening; and continue the pressure with it hot until the iron, still hot, reaches the hollow and the extremity of it.	0.705924
And do that once or twice.	Do this once or twice over.	0.8645117
Then treat it afterward with what we mentioned of treatment until it heals, God willing.	Then afterwards treat as we have mentioned until it heals.	0.83322036
If the discharge stops, and it heals. Otherwise, it is necessary to examine the area and remove the corrupted bone according to what will come in its chapter, God willing.	If the matter stops and it heals, well and good; otherwise it is impossible to avoid opening up the place and removing the diseased bone in the manner we shall speak of in its proper chapter.	0.6754323

chapter-1-subchapter-20.txt
Chapter twenty on cauterizing the molars and the relaxed gums.	CHAPTER TWENTY. On cauterization of teeth and of relaxed gums.	0.8270969
If the gums are loose due to moisture and the molars are loose, and you have treated them with medicines and they have not been effective, then place the patient's head in your lap.	When the gums are relaxed on account of humidity and the teeth are loose, and you treat this with drugs, and your treatment is ineffectual, then place the patient's head in your lap; then heat the cautery whose picture will come later.	0.7605947
Then heat the cautery iron, whose image comes after this, after you place the tube on the tooth and insert the hot cautery iron into it quickly and hold your hand for a short time until the patient feels the heat of the fire has reached the root of the tooth. Then lift your hand.	Put a cannula upon his tooth and quickly introduce the glowing cautery into it and press a little until the patient can feel the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth; then remove your hand.	0.7905048
Then repeat the cautery as many times as you want.	Then repeat the cauterization as many times as you may desire.	0.95579755
Then the patient fills his mouth with salt water and holds it for an hour and then spits it out.	Then the patient should fill his mouth with saline, hold it for a while, then spit it out.	0.83228725
For the loose tooth will be fixed, and the loose gums will tighten, and the corrupt moisture will dry up.	Then the loose tooth will be made firm, the relaxed gum will be tightened, and the corrupt humidity will be dried up.	0.7453137

chapter-1-subchapter-21.txt
Chapter twenty-one on cauterizing toothache.	CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE. On cauterization for toothache.	0.8396301
If the toothache is caused by cold or there are worms in it, and treatment with medicines is not effective, then cauterization is done in two ways: either cauterization with ghee or cauterization with fire.	When the toothache arises on account of cold, or if there be a worm in the tooth, and medical treatment does not avail, then cauterization should be undertaken. There are two ways of doing this, one with butter, the other with the cautery.	0.82029366
Cauterization with ghee is done by taking cow ghee and boiling it in an iron spoon or in a shell, then taking cotton and wrapping it around the tip of a probe, then dipping it in the boiling ghee and placing it quickly on the aching tooth, holding it until it cools, and repeating this several times until the heat reaches the root of the tooth.	Cauterization with butter is done thus: take cows' butter and let it boil in an iron ladle or pan; then take cotton wool, wind it round the top of a probe, and dip it in the boiling butter and quickly apply it to the aching tooth and hold it there till cold. Repeat this a number of times till the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.	0.89420545
If you wish, you can dip wool or cotton in cold ghee and place it on the aching tooth and place the heated iron on top of it until the heat reaches the bottom of the tooth.	If you prefer, dip wool or cotton in cold butter and put it on the aching tooth, then on top of that apply the hot iron until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.	0.90994364
Cauterization with fire is done by using a copper or iron tube that is somewhat thick so that the heat of the fire does not reach the patient's mouth.	The actual cautery is administered thus: take a tube of bronze or iron with some thickness in the body of it so that the intensity of the fire does not reach the patient's mouth.	0.70455813
Then, heat the cauterizing iron, the image of which is shown, and place it on the tooth itself, holding your hand steady until the iron cools. Repeat this several times and the pain will go away, either that same day or the next.	Then heat a cautery whose figure will be given shortly, and apply it to the tooth itself and hold your hand until the cautery gets cold. Do this several times over; the pain will certainly depart the same day or the next.	0.87346935
After the cauterization, the patient should fill his mouth with good ghee, hold it for an hour, and then spit it out.	After this cauterization the patient is to fill his mouth with good butter and keep it in for a while, then spit it out.	0.85940456
And this is the image of the cauterizing iron:	This is the figure of the cautery.	0.49732304
Cauterize with whichever end you wish and according to what is possible.	Cauterize with whichever end you prefer according to circumstances.	0.76120365
And this is a picture of the tube:	This is the figure of the tube.	0.62497365

chapter-1-subchapter-22.txt
Chapter twenty-two on cauterizing pigs.	CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO. On cauterization of scrofulous tumours.	0.6057059
If the swellings are due to phlegm and cold humors, and they do not respond to maturation with medications, and you want rapid maturation, then heat the hollow iron, which is pictured here:	When the tumours arise from phlegm and cold humidities and are not to be dispersed with medicines and you wish for a rapid dispersal, then heat the hollow cautery of which this is the figure.	0.7561589
Perforated at both ends so that the smoke may come out of the other end during cauterization.	It is open at both ends to give exit for the fumes of burning from the other end.	0.71380544
Place it, protected, on the tumor itself once or twice if needed, until you reach the depth of the tumor.	Place it hot, right on the tumour, once, or twice if need be, till you reach the bottom of the tumour.	0.84923035
If the tumor is small, make the cautery iron the size of the tumor.	If the tumour be small, suit the cautery to the size of the tumour.	0.84595263
Then leave it for three days and apply cotton dipped in fat on it until what was burned by the fire disappears.	Then let be for three days and apply cotton wool soaked in butter until the eschar has disappeared.	0.8583666
Then treat it with the ointment and wicks until it heals, God willing.	Then treat with ointments and with plugs of lint till healed. [	0.7373588

chapter-1-subchapter-23.txt
Chapter twenty-three on cauterization for hoarseness of voice and shortness of breath.	CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE. On cauterization for hoarseness and for constriction of the breath.	0.8756064
If moistures prevail over the trachea, especially if that is with a cold temperament, then the sick person should first vomit using laxative medications.	When humidities prevail over the windpipe, and especially when there is a frigid temperament, the patient should first have his bowels opened with a laxative.	0.8363012
Then cauterize him with a cautery in the pit of the jugular vein at the base of the larynx in the low place, but be careful not to reach the larynx with the cautery, and do not burn more than half of the skin.	Then cauterize him once in the hollow of the jugular fossa at the root of the throat in the hollow part. Take care that the cautery does not pierce through to the gullet, and burn no more than half of the thickness of the skin.	0.8467667
Then cauterize him with another cautery at the joint of the neck at the last vertebra of it, intensely, and the cautery should be nail-shaped according to the description that preceded.	Then cauterize him once more, strongly, at the junction of the neck with its last vertebra, the cautery being claviform as described above.	0.86916053
Then treat him with what was mentioned previously until he recovers, God willing.	Then treat as prescribed before till healed.	0.6793667

chapter-1-subchapter-24.txt
Chapter twenty-four on cauterizing lung disease and cough.	CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR. On cauterization for pulmonary disease and for cough.	0.89565283
If the cough and lung disease are due to cold humors, and the patient has neither fever nor phthisis, and the disease is chronic, then cauterize him with two cauterizations above the clavicles in the low, soft, empty places, and another cauterization in the middle of the chest between the breasts, and the cautery iron should be nail-shaped in the form that has been previously described.	When the cough and pulmonary disease arise from cold humidities and the patient suffers from no fever or wasting but the disease is chronic, sear him with two cauterizations over the two clavicles, in the soft depressions ; and with another cauterization in the mid-line of the chest between the breasts. Let the cautery be claviform as described above.	0.8443486
And if you wish, let your cauterization be by spotting with the cautery iron that is called "the point," and its form has been previously described in the spotting for earache, and the spots should be from thirty spots to about that number.	And if you prefer, make punctate cauterizations with the cautery called 'punctate'; its shape has already been described under pricking for earache. The punctures should number upwards of thirty.	0.8106949
Then treat him with what has been mentioned previously until he recovers.	Then treat as aforesaid until healed.	0.8404671
And a cautery iron with three prongs may be made in this form, and cauterization is hastened with it because you cauterize three cauterizations with it at once.	Sometimes also a trident cautery is prepared, in this manner, with which you can burn more speedily; for with this you can apply three cauterizations at once.	0.75602794

chapter-1-subchapter-25.txt
Chapter Twenty-Five on Cauterizing the Armpit	CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE. On cauterization of the axilla.	0.7109052
If the head of the humerus is dislocated due to slippery humors, or it does not stabilize when it is reduced from its dislocation until it becomes habitual for it to be reduced and then dislocated at the slightest movement, as we have witnessed it, then the jaw should be reduced first. Then the patient lies on his back or on the healthy side. Then the skin inside the armpit is lifted upwards with the fingers of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated inwards.	When the head of the humerus is dislocated on account of the synovial fluid or when it does not remain in the correct position after the dislocation has been set, so that this becomes a regular occurrenceit is set and then dislocates with the least movement, as we have ourselves seen; you must first set the luxation, then make the patient lie down on his back or on his sound side; then with the fingers of the left hand lift up the skin of the axilla if the joint has dislocated downwards.	0.8807435
Then heat the cautery with two skewers, whose image is this:	Then heat a cautery provided with two spits in this manner.	0.72844684
Then the skin is cauterized with it until it penetrates to the other side. And the shape of the cauterization becomes four cauterizations.	Then with that burn through the fold of skin till you have perforated to the other side, getting four cauterizations.	0.7532486
And it may be cauterized with a cautery iron having three blades, so the shape of the cauterization then will be six cauterizations.	The cautery may be of three prongs and then the form of the cauterization will be six burns.	0.782766
And the blades should be of the thinness of a file.	The prongs should be of the fineness of a probe.	0.6732783
And this is a picture of the cautery iron with three blades:	This is the figure of the cautery with three prongs.	0.6816844
And one may be added to this number, making the cauterizations eight.	Sometimes there is added yet one more so there will be eight burns.	0.537676
Then the crushed colocynth is applied to the cauterization with salt. Then the patient must rest and not move the limb for a while until it strengthens.	Put on the burns leeks well pounded with salt; then keep the patient absolutely quiet so as not to move the joint for a time till it gains strength.	0.67704815
And if the dislocation is upwards, and this rarely happens, cauterize it above the shoulder with one good nail-shaped cauterization or many cauterizations by dripping/dotting.	If the dislocation has gone upwards, which very rarely happens, then cauterize him above the shoulder with one good claviform cautery or with multiple punctured cauterizations.	0.79707754
For the joint will strengthen, the moisture will go away, and the patient will recover.	Thus the joint will gain strength and the humidity will disappear and the patient will be cured.	0.8380325

chapter-1-subchapter-26.txt
Chapter twenty-six on cauterizing the stomach.	CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX. On cauterization of the stomach.	0.8550894
and let the depth of the cauterization be two-thirds of the thickness of the skin	Let the depth of the burning be two-thirds of the depth of the skin.	0.7592027
and let the shape of the cauterizations be according to this image and according to this amount, without any addition	Let the shape of the cauterizations be thus and of no more than this size.	0.62195086
And if you wish, cauterize it with one large cauterization in the middle of the stomach in this manner:	If you wish, make a single large cauterization in the middle of the stomach, thus.	0.8015409
And the cautery iron with which this single cauterization is performed will be in the shape of a circle in this form:	The cautery for this single cauterization is circular, thus.	0.48554844
And the stomach may be cauterized by spotting, for those who are afraid of this cauterization.	The stomach may be cauterized with punctures in the case of a person who fears this operation.	0.69072175
And it is that you mark spots on the stomach in the amount you want, with ink. Then you cauterize it with a spotting cautery iron.	You will have marked the points with ink on the stomach, as many as you wish; then sear with a punctate cautery.	0.77707225
Then you treat it with the treatment mentioned previously, until he recovers.	Then treat as previously described until he be healed.	0.8831957

chapter-1-subchapter-27.txt
Chapter twenty-seven on cauterizing the cold liver.	CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN. On the cauterization of a cold liver.	0.8623173
If pain arises in the liver from coldness and moisture, or from intense wind, to the point that it departs excessively from its natural temperament, and the patient is treated with what we mentioned in the classification, but it does not succeed, then it is necessary that the patient lies flat on their back, and three cauterizations are marked with ink in this shape and this exact measure:	When there is pain in the liver from cold and humidity or from thick vapour, so there is a severe disturbance of its natural constitution, and the patient has been treated as prescribed in the appropriate section but with no effect, the patient should lie back, and you should mark with ink the places of three cauterizations, in this form and exactly of this size below the costal cartilages, where the elbow reaches.	0.7911627
On the liver, below the ribs, where the human elbow ends, it should be after each cauterization, with the distance between cauterizations being the thickness of a finger. And the cauterization should be along the length of the body, straight.	Let there be a finger's breadth between each pair of cauterizations and let the burning be straight along the length of the body.	0.587021
And do not clench your hand with the cautery iron, gently.	Do not press the cautery hard with your hand.	0.6867466
And let the amount you burn of the skin's thickness be half of it, no more. And the patient should be standing on his feet.	Let the thickness of the skin you burn be half its thickness, not more; and let the patient be standing on his feet during the cauterization.	0.8030065
But if he is not standing, then he should be lying down, having extended his legs and raised his arms.	Alternatively he may be recumbent with legs outstretched and arms raised.	0.6494795
And you can cauterize these cauterizations with the scalpel cautery if you have gentleness and skill in the craft.	You will also be able to do these cauterizations with the edged cautery when you have craft and facility in the art.	0.7708779
And be careful not to go too deep in the cauterization, burning all the skin, so that you burn the abdomen and reach the intestines. For the skin there is thin, so know this.	Be careful lest you go too deep with the cautery and burn the whole thickness of the skin and the abdomen and penetrate to the intestine, for the skin there is thin; bear this in mind.	0.79282284

chapter-1-subchapter-28.txt
Chapter twenty-eight on treating liver swelling with cauterization.	CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT. On incising a tumour of the liver with the cautery.	0.772508
If an abscess appears in the liver and you want to know whether that swelling is in the liver's parenchyma or in its membrane, then if it is in the parenchyma, the patient will feel heaviness and pain without sharpness.	When there is an abscess in the liver and you are anxious to know if the tumour is in the body of the liver or in its capsule: if it is in the substance of the liver, the patient will be suffering from a feeling of heaviness and no very acute pain.	0.7603461
And if it is in the liver's membrane, there will be intense sharpness with the pain. And I have seen that its treatment has baffled physicians, so the patient should lie on his back.	But if it is in the capsule of the liver there will be the sharpest intensity of pain and you will see that it has baffled the doctors.	0.6780535
And I have seen that its treatment has baffled physicians, so the patient should lie on his back. Then mark the swollen area with ink.	Then the patient should lie back on his neck; then mark the place of the swelling with ink.	0.69749236
Then heat the cautery iron in the fire, and it is the cautery iron that resembles the probe, and this is its image: And cauterize it with a single cauterization until you burn all the skin. And continue with the cauterization to the peritoneum until all the pus comes out.	Then heat the cautery in the fire, this being the cautery resembling a probe, of this form, and with that make one cauterization till the whole thickness of the skin is burnt through, finishing up at the capsule so that all the purulent matter comes out.	0.7930666
Then treat it with the treatment of abscesses until it heals.	Then apply the treatment for wounds.	0.6275132
And this type of cauterization should not be used except by someone who has long training in the art of medicine and has treated these diseases with experience repeatedly.	This kind of cauterization should not be employed except by one who has a long experience of the medical art and who has frequent practice at dealing with this kind of disease.	0.84549505
Only then should he undertake such a procedure.	Then he can undertake this kind of operation.	0.7584439
And leaving it (untreated) in my opinion is better.	But in my opinion it would be better to pass it by.	0.554437

chapter-1-subchapter-29.txt
Chapter twenty-nine on cauterizing hemorrhoids.	CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE. On cauterization for pleurisy.	0.7523667
The ancients mentioned cauterization with birthwort roots for cold quinsy in this manner. It is that you take from the long dry roots of birthwort a single root, the longest you can find, and it should be as thick as a finger, then dip it in oil and burn it in fire, then cauterize with it once between the junction of the clavicle and the neck. And two small cauterizations a little below the jugular veins, inclined towards the area under the chin.	The Ancients mentioned a cauterization for cold pleurisy by means of the roots of the long birthwort, in this fashion: you take the longest you can find of the roots of the long dry birthwort, and of the thickness of one finger; dip this in oil and light it at the fire; then burn the patient with one cauterization in the space between the junction of the neck with the clavicle; and two small cauterizations below the jugular veins, inclining slightly toward the region below the beard.	0.9009654
And two large cauterizations above the breasts, between the third and fourth ribs. And two cauterizations also between the fifth and sixth ribs, inclined slightly towards the back. And another cauterization in the middle of the chest and another above the stomach. And three cauterizations from behind, one between the shoulders, and two on the sides of the back, lower than the cauterization that is between the two hands.	And two big cauterizations above the nipples in the space between the third and fourth ribs; and two more between the fifth and sixth ribs, tending slightly toward the back; and another in the middle of the chest; and another above the stomach; and three more behind, namely, one between the scapulae and two on either side of the dorsal spine below the one between the scapulae.	0.96327543
And it is not appropriate to deepen your hand with the cautery, rather it should be on the surface of the skin, a superficial burning.	It is not necessary to cauterize deeply, but let it be a mere hint, in the outer skin.	0.59166086
And some of the ancients mentioned that some people used an iron cautery, like a probe, and heat it up, and insert it between the ribs until it reaches the tumor itself, and extract the pus as we mentioned in the case of liver tumors.	Now one of the Ancients mentioned that there were some people who used an iron cautery shaped like a probe, and introduced it red hot into the intercostal space until it reached the abscess itself and evacuated the pus, as we have mentioned under tumour of the liver.	0.8532826
And in this recklessness with cautery is a great risk: either the patient dies immediately, or a fistula develops in the area that has no cure.	But in this perforation with the cautery there is a danger either that the patient may die on the spot or that an incurable fistula may arise at the place.	0.7669723

chapter-1-subchapter-30.txt
Chapter Thirty on Cauterizing the Spleen	CHAPTER THIRTY. On cauterization of the spleen.	0.7241858
And the other aspect is in the elbow, and you lift the skin opposite the spleen where the elbow of the sick person ends, the elbow, and you lift the skin opposite the spleen where the left elbow of the sick person ends, and your lifting of the skin should be across the width of the body, so that the cauterizations fall along the length of the body, then you insert the two skewers, very protected, until they penetrate the skin from the other side, then you remove the cautery iron, so the cauterizations are four.	The second method is to heat the cautery provided with two prongs, described in the chapter on dislocation of the shoulder. Lift up the skin over the spleen at the level of the patient's left elbow; and let the fold of skin lie across the patient's body so that the cauterizations will fall longitudinally. Then push in the two prongs, well heated, till you have pierced the skin from side to side. Then take out the cautery; and there are four cauterizations.	0.78473
And if you wish to cauterize with the other cautery iron, which has three skewers, then treat the cauterized area after you leave it to drain pus for many days, then it is more effective than all of what preceded from the treatment.	Or if you prefer you can burn with the other cautery, of three prongs. Then dress the site of cauterization after you have allowed pus to run therefrom for many days. This is more effective than any of the preceding treatments.	0.80213404

chapter-1-subchapter-31.txt
Chapter thirty-one on cauterizing ascites.	CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE. On the cauterization of dropsy.	0.7864146
Cauterization is only beneficial in particular for ascites due to an obstruction.	The cautery is particularly effective in ascites.	0.7209648
If you treat the patient with ascites with the types of treatment that we mentioned in the classification, and your treatment is not effective, then it is appropriate to cauterize him with four cauterizations around the navel, one cauterization on the stomach, another cauterization on the liver, a cauterization on the spleen, and two cauterizations behind his back between the vertebrae, one facing his chest and the other facing his stomach. And the depth of the cauterization should be close to the thickness of the skin.	When you have, without effect, treated a dropsical person with the various measures mentioned in the section on diseases, you should sear with four cauterizations around the umbilicus, and one over the stomach, another over the liver, and another over the spleen, and two behind his back between the vertebrae, one at the level of the breast and one at the level of the stomach; and let the burn be almost skin-deep.	0.80020565
Then you leave the cauterization open, letting the pus flow for a long time.	Then keep the burn open so that it suppurates for a long while.	0.72665024
And do not neglect treating the patient after the cauterization with what is appropriate to combine for him the two meanings, so that healing will quickly come to him.	Do not let the patient, after cauterization, be without the necessary treatment, so that you combine both methods for him, and a cure will speedily come to him.	0.8165248
And the shape of the cautery iron with which the back is cauterized should be nail-shaped, as its image was presented previously, and the one with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped.	The cautery with which his belly is cauterized should be claviform like the figure previously given; while the one with which his back is cauterized should be olivary.	0.81830376

chapter-1-subchapter-32.txt
Chapter thirty-two on cauterizing the feet and legs.	CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO. On cauterization of the legs and feet.	0.88229
If they swell in ascites and are filled with yellow water, then it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot in the hollow between the little finger and the ring finger. And keep your hand steady with the cautery iron, and do not twist it.	When, in the sufferer from dropsy, these swell and become full of yellowish fluid, you should cauterize the upper surface of the feet in the depression between the little and fourth toes; hold your hand upright with the cautery; do not let it slant.	0.7361537
Then lift your hand and do not return it at all. For it will drain the yellow water.	Then remove your hand and do no more cauterization whatever; for the yellowish fluid will exude.	0.7717355
And the cautery iron should be of this form:	The cautery should be of this type.	0.5713316
Then cauterize on the legs, two spots, two spots on each leg. And the cauterization should be with the knife-like edge of the cautery iron. And the cauterization should be along the length of the leg, one below the knee and another below it towards the middle of the leg.	Then sear the legs with two cauterizations on each leg; cauterize with the bladed end of the cautery, and let it be along the length of the leg: one under the knee, the other lower than that, about the middle of the leg; and two more cauterizations over each femur.	0.86933357
And leave the cauterization open without treatment for a long time so that water seeps from it.	Leave the burns open without treatment for a long while during which the fluid will exude from them.	0.65971625
Then treat it with all that we have mentioned.	Then dress with all that we have described.	0.8310102

chapter-1-subchapter-33.txt
Chapter thirty-three on cauterizing diarrhea.	CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE. On cauterization for diarrhoea.	0.864262
If the diarrhea is from cold and humors, so that it weakens the retentive and digestive powers in the stomach and intestines, and it has been treated with various treatments, but has not healed, and you see the patient tolerating cautery and having sufficient strength, then cauterize him with a large cautery on his stomach, as mentioned previously in cauterizing the stomach with the circular cautery iron, and four gentle cauterizations around the navel with the gentle nail-shaped cautery iron, and a large cautery on the coccyx above the buttocks, or two cauteries.	When the diarrhoea is due to frigidity and humidities so that the capacity of the stomach and intestines to hold and to digest is impaired, and this has been treated by various methods and is not cured; if you see that the patient is able to endure the cautery and is of unimpaired strength, make a big cauterization on his stomach according to the preceding instructions for cauterization of the stomach with a circular cautery; and four narrow cauterizations round his navel with the thin claviform cautery; and one or two big cauterizations in the lumbar region over the coccyx.	0.9097078
If you see that the humors are abundant and the patient can tolerate it, then cauterize him with a cautery on the pubis and a cautery on each flank, and perhaps you may add two small cauterizations on the stomach near the large one, for it is a successful treatment whose benefit will not fail, God willing.	And if you see that the humidities are superabundant, and the patient fit to tolerate it, then make one cauterization over the groin and one over the hypochondrium. You may also add two small ones over the stomach near the big one. This is an effective treatment that does not fail to help.	0.77935594

chapter-1-subchapter-34.txt
Chapter thirty-four on cauterizing hemorrhoids of the anus.	CHAPTER THIRTY-FOUR. On cauterization for anal haemorrhoids.	0.86899745
If there are many or one chronic hemorrhoid in the anus, and it is from thick cold humors or corrupt moistures, and it was treated with what we mentioned in the division, but the treatment did not work then cauterize the patient with three triangular cauterizations on the bottom of the vertebrae of the back, slightly below the buttocks and a cauterization below the navel by about two fingers' breadth	When there are one or more chronic haemorrhoids in the anus arising from thick and cold humours or corrupt humidities, and they have been treated by those measures mentioned in the section, without effect, then sear the patient with three cauterizations over the lowest dorsal vertebra a little below the flat part of the back, triangularly; and one about two fingers' breadth below the navel.	0.9080104
And if you estimate that his stomach has become cold, and his food is not being digested, and you see his face swollen then cauterize him on the stomach with a large cauterization as mentioned before and a cauterization on his liver and another on his spleen with a nail-shaped cautery iron	And if you consider that his stomach has become chilled and his food not being digested, and you see his face swollen, then do one big cauterization over the stomach as previously described; and one over his liver; and another over the spleen; with the claviform cautery.	0.91668874
and leave the cauterization open for a while then treat it until it heals, God willing	Keep the burn open a long while; then dress till healed.	0.63850224

chapter-1-subchapter-35.txt
Chapter thirty-five on cauterizing warts after cutting them.	CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE. On cauterization of warts after excision.	0.8559706
If you cut the wart, heat the cautery iron that resembles the probe. Then insert it hot into the same cut wart. And press your hand until the cautery reaches the opening of the vessel from which the blood flows.	When you excise warts, heat a spike-shaped cautery and bring it, hot, to the site of the excised wart, and press down till the cautery reaches the mouth of the vessel whence the blood comes.	0.8090466
Do this once or twice.	Do this once or twice over.	0.97891295
If the warts are many, cauterize each one as we have described. Then treat them with suitable ointments until they heal.	If the warts be more than one, sear each one separately as we have described ; then dress with suitable ointments till healed.	0.8928603
And if you cauterize it also with a large cauterization on cotton, it would be more effective in benefit.	And if you burn the patient with one big cauterization over the lumbar region that will add to the effect.	0.6417047

chapter-1-subchapter-36.txt
Chapter Thirty-Six on Cauterizing the Fistula that Occurs in the Anus and its Surroundings	CHAPTER THIRTY-SIX. On the cauterization of fistulae in the anal and peri-anal regions.	0.69755864
If the patient does not respond to the incision and the procedure that we described in its place and is afraid of it, then perhaps he will recover with cauterization.	When the patient will not submit to the cutting operation we have described in its own place, and is afraid of it, he may perhaps be cured with the cautery.	0.87629956
So if a fistula occurs in someone and becomes chronic, pus and corrupted fluids flow from it, then the first thing you should do is measure it with a thin probe. Then know the extent of its depth with the probe.	So when somebody gets a fistula, and pus and foul humidities have for a long while been running from it, you must first explore it with a fine probe and judge of its depth by the probe.	0.85860574
Then heat the cauterizing iron that resembles the probe. Then insert it hot into the fistula itself, aligned with the depth of the fistula and the extent to which the probe entered.	Then heat a spike-shaped cautery and introduce it, hot, into the fistula, in the direction of the bottom of the fistula and to the depth to which the probe entered.	0.84235
And repeat the cauterization until all those corrupted tissues are burned, once or twice or thrice, according to your need.	And repeat the cauterization till all those corrupt bodies are burnt away; once or twice or three times over, as you have need.	0.8623301
And beware of burning a nerve, if there is one there, or a large vein.	But beware of burning a nerve should one be there, or a big blood-vessel.	0.8411857
And if the fistula leads to the body of the bladder or to the body of the intestine, then beware of all these places.	If the fistula penetrates to the urinary bladder or the intestine, beware of all these parts.	0.8017794
And you only do that if the fistula is in a fleshy place and you estimate that it is not perforated.	Do this only when the fistula is in a fleshy part and you judge that it does not open into any other part.	0.75474143
Then treat the area until it heals.	Afterwards dress the place till healed.	0.79653424
If the area seals and the discharge stops from it and remains so for a while, then know that it has completely healed.	If the place cicatrizes and the flux of humours ceases and it remains so for a long while, you may know that it is perfectly healed.	0.811432
And if the discharge does not stop from it, then know that it is perforated or there is a corrupted bone in its depth, or something similar to that, which will be mentioned in its place.	But if the flux of humours from it is not stopped, understand that it has perforated or that at the bottom there is a piece of diseased bone or the like; which will be mentioned in its proper place.	0.83520037

chapter-1-subchapter-37.txt
Chapter thirty-seven on cauterizing the kidneys.	CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN. On cauterization of the kidneys.	0.8626591
If there occurs in the kidneys pain from cold or thick wind, and because of that the sick person's intercourse diminishes then it is necessary to cauterize him on the buttocks, on the location of the kidneys, a cauterization on each kidney with the nail-shaped cautery iron that was mentioned before.	When pain strikes the kidneys from chill or heavy vapour, and the patient's sexual vigour is impaired thereby, you should burn him right over the kidneys, once on each kidney, with the claviform cautery mentioned before.	0.7607821
And perhaps we cauterize him a third time at the same sitting, resulting in three cauterizations lined up, so it is more effective in benefit.	I have often burnt him with a third cauterization on the flat of the back, making three cauterizations in a line, which is most effective.	0.64228225

chapter-1-subchapter-38.txt
Chapter thirty-eight on cauterizing the bladder.	CHAPTER THIRTY-EIGHT. On cauterization of the urinary bladder.	0.85985154
If there occurs in the bladder weakness and laxity from cold and humors, so that the sick person cannot hold their urine then cauterize him with a cautery below the navel, over the bladder, where the pubic hair begins and with a cautery to the right of the navel and another to its left and let the distance after the cauterization, from each side, be the extent of a thumb-joint	When there occurs in the urinary bladder a weakness and relaxation due to chill and humidities, so that the patient cannot retain his water, sear him once below his navel, on the bladder, where the pubic hair begins; burn him once also on the right side and once on the left side of the navel; and let the distance of the burn from either side be the length of the joint of the thumb.	0.8531486
and cauterize him with a cautery in the lower back or two cauteries if there is need for that	Cauterize him also once on the lower part of the back, or twice if you need.	0.73158574
and let the cautery instrument be nail-shaped, as mentioned previously.	The cautery should be claviform, as described.	0.54104626

chapter-1-subchapter-39.txt
Chapter thirty-nine on cauterizing the uterus.	CHAPTER THIRTY-NINE. On cauterization of the womb.	0.8664384
If a substance of coldness and humidities occurs in the uterus, it thereby prevents pregnancy. And its menses are corrupted and its flow is difficult. Or pain occurs to her at its arrival. Then it is appropriate to cauterize three cauterizations around the navel as we mentioned in the cauterization of the bladder.	When matter arises in the womb from chill or humidities and she is thereby prevented from conceiving and her menses are upset; their flow fails or, as they pass, pain accompanies them; then you must cauterize her three times around the navel, as we have mentioned in cauterization of the bladder; and once or twice in the lumbar region in the lower part of the back over the hips.	0.82366884
And the cautery iron should be nail-shaped.	The cautery should be claviform.	0.6418545

chapter-1-subchapter-40.txt
Chapter forty on cauterizing hip dislocation.	CHAPTER FORTY. On cauterization of a dislocated hip.	0.8192059
Erroneous/Harmful humors may flow to the hip joint, causing it to be dislocated.	Sometimes harmful humidities reach the hip joint and result in its coming out of its place.	0.5449657
And its sign is that one leg becomes longer than the other when you compare them to each other. And you find a gap at the site of the dislocation.	The symptom of this is that one leg is longer than the other when one is measured against the other; and a hollow is found there [i.e. at the hip].	0.7448597
It is necessary to cauterize the patient on the hip joint itself with a semi-circular cautery after marking with ink around the joint as it rotates, so that the joint itself falls in the center of the circle.	Then you should cauterize the patient over the hip joint itself with a circular burn, after you have marked with ink a circle round the femoral joint, so that the joint falls in the middle of the circle.	0.85143363
And use the cautery whose image is presented in stomach cauterization.	The cautery should be the one whose description has already been given in cauterization of the stomach.	0.5483243
If this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it three times with the large olive-shaped cautery.	But if you have not this cautery by you, give him three cauterizations with the larger size olivary cautery.	0.78665155
And make the depth of the cauterization equal to the thickness of the entire skin.	The burn should be to the depth of the whole thickness of the skin.	0.5680916
Then treat him until he recovers, God willing.	Then dress till healed.	0.5701921

chapter-1-subchapter-41.txt
Chapter forty-one on cauterizing the sciatic nerve.	CHAPTER FORTY-ONE. On cauterization for sciatica.	0.78465664
If pain occurs in the hip joint, and its cause is cold and humidity, and you have treated the patient with what we mentioned in the division, but the treatment was not successful, and this becomes chronic, then it is necessary to purge the patient of thick humors with habb al-muntin (asafoetida) or habb al-sabari (aloe vera) and the like. Then cauterize him.	When pain occurs in the hip joint and is due to cold and humidities, and the patient has been treated by those means mentioned in the section, and the treatment is ineffectual, and the pain becomes chronic, the patient should be purged of the heavy humours with foetid pills or pills of tamarind or the like; then cauterize him.	0.74454784
And the method of cauterization in it is of two types. Either cauterization with burning medications or cauterization with fire.	The means of cauterization in this case is twofold: either with caustic chemicals or with fire.	0.7553667
And cauterization with fire is of many types.	The actual cautery will serve for several methods.	0.43179965
One of them is that you cauterize on the hip joint itself three triangular cauterizations in this manner: And it should have a suitable depth, and the distance between each cauterization mark should be about the thickness of a finger, and the cautery iron should be olive-shaped.	One of them is to make three cauterizations over the femoral joint itself in a triangular manner ; and let them be of a fair depth; and the space between them a finger's breadth. The cautery should be an olivary one.	0.84394616
A cauterization may also be performed in the middle, on the head of the hip itself, making four cauterizations.	Sometimes there will also be one cauterization in the middle over the actual head of the femur, making four cauterizations in all.	0.77663934
And if you wish, cauterize it with the circle that was previously mentioned in the cauterization of hip dislocation, a single cauterization, so that the circle surrounds the entire hip and burns the entire thickness of the skin.	The burning may be done with the circular cautery which has been mentioned under cauterization of a dislocated hip; a single cauterization so that the circle embrace the whole joint. Burn through the whole thickness of the skin.	0.7386628
This is the method of cauterization for sciatica if the pain is confined to the hip itself and does not extend to the thigh and leg.	This is the form of cauterization for sciatica when the pain is localized in the hip joint and does not extend to the femur and the leg.	0.8908683
If it extends to the thigh and leg, cauterize it with two cauterizations on the thigh, on the location where the patient indicates the pain, and one cauterization above the ankle by four fingers, slightly to the lateral side, and the cautery iron should be knife-shaped, and the depth of the cauterization should be only the thickness of the skin.	But if it extends to the femur and the leg, cauterize him over the thigh with two burns at the place where the patient indicates the pain to be; and one burn four fingers above the great tendon of the heel, a little to the outer side. The cautery should be edged, and the depth of the burn only to the thickness of the skin.	0.8673245
And if he indicates that the pain extends towards the toes, cauterize it where he indicates, with the point cautery, three or four times, or more if needed.	But if the patient points out that the pain reaches to the toes, then cauterize where he has indicated to you, with a punctate cautery, three or four or more perforations if he needs it.	0.8384161
And if he indicates pain below the knee towards the leg, cauterize there with a single knife-shaped cauterization.	If he indicates that the pain is under the knee towards the shank, give him one burn there with the edged cautery.	0.76602614
And be careful in all your cauterizations not to reach the point of burning a nerve or a major artery, thus causing the patient a serious injury or chronic illness.	Be careful in all your cauterizing not to carry the cautery so far as to burn a nerve or a large artery; for thence arises grave harm, or crippling, to the patient.	0.8350494
I have seen one and another of those who were cauterized above the ankle, and the cauterization was excessive, so the leg became infected until the infection reached the foot, and it became perforated entirely, and the entire leg was ruined, then diarrhea occurred, and death followed.	I myself have seen more than one person cauterizing over the tendon of Achilles, the cauterization being excessive, and the leg was affected with a defluxion of humours which eventually reached the foot and the whole was riddled; after that came diarrhoea, and, after that, death.	0.7935453
If the pain is in both sides, cauterize them both in this same manner.	If there is pain in two places, cauterize both in this way.	0.89822656
Some learned physicians have mentioned a cauterization for the hip, whose description is as follows: A cup-like object is made of iron, its diameter being half a span, and at its mouth it is about the thickness of a date pit or slightly less, and inside that cup is another cup, and a third cup, and the distance between each two cups is about the length of a thumb joint, and the cups are open on both sides, and their height is about one or two thumb joints, and a handle of iron is made for them, firmly attached to the cups, and this is its image:	Certain learned doctors have mentioned a cauterization applicable to the hip in this manner: make a bowl of iron with a diameter of half a span; the thickness of the edge of its mouth should be that of a date-stone or a little less. Another bowl is introduced into this, and a third into that; and there is a distance between the bowls of a thumb-joint. The bowls are open on both sides; and the depth of them should be a thumb-joint or two. Make an iron handle for them firmly fitted to the bowls.	0.8859138
Then it is heated in the fire until it becomes red and throws off sparks. Then it is placed on the hip joint while the patient is leaning on the healthy side. Then cauterize him with three circular burns at once.	Then heat this cautery in the fire until it is hot and sends out sparks; and so let it be applied to the hip, the patient lying on his sound side; and thus three circular cauterizations will be produced at a time.	0.84737
Then leave him for three days and dress it with ghee. And leave the wound open for many days. Then treat it with the ointment until it heals.	Afterwards let it be for three days; then smear with butter and leave the wound open for a while; then treat with ointment till it heals.	0.8603711
The author of this book said: This type of cauterization we rarely use because of its ugliness and the dreadfulness of its appearance.	The author of this book says that we very rarely employ this method of cauterization on account of the ugliness and dread appearance of it, and because we find few patients who will endure it.	0.80174947
And because of the scarcity of those we find who can bear it, except that it is a good cauterization for those who endure it and its proper place is affected.	Nevertheless, it is one of the best cauteries for him who can endure it and is correctly treated by it.	0.5037463
As for cauterization with burning medications, it is that you make two cups, similar to the rings into which the bolt of the door descends, of copper or iron.	Cauterization with caustics is thus: make two bowls like the ring into which a door-hinge descends, either of bronze or iron.	0.773637
Let there be on their edge a height of about two knuckles or so. And let the distance between them be the width of a finger. And let them be open at the bottom, open at the top. And let them be held together in this manner:	The height of their sides should be two thumb-joints or thereabouts, and they should be separated about a finger's breadth; they should be open above and below, and joined one to another thus.	0.8453856
If the pain extends to the thigh or the leg, you make a mold for it to hold the water, just as you did with the hip.	If the pain extends to the hip joint or the leg, make a form in some material that will hold the fluid for that, just as you did for the capsule of the femur.	0.7852274
And this is the description of the corrosive water, which I have already recorded in the treatise on the Rectification of Medicines. You take one part each of alkali salt and quicklime. You crush them and place them in a new pot that has a single small hole pierced in its bottom, the size of a probe. And you place another glazed pot beneath the bottom of the pot. And you pour fresh water over the alkali and the lime to submerge them by a finger's breadth after you have mixed them well with your hand. And you leave the pot until the corrosive water drips down into the bottom of the glazed pot. Then you collect all of that water. Then you pour it over another batch of fresh lime and alkali. For then it will be very strong and sharp, effective in many medical procedures and in cauterizing all the limbs because it acts exactly like fire.	Now this is the description of the caustic; I have already put it in my treatise on the improvement of drugs: take of the salt of potash and quicklime, equal parts, and beat them both up well and put them into a new earthen pot, in the bottom of which you have made a small hole of a size to take a probe. Place under that pot another one, glazed. Pour enough water on the quicklime and potash to cover them to a finger's breadth after you have pressed them well together with your hand; and leave the pot until the caustic fluid has passed down into the bottom of the glazed pot. Then collect all that fluid and pour it upon a fresh lot of lime and potash.	0.87402284
Among the medications that can also be used to cauterize the hip are thapsia, honey of jujube, and lime with soap, ground together.	There are other drugs too with which the capsule of the femur is cauterized, such as Thapsia and Mel Anacardinum and inunction of lime with soap.	0.64792794
If he is not cured, then repeat the poultice after ten days, and he will be cured, God willing.	If he is not cured repeat the plaster in ten days' time and then he will be healed.	0.8295393
Know that cauterization with these medicines should not be used except after purging the body.	But you must know that no one should have cauterization with these drugs except after evacuation of the bowel.	0.7782997
Dioscorides mentioned that goat dung, if used for cauterization of sciatica, is beneficial for it, and the cauterization is done in the following manner.	Dioscorides has said that cauterization with goats' dung is beneficial for sciatica.	0.7637562
Wool is taken and soaked in old oil and placed on the deep spot between the thumb and the forearm, closer to the forearm. Then take dry goat dung and ignite it with fire until it becomes an ember. Then place it on the wool and leave it until it is extinguished. Then take another piece. You continue doing this until the sensation reaches the hip through the upper arm, and the pain subsides, God willing. This type of cauterization is called dung cauterization.	The cauterization is carried out in this manner: take wool soaked in old oil and put it into the cleft which is between the thumb and the forearm but nearer to the forearm. Then take the dried dung of a goat and expose it to fire until it glows like a coal. Place it on the piece of wool, and leave till it cools, then replace it with another, and so on until the sensation has reached the hip joint by way of the forearm, and the pain stops. This kind of cautery is called 'the dung cautery'.	0.8783878

chapter-1-subchapter-42.txt
The forty-second chapter on cauterizing back pain.	CHAPTER FORTY-TWO. On cauterization for pain in the back.	0.8306936
Pain may occur in the back from many causes, either from a fall, a blow, excessive vomiting, or the like.	Many different causes give pain in the back. Sometimes it happens from a fall or a blow, or from excessive evacuation or the like.	0.85513425
And it happens from the outpouring of a cold, moist humor.	It may also be due to an influx of humid matter.	0.46384612
And cauterization is only applied in this category alone, which results from the outpouring of a cold humor.	Cauterization is only to be employed in this last case, which arises from an influx of cold matter.	0.7024547
Therefore, it is necessary, after the patient vomits with   (habb al-muntin) or similar, to cauterize his back where the pain is, in three rows across the width of the table itself, after marking the place with ink, in each row five cauterizations or more, according to what you see of the patient's tolerance and strength. And the cauterization should be with a point cautery.	When the patient has been purged with foetid pills or the like, he should be cauterized in his back where the pain is, over the breadth of the flat of the back, after the place has been marked with ink, with three rows of cauterizations, five in each, or more, in proportion to what you see of the patient's endurance and strength.	0.78633034
And if you wish, cauterize him three or four cauterizations with a medium nail-shaped cautery, in this manner:	If you like, you may give him three or four cauterizations with the middle-sized claviform cautery.	0.76755404

chapter-1-subchapter-43.txt
The thirty-third chapter on cauterizing the beginning of humpbackedness.	CHAPTER FORTY-THREE. On cauterization of early hunchback.	0.7349552
This ailment frequently affects young children.	This disease often occurs in small children.	0.9141214
And the sign of its beginning in the child is that he experiences shortness of breath upon standing and moving. And you will find at the end of the vertebrae of his back a bead that has protruded, elevated above the rest of the beads.	The sign of the beginning of the disease in a child is that he suffers shortness of breath when standing or moving, and you will find that at the end of his dorsal vertebrae there is one visibly projecting above the other vertebrae.	0.8150176
So if you see that and you want to stop it, cauterize it with a cautery iron that is circular in this way: Take the cautery on each side of the vertebra evenly.	So when you see this and you wish to stop it, cauterize him with a cautery that should be circular so that the cauterization takes in equally all sides of the vertebra.	0.79171216
And if you wish, cauterize it around the vertebra with the point cautery, two or three rows. And let the points be close to each other.	If you wish, you can cauterize two or three lines around the vertebra with the punctate cautery; let the punctures be close to one another.	0.825118
Then treat the area until it heals with what we have mentioned.	Then dress the place with those remedies we have mentioned, till healed.	0.8285856
And be careful to use the cautery in the hump that results from a spasm of the nerve.	But beware of using the cautery in the deformity arising from a nervous spasm.	0.78380847

chapter-1-subchapter-44.txt
Chapter forty-four on cauterizing gout and joint pains.	CHAPTER FORTY-FOUR. On cauterization of gout and pain in the joints.	0.8873869
If joint pains are due to cold humors flowing to any part of the body And if the pains occur in the legs, then it is the custom of physicians to call that specifically gout.	When there are pains in the joints from cold humidities flowing into whatever part of the body it may be, and specially when there are pains in the feet, doctors are in the habit of calling that 'gout'.	0.84060335
So if cold-caused gout is treated with the types of treatment that we mentioned in the classification and the pains do not go away, then cauterization will remove them.	When gout due to chill has been treated with the various treatments mentioned in its section, and the pains remain, the cautery will remove them.	0.76064205
And that is to cauterize it after emptying (purgation) around the joint of the legs with many cauterizations.	That is, you cauterize the patient with multiple burns around the joint of the foot, after he has been purged.	0.6156897
And the cautery iron should be olive-shaped and medium-sized in this way:	The cautery should be a middle-sized olivary one, thus.	0.56872034
If the pains rise to the knees or to the other joints, and this often happens, cauterize each knee three or four times on each side with this same olive-shaped cautery iron.	If you need to make punctate cauterizations round the front of the foot, use the punctate cautery; and if the pains go up to the knee or other joints, which often happens, burn each knee with three or four cauterizations on every side with the same olivary cautery.	0.8355188
If you need more than this cauterization, cauterize him, but do not deepen your hand with the cautery, but let it be about the thickness of the skin only.	And if you require to cauterize him more than this, do it, but do not go deeply but only about the thickness of the skin.	0.790856
If the pains rise to the hips or to the back, use what we mentioned of cauterization in its chapter.	If the pains go up to the hip joints or the back, employ those cauterizations that we have mentioned in their own chapter.	0.90417504
If the pains are only in the hands, cauterize around the two forearms as you go around two rows.	And if the pains are in the hands only, pierce a double line all around the wrists.	0.79096794
If the pains remain in the fingers, cauterize them on each knuckle a spot and on the back of the hand.	If the pains remain in the fingers, pierce them once over each joint and once on the metacarpus.	0.7884758
If the pains rise after days to the elbows or to the shoulders, cauterize them on each side.	And if after some days the pains go up to the elbows or shoulders then cauterize both on each side.	0.8944291
And the sick person should not be without good management and taking medications, for if he improves his diet and vomits the phlegm, he will recover with this cauterization, God willing.	And keep the patient to good habits and taking of medicine; for if his regimen be good and the phlegm got rid of, he will be cured with this cautery.	0.70546865

chapter-1-subchapter-45.txt
Chapter forty-five on cauterizing hernias.	CHAPTER FORTY-FIVE. On the cauterization of hernia.	0.8373659
If a hernia appears in the groin and some of the intestines and omentum descend to the testicle, and this is recent and new, then you should order the patient to abstain from food for the day and that he use laxatives that will bring down the stool from his belly.	When a rupture occurs in the groin, and part of the intestine and omentum comes down into the scrotum, being the onset of the disease, forbid the patient to take food for one day and have him use laxatives to empty the bowel.	0.7651622
Then he should lie down on his back in front of you and you order him to hold his breath until the omentum or intestines protrude. Then you push it back with your finger.	Then let him lie on his back in front of you and bid him hold his breath till the intestine or omentum comes out; then put it back with your finger.	0.93894625
Then you mark with ink under the hernia on the pubic bone a mark resembling a half-circle, its ends towards the upper part of the body.	Then, below the hernia over the pubic bone, mark a semicircle whose extremities point upward.	0.82756305
Then you heat a cautery, its shape being this:	Then heat a cautery of this type.	0.61843914
Until it becomes white and emits sparks. Then return the intestine or omentum to its cavity. Then an assistant places his hand on the area so that the intestine does not protrude.	When it is white hot and emits sparks then return the intestine or omentum into his abdominal cavity, and have an assistant put his hand over the place to prevent the exit of the intestine.	0.7850353
And the patient's legs have been spread apart, and a pillow has been placed under him. And another assistant holds his legs, and another on his chest holds his hands.	You should first have parted his legs and put a pillow under him; let another assistant sit on his legs and another on his chest, holding his hands.	0.7597389
Then apply the cautery iron to the mark itself. And your hand holding the cautery iron should be steady and straight, and you hold it until it reaches the bone. Or repeat it again if it did not reach the bone the first time.	Then apply the cautery to the mark, keeping the cautery upright, and hold it till it reaches the bone; or apply the cautery again a second time if it does not reach the bone the first time.	0.85600185
And be very careful of the protrusion of the intestine while cauterizing, so that you do not burn it, which would cause the patient either death or a great affliction.	You must take the greatest care that the intestine does not come out while you are cauterizing, lest you burn it and it result in death or grave injury to the patient.	0.846668
And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work will not succeed.	You must understand that if you do not bring the cauterization down to the bone your operation will not be successful.	0.71490973
And the cautery iron for children should be gentle, according to their size, and for adults according to their size.	For boys the cautery should be slender according to their proportions, and for adults according to theirs.	0.81375116
Then treat the cauterized area after three days with ghee until the char of the fire disappears.	Then dress the site of the cauterization till it heals. After three days, treat the site of cauterization with butter until the eschar from the burn departs.	0.8406774
Then treat it with other ointments until it heals.	Then treat with the usual ointments till healed.	0.7769191
And let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is sealed.	The patient should lie on his back for forty days so that the wound may cicatrize.	0.8533219
And it is necessary to make his food, for the duration of his treatment, something that softens his stomach so that the intestine does not protrude during straining and defecation.	Throughout the course of his treatment you must make his diet such as will be gentle with his inside, so that the intestine should not come down during the effort of defaecation.	0.75622785
Then, if he wants to get up after the forty days, use a tight bandage and keep it on for another forty days.	Then when he wants to get up after the forty days, employ a tight bandage and keep this on another forty days.	0.97347367
And reduce exertion, and fullness from food and drink, and loud shouting.	He should be moderate in his exertion, his eating, drinking, and shouting.	0.5315455
For if he follows this regimen in this way, he will be completely healed, God willing.	Thus under these rules he will be completely cured.	0.6552385
And I will mention the treatment of hernias by incision in its chapter, God willing.	I shall speak of the treatment of rupture by scission in the appropriate chapter.	0.6733704
As for the hernia that occurs in the rest of the abdomen and is in its early stages, if you want it not to increase, cauterize the hernia with a circular cautery according to its size. And let what you burn of the skin be like two-thirds of it. Then treat it with what we have mentioned, for it will not increase, God willing.	When a rupture occurs elsewhere in the belly and is at its inception and you wish it not to grow, cauterize the rupture with a round cautery in proportion to its size; burn about two-thirds through the thickness of the skin and treat as we have said; he will be cured and the rupture will not grow.	0.83248645
And some of the predecessors have mentioned cauterizing the hernia with a triangular cautery iron in this manner:	One of the Ancients said that ruptures were to be cauterized with a three-armed cautery like this.	0.54327035
After you have marked the hernia with ink, and make the horizontal line on the upper side of the hernia and the other line below, and you apply your hand in the middle with a single nail-shaped cautery,	First mark the rupture with ink; put the transverse line on the upper margin of the rupture and the other towards the lower, and apply a single claviform cautery in the middle.	0.74900496
and the first cauterization is easier and better, God willing.	But the first cauterization is easier and better.	0.7224139

chapter-1-subchapter-46.txt
Chapter forty-six on cauterizing the uvula.	CHAPTER FORTY-SIX. On cauterization for contusion.	0.7542318
If pain occurs in some organs due to a fall or a blow, and that pain lasts for a long time, and treatment with medications is not effective	When pain occurs in some limb due to a fall or a blow and the pain becomes chronic and medical treatment has no effect upon it, you should cauterize it with the punctate cautery.	0.73153573
then it should be cauterized with a point cautery, and the cauterization of each organ should be according to its size, smallness, weakness, strength, and the severity and chronicity of the pain.	In each case the cauterization should be in proportion to the size of the limb, its strength or weakness, and the chronicity of the pain and contusion in it.	0.7111051
If it heals from the first cauterization, then fine, otherwise, repeat the cauterization because it is the nature of these pains to move from the organ to what is near it. Therefore, it is necessary to follow it with cauterization until the patient recovers.	If it is cured at the first cauterization, good; otherwise repeat the cauterization. For it is customary for these pains to move from one part to a neighbouring part, and you must follow them with the cautery till the patient is cured.	0.87644917

chapter-1-subchapter-47.txt
Chapter forty-seven on cauterizing leprosy.	CHAPTER FORTY-SEVEN. On cauterization for elephantiasis.	0.74021363
As for those afflicted with leprosy, they may benefit greatly from cauterization, especially a certain type. Leprosy, which results from the putrefaction of phlegm and black bile,	Those suffering from elephantiasis are sometimes greatly helped by the cautery; especially that kind that arises from corruption of the phlegm and black bile.	0.76111174
He may also be cauterized with a burn on the pubic bone, another on the cardia of the stomach, and another on the liver.	He may also be cauterized once on the pubic bone; another on the cardia of the stomach; and another on the liver.	0.9177002
And know that the more you cauterize, the more beneficial and effective it is.	You should know that the more you cauterize the more beneficial and effective it will be.	0.8955147
And know that the sick person does not feel pain from cauterization as a healthy person does, because his body is numb.	You should know also that the patient will not find the cautery painful as a sound man would, since his body is benumbed.	0.8247225
The cauteries should be of a size appropriate for the organs and joints, according to the descriptions of the irons that have been given.	The cauteries should be of the types of instrument mentioned earlier, larger or smaller in proportion to the size of the limb or joint.	0.6188197
Then treat the cauterization with powdered chickpea flour mixed with honey and other treatments until he recovers, God willing.	Then treat the cauterization with powder of bitter vetch with honey, together with the other treatments, till healed.	0.8497121

chapter-1-subchapter-48.txt
Chapter forty-eight on cauterizing numbness.	CHAPTER FORTY-EIGHT. On cauterization for numbness.	0.83051693
When a limb is numb and is treated with medications, ointments, and bandages, but does not heal then cauterize the numb limb itself with cauterizations according to what the size of the limb necessitates, whether large or small.	When some limb is affected with numbness and it is treated with drugs and ointments and plasters, but is not cured, burn the benumbed limb itself with cauterizations proportionate to its bigness or smallness.	0.8640807
And let your cauterization penetrate slightly into the thickness of the skin. Then treat it with the ointment until it heals.	Let the cauterization somewhat penetrate the thickness of the skin; then dress with ointments till healed.	0.8524711
And some numbness that affects the hand and foot may be cauterized in the vertebrae of the back at the exit of the nerve that moves that limb, so the numbness goes away.	For numbness that occurs in the hand or foot it is possible to cauterize over the dorsal vertebrae at the exit of the nerve activating that part; and the numbness will go.	0.7784649
And no one should undertake this except someone who is knowledgeable about the anatomy of the limbs and the exits of the nerves that move the body.	This should not be attempted except by one who has a good knowledge of the anatomy of the limbs and of the exits of the nerves that move the body.	0.8707676

chapter-1-subchapter-49.txt
Chapter forty-nine on cauterizing vitiligo.	CHAPTER FORTY-NINE. On cauterization for leprosy.	0.8065973
If vitiligo becomes chronic and no medical remedy works for it then cauterize it with a slight depth, according to the thickness of the skin until the whiteness disappears and its color changes	When leprosy is of long standing and no device of medicine has any effect upon it, make a cauterization over it to a slight depth according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness has gone and the colour of the skin altered.	0.7436812
then treat it with lentil flour, rose oil, plantain leaves, and pigeon blood or swallow blood, one part of each and mix everything and spread it on a cloth and apply it to the affected area until it heals	Then treat with lentil flour, oil of roses, arnoglossa leaves, and pigeons' or swallows' blood, of each equal parts mixed all together and spread on lint; let this stick to the place till healed.	0.8587502

chapter-1-subchapter-50.txt
Chapter fifty on cauterizing cancer.	CHAPTER FIFTY. On cauterization for cancer.	0.8489776
If the cancer is in its early stages and you want to stop it, cauterize it with a circular cautery iron around it as it rotates.	When the cancer is in its initial stage and you wish to arrest it, burn all round the circumference of the cancer with the circular cautery.	0.8656328
Some physicians have mentioned that it should be cauterized with a deep cautery in its center, but I do not see that because I expect it to ulcerate. And I have witnessed that several times.	Some doctors have said that it may be cauterized with one extensive cauterization in the middle. This hardly seems right to me, for I should expect it to ulcerate out; which I have several times seen.	0.82173663
So the correct way is to cauterize around it in a circle as we said, or with many cauterizations.	So it is correct to burn around the circumference with a circular cautery as we have said, or with multiple cauterizations.	0.86536

chapter-1-subchapter-51.txt
Chapter fifty-one on cauterizing the furuncle.	CHAPTER FIFTY-ONE. On cauterization of boils.	0.7841754
If a furuncle occurs in someone and it is slow to ripen, either because of the agent causing it, or because of the age of the patient if he is old and has little blood, or because of the time, and you want to accelerate the ripening of the furuncle, then cauterize around it with many small, dot-like cauterizations. Then leave it, as this will accelerate the ripening.	When a person gets a boil which is slow in coming to a head, either because of the superfluity causing it, or because of the patient's age if he be an elderly man lacking in blood, or because of the season, and you wish to hasten the ripening of the boil, then make a punctate burn around it with multiple small cauterizations, and then let be; it will speedily come to a head.	0.8280326
If you want to treat it with cauterization, then heat the iron which has this shape:	If you wish to perforate it with cauterization, heat the cautery of this type.	0.70258415
And insert it in the middle of the furuncle until it penetrates the skin.	Apply it to the middle of the boil till it has pierced the skin.	0.7162076
And let the cautery be from what is below so that the flow of pus is facilitated.	The cauterization should go right to the bottom to facilitate the flow of pus.	0.6464094
Then treat it with what is necessary until it heals.	Then dress till cured.	0.6671103

chapter-1-subchapter-52.txt
Chapter fifty-two on cauterizing the corroding ulcer.	CHAPTER FIFTY-TWO. On cauterization of gangrene.	0.7142911
The corroding ulcer is but a corruption that spreads in the organ, consuming it as fire consumes dry wood.	Gangrene is a creeping corruption of a limb, consuming it as fire consumes dry wood.	0.7482831
If you see the corroding ulcer in a place that can tolerate cauterization with fire, heat many nail-shaped cauteries, small and large, according to what is suitable for the place where the corroding ulcer is.	If you see gangrene in a part which can tolerate the actual cautery, heat a number of claviform cauteries, small or large to suit the site of the gangrene.	0.7131103
Then cauterize it from every side until all the corruption is eradicated and nothing of it remains at all.	Then cauterize it all over till the whole corruption is eradicated and none remains.	0.8970483
Then leave it for three days and apply powdered sulfur with oil to the cauterized areas until all the scab and all the corruption is removed.	Then let be for three days, applying to the cauterized site sulphur beaten up with oil, until the whole eschar comes away, and all the corruption.	0.8575962
Then treat it with ointments that promote flesh growth.	Then treat with stimulating ointments.	0.7013738
If, after three days, you see that the flesh is growing healthily without corruption, then [it is fine]; otherwise, repeat the cauterization on the remaining corrupted areas.	If after three days you see the flesh growing healthily and no corruption in it, good. Otherwise repeat the cauterization over whatever corrupt parts are left.	0.8877139
The corroding ulcer can also be treated with a potent medication, as it acts as a quicker substitute for fire.	Gangrene is also sometimes cured with caustic, for that takes the place of fire; but the actual cautery acts more speedily.	0.6229383
I have mentioned its treatment with the potent medication in the classification, so take it from there whenever you need it.	I have already spoken of the treatment of it by caustic in its section, so take it from there when you have need of it.	0.8093441

chapter-1-subchapter-53.txt
Chapter fifty-three on cauterizing inverted and non-inverted nails.	CHAPTER FIFTY-THREE. On the cauterization of corns, inverted and otherwise.	0.6593324
This ailment frequently occurs on the soles of the feet, and it is a rough thing that pains the man.	This disease, which is something hard paining the foot, very often occurs in the soles of the feet.	0.79188
Cauterization for it is of two types: either cauterization by fire or cauterization by strong water.	The cauterization in this case is twofold, actual or caustic.	0.5289295
Thus, you do to them one by one until you have treated all of them in the body, then you treat their places after they are uprooted with what generates flesh from ointments.	Treat them in this manner one after another till you have accounted for all of them. Then treat the site of them, after eradication, with stimulating ointments.	0.7752687

chapter-1-subchapter-54.txt
Chapter fifty-four on cauterizing tremors.	CHAPTER FIFTY-FOUR. On cauterization for tremor.	0.82301486
If someone experiences tremors due to coldness in the nerves or from quartan fever or other causes then it is advisable to cauterize him four or five times on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra a cauterization and on his chest a cauterization and on his stomach a cauterization with an olive-shaped cautery iron	When someone has a tremor, either from chill in a nerve or quartan fever, or from some other cause, you should cauterize him four or five times over the vertebrae of the back, one between each vertebra, and one on his breast and one on his stomach, with an olivary cautery.	0.9361111
for the tremors will cease and it accelerates the maturation of the cold illness.	Thus the tremor will be stilled and the dispersal of the cold distemper will be hastened.	0.6755825

chapter-1-subchapter-55.txt
Chapter fifty-five on cauterizing pustules occurring on the body.	CHAPTER FIFTY-FIVE. On the cauterization of pustules occurring on the body.	0.85798794
Ugly pustules may erupt on the body, arising from cold, thick, and corrupt humors.	Foul pustules sometimes arise on the body, caused by heavy corrupt frigid matter.	0.6412728
Therefore, upon their first appearance, it is necessary to cauterize the head of each pustule gently with an aloeswood stick, the tip of which has been ignited by fire, or with the root of long birthwort, or with a lentil-shaped cautery iron.	When they first appear you should cauterize the head of each one lightly with myrtle wood whose tip has been lighted in the fire; or with the root of the long birthwort; or with the lenticular cautery.	0.77341664
Carbuncles may also be cauterized in the same manner upon their first appearance, so that they do not increase, and the causative excess dissipates, and the patient recovers.	Sometimes furuncles also are cauterized in the same manner when they first arise; then they get no bigger and the superfluity originating them is dispersed and the patient is cured of them.	0.7317951
However, it is necessary that this be done after the patient has been evacuated by bloodletting.	But before you cauterize these, the patient must be depleted by bleeding.	0.7223774

chapter-1-subchapter-56.txt
Chapter fifty-six on cauterizing bleeding occurring when an artery is severed.	CHAPTER FIFTY-SIX. On cauterization in haemorrhage arising from a cut artery.	0.80685556
Bleeding often occurs from an artery that has been severed during an external wound, or when incising a tumor, or cauterizing an organ, and so on, making it difficult to stop.	Very often there occurs bleeding from an artery which has been cut either by an external wound or in opening an abscess or in cauterizing a part of the body and so on, and it is difficult to stem.	0.886515
So if this happens to someone, quickly place your index finger over the opening of the artery and press firmly until the blood is trapped beneath your finger and nothing comes out.	When this happens to anyone, quickly apply your hand to the mouth of the artery, putting your forefinger to it and closing it properly till the bleeding ceases under your fingers and nothing comes out.	0.8886392
Then place several small and large olive-shaped cauteries in the fire and blow on them until they become very hot.	Then put in the fire several olivary cauteries, small and large, and blow on them to make them very hot.	0.9246787
Then take one of them, either small or large depending on the wound and the place where the artery ruptured, and apply the cautery to the vessel itself after quickly removing your finger, holding the cautery until the bleeding stops.	Then take one, small or large according to the size of the wound and the site of the opening of the artery, and bring the cautery down right on the artery itself, after promptly removing your finger, and hold the cautery upon it till the blood ceases.	0.90876126
If the blood gushes out when you lift your finger from the opening of the artery and the cautery is extinguished, quickly take another cautery from those prepared in the fire, and continue doing this one after another until the bleeding stops, taking care not to burn a nerve that might be there, thus causing the patient further harm.	But if it bursts out after you have removed your finger from the mouth of the artery, and the cautery has cooled, promptly take another of the cauteries which you have ready in the fire. Continue doing this, with one after another, till the haemorrhage is stanched. Mind you do not burn any nerve which may be there, so that another calamity afflicts the patient.	0.8465662
Know that if an artery bleeds, it cannot be stopped, especially if it is a large artery, except by one of four methods: either by cauterization as we have said, or by severing it if it has not already been severed, for if it is severed, its ends will contract and the bleeding will stop, or by tying it tightly with threads, or by applying medications that stop bleeding and applying tight bandages.	You should know that when there is arterial haemorrhage it is impossible to stop it, especially when the vessel is big, except in one of four ways, to wit: by the cautery as we have said; or by division of the vessel when it is not completely divided, for when it is cut through the ends of it contract and the bleeding is stopped; or by a strong thread ligature; or by the application of styptics with tight bandaging.	0.90289354
As for those who try to stop it with a bandage, or by tightening it with rags, or by applying burning substances, and so on, it will not stop at all by that, except rarely.	But those who try to stop bleeding with ligatures or cloths, or by the application of caustics and the like, never stanch it by these means, or at least very rarely.	0.7299189
If this happens to someone and there is no doctor or medicine present, he should immediately place his index finger over the opening of the wound itself, as we have described, and press very firmly until the blood is contained and comes out from above the wound, and he should continually apply very cold water to the artery and finger, without removing it, until the blood clots, thickens, and stops flowing.	And if this happen to anyone and there are available neither doctor nor remedies, let him at once apply his forefinger to the mouth of the vessel as we have bidden and close it firmly till the blood is stanched; and pour over the wound and over the artery, without removing the finger, water as cold as possible till the blood thickens and congeals and ceases to flow.	0.8742887
Meanwhile, consider what cauterization or medication he needs.	And meanwhile one should be considering what kind of cautery or medicine is indicated.	0.83455133

chapter-2.txt
The second chapter on incision, lancing, phlebotomy, wounds, and the like.	BOOK TWO ON INCISION, PERFORATION, AND VENESECTION, AND WOUNDS AND THE LIKE	0.5396835
Khalaf said: We have mentioned in the first chapter every disease suitable for cauterization with fire and burning medicine, its causes and reasons, its instruments, and forms of cauteries, and I have made that into chapters from the head to the foot.	IN the first book I spoke of all those diseases for which cauterization is of value, either the actual cautery or that done with caustic medicines; and of their reasons and causes; also the instruments and the shapes of the cauteries. This I set out in chapters, from head to heel.	0.7405447
And I follow in this chapter the same path to make it easy for the student to obtain what he seeks.	In this book I shall proceed along the same route so that it will be easy for the inquirer to find what he is looking for.	0.7714486
And before I begin with that, it is necessary for you to know, my sons, that this chapter contains more danger than the first chapter on cauterization, and for that reason, the warning in it should be stronger, because the work in this chapter often involves the discharge of blood, by which life is sustained, when opening a vein, or incising a swelling, or lancing an abscess, or treating a wound, or extracting an arrow, or incising a stone, and similar things, all of which are accompanied by danger and fear, and in most of them, death occurs.	But before I begin this you ought first to know, my sons, that in this book there is more risk than in the first, which treats of cauterization. Wherefore in this matter there should be greater circumspection. For in the course of the work of which this book treats there often occurs an effusion of the blood upon which life depends, in the opening of a blood-vessel or the incision of a tumour or the perforation of an abscess or the treatment of a wound or the extraction of an arrow, or in the incising for a calculus or similar cases; all of which are accompanied by uncertainty and fear; and in most death will supervene.	0.8908383
And I advise you against falling into what is doubtful for you, for various types of people may come to you in this profession with various kinds of illnesses, and among them are those who have become weary of their illness, and death has become insignificant to them due to the intensity of their suffering and the length of their affliction, and the illness has reached a stage that indicates death.	So I warn you against undertaking any case in which there is any element of doubt to you; for in the exercise of the art you will be mobbed by all kinds of persons with all manner of afflictions; some being so weary of their sickness that death itself is a relief on account of the extent of their sufferings and the length of their miseries, their illness being so settled as to presage death.	0.8148112
And among them are those who offer you their wealth and enrich you with it, hoping for health, but their illness is fatal, so it is not appropriate for you to help anyone who comes to you with such a condition at all, and let your caution be stronger than your desire and eagerness, and do not proceed with anything of that until after certain knowledge is established with you regarding the good outcome it will lead to.	Some will lavish their wealth on you and enrich you, in the hope that they may be curable, when their disease is mortal. You should not assist any of this kind who approach you; let your caution be stronger than your greed and desire for gain; and do not embark upon anything of this kind unless you have positive knowledge, which you judge adequate, about the way of bringing the patient a good outcome.	0.8144114
And use in all the treatment of your patients the precedence of knowledge and warning about what the safety will lead to, for in that, you will have help in acquiring praise, glory, remembrance, and thanks.	In treating every patient be prescient and foretell the means whereby health may be restored to him. That will help you to obtain renown, glory, fame, and praise.	0.7222178
May God inspire you, my sons, with His guidance, and may He not deprive you of correctness and success. Indeed, that is in His hand, there is no god but Him.	May God inspire you, my sons, with His guidance, and grant that you hit the mark and succeed; for it is in His hand; there is no God but He.	0.90785706
And I have arranged this chapter into sections, as presented in the chapter on cauterization, from the head to the foot, to make it easier for you to obtain what you want from it, God willing.	I have arranged this book in sections as I did with the previous book on cauterizations, from head to heel; so you will the easier find in it what you seek.	0.75340873

chapter-2-subchapter-1.txt
This ailment often occurs to boys at birth if the midwife squeezes the boy's head without gentleness.	This disease occurs most commonly in infants upon delivery when the midwife grasps the child's head roughly.	0.80211973
It may also occur from a hidden cause that is not known.	It also sometimes happens from some hidden and unknown cause.	0.8413962
And I have not seen this ailment in anyone other than boys. And all of those whom I have seen with it, death came to them quickly. Therefore, I have decided to abandon treating it.	I have never seen this disease except in very small children; and death very quickly overtook all those that I have seen; therefore I have preferred not to undertake operation in these cases.	0.796873
And I have certainly seen among them a boy whose head was filled with water, and the head grew larger every day until the boy could not sit up on his own due to the size of his head. And the moisture increased until he perished.	I have seen a child whose head was filled with fluid and daily growing in size, until the child could not sit upright on account of the size of his head, and the humidity increased till he died.	0.8491109
And this moisture either gathers between the skin and the bone, or it gathers beneath the bone on the periosteum.	Now this humidity sometimes collects between the skin and the bone; sometimes it collects beneath the bone and over the membrane.	0.7514258
And the treatment for that, if the moisture is between the skin and the bone and the swelling is small, it is necessary to make one horizontal incision in the middle of the head, and the length of the incision should be about two knuckles so that the moisture flows out.	The operation is thus: when the humidity is between the skin and the bone and the swelling is small, an incision should be made in the middle of the head, transversely. The length of the incision should be about two thumb-joints, so that the humidity may flow out.	0.74739206
And this is a picture of the lancet.	This is the form of the scalpel.	0.42958087
If the moisture is greater and the swelling is larger, then make it two intersecting incisions in this way:	If the humidity is more copious and the swelling greater, make two intersecting incisions to this pattern.	0.8073882
And if the moisture is under the bone	But if the humidity is beneath the boneand the sign of that is that you will see the sutures of the skull gaping on all sides, the water manifestly yielding when you press in with your fingersyou should make three incisions in the middle of the head, in this pattern.	0.5786137
And after the incision, all the moisture comes out. Then the incisions are tightened with bandages and compresses. Then it is moistened from above with wine and oil until the fifth day.	After incising, draw out all the humidity; then bind up the incisions with pads and bandages; and over the bandages foment with wine and oil till the fifth day.	0.8360239
Then the bandage is loosened, and the wound is treated with bandages and ointments.	Then loose the bandage and dress the wound with lint and ointments.	0.8605771
And do not neglect to tighten the head moderately. And the patient is fed with all dry food, low in moisture, until the organ strengthens and heals.	And do not forget to bandage the head lightly; and feed the patient with a dry diet with little fluid, until the part is strengthened and healed.	0.8318245
Another method of incision is to look where the bone of the swelling and the accumulation of water appear.	Another pattern of incision is to see where the tumefaction and collection of fluid is apparent.	0.8492776
Because it may be more in the back of the head or in the front of it, or on the right or on the left.	For sometimes it is greater in the posterior or anterior part of the head, or to the right or to the left.	0.8950036
So you aim the incision where the swelling and the fullness of water appeared to you. So you incise it as best you can.	Therefore make your incision where the tumefaction and dropsy are apparent; incise that place in whatever way you can.	0.75085056
And be careful not to cut an artery, causing bleeding, so that the patient dies from that bleeding with the discharge of moisture.	Be careful not to cut an artery lest you cause haemorrhage and the patient die of that haemorrhage at the same time that the humidity is evacuated.	0.8540752

chapter-2-subchapter-2.txt
When someone experiences acute episodes affecting the eyes or chest, and this becomes chronic, and medication does not work, then the most effective treatment is to cut these two arteries.	When a person gets painful defluxions into the eyes or chest which become chronic, and medical treatment is ineffectual in this case, then section of these arteries will be the most efficacious treatment.	0.8302368
Therefore, if you intend to cut them, you should shave the patient's head with a razor, then rub the area with a rough cloth so that the artery appears, then tie the patient's neck with the excess of his garment, then look where the vein pulsates, and their locations are the two lowered places behind the ears, and they are rarely hidden except in some people, then mark them with ink, then cut them with a sharp scalpel down to the bone, and this should be across the width of the head.	When you decide on section, you should shave the patient's head with a razor; then rub the place with a rough cloth to show up the artery; then bind the patient's neck with an end of his garment; then you will observe where the artery is pulsating (the sites of both are the depressions behind the ears) for it is uncommon for them to remain hidden, except in a few persons. Then do you mark with ink over both; then cut with a hooked scalpel, cutting down to the bone; the incision should be lateral to the head.	0.8172176
And if you wish, you can insert the scalpel from under the artery and lift it upwards while cutting, and the length of the cut should be about two closed fingers, because when the vein is cut, the blood will come out in a pulsating flow, leaping forward in successive spurts.	Or if you prefer, introduce the scalpel beneath the artery and make a thrusting cut up at it. The incision should be of about two fingers' breadth. When cut, the artery gives out a pulsating jet of blood spurting intermittently.	0.77097917
If the artery is not apparent to the touch, then you should measure from the ear a distance of about three fingers, then mark it with ink and incise down to the bone.	If the artery is not discernible, you should measure three fingers' breadth from the ear, than mark with ink, and cut down to the bone.	0.92260426
It is advisable to let out six ounces of blood on average, and sometimes you may let out more or less, all depending on the patient's strength and the fullness of his arteries as it appears to you.	The quantity of blood that should be let is six ounces on the average, but often more blood, or less, is withdrawn; all in proportion to the strength of the patient and the fullness of the arteries as they appear to you.	0.8941715
Then look at the wound, and if any membrane remains on the bone, cut it so that a hot swelling does not occur, then tie the wound with a wick of linen cloth, then treat it with ointments until it heals.	Then examine the wound and if there remains on the bone any part of the membrane cut it off to avoid a haematoma. Then bind up the wound with a bandage of linen cloth and dress with ointments till healed.	0.8325819

chapter-2-subchapter-3.txt
If a person experiences chronic migraine or acute catarrh due to sharp humors and heat in the muscles of the temples, or severe chronic headache and the like, and is treated with various medical treatments, but that does not work then we have experimented in these diseases with incising the arteries of the temples or cauterizing them as we have described.	When a man has a chronic migraine or acute catarrh, on account of acrid humidities and heat in the temporal muscles, or a violent chronic headache, or the like, and he has been treated with various medical treatments without success, we have sometimes in these diseases tried extraction of the arteries from the temples or cauterization of them, already described.	0.89820117
And the way to incise them is that the patient shaves the hair that is on the temples and you aim for the artery that is apparent in the temple, for it will be clear to you from its pulse. And it rarely hides except in a few people or during intense cold.	The manner of extraction is for the patient to shave the temporal hair; then you press upon the artery appearing on the temple; for it will be manifest to you by its pulsation, and is rarely invisible save in a few people or on account of severe cold.	0.84728515
If it is hidden from you, then let the patient tighten his neck with the extra part of his garment. Then you rub the place with a cloth or compress the place with hot water until the artery appears clearly and distinctly. Then you take the lancet, which is pictured here: Then gently flay the skin until you reach the artery.	But if it is not plain to you then let the patient bind his neck with the end of his garment; then do you rub the place with a piece of cloth or foment with hot water, till the artery is obvious to you; then take a scalpel shaped thus; then with it gently scrape away the skin till you come to the artery, then stick a hook in it and draw it upward till you extract it from the skin and free it all round from the membranes that are beneath it.	0.8473642
If the artery is thin, twist it with the tip of the hook. Then cut a part of it to the extent that its ends separate and contract without causing bleeding. For if it is not severed and cut, the blood will not thin at all.	But if the artery be thin, twist it with the tip of the hook and cut out enough of it for the two ends to be well separated from one another and contract so that no haemorrhage occurs; for if it is not divided and cut it will not let blood flow at all.	0.8288361
Then let out blood from six to three ounces.	Then let blood, from six to three ounces.	0.95156
If the artery is large, it is necessary to tie it in two places with a strong doubled thread. And let the thread be either silk or lute strings so that putrefaction does not quickly reach it before the wound heals, causing bleeding.	If the artery be large it should be ligated in two places with a strong double thread; the threads should be either silken or lute-string, lest corruption attack them before the wound is healed, and haemorrhage occur.	0.8978122
Then cut the excess between the two ligatures. Do this at that time or after another time.	Then cut away what remains between the two ligatures; do that immediately or later.	0.8518862
And if you wish, cauterize it to the bone with a knife-shaped cautery until its ends are severed, which will serve the same purpose, or better, as we have said.	If you wish, you may cauterize it down to the bone with an edged cautery so that the ends of the artery be divided; for this will replace that operation.	0.6142127
Except if the patient has a fever or a hot temperament, because cauterization helps to destroy moisture, so it is more effective in benefit.	It is in fact better, as we have said, unless the patient is feverish or of a hot constitution; cauterization is one of the means of eliminating humidities, so it will be of surer efficacy.	0.74717987
It is necessary after severing the arteries to stuff the place with worn cotton and place tight bandages on it.	After extraction of the arteries the place must be packed with teased-out cotton wool, and on top of that must be put firm pads.	0.8622638
And after the resolution, treat it with dry medicines that grow flesh and with bandaging until it heals, God willing.	And after loosening the ligature, dress with dry medicaments that encourage growth of flesh, and with bandages,, till it heals.	0.79146576
If bleeding from the artery occurs during your work, immediately cut it either by cauterization or fill the place with vitriol and tighten your hand until the bleeding stops. If none of that is available to you, put your finger until the blood clots. And wash the place with very cold water until the sharpness subsides and tighten it as necessary.	But if arterial bleeding hinders you in the course of your operation, hasten to stanch it either by cauterization or by filling the place with vitriol, compressing it with your hand till the blood stays; or, if you have nothing of this kind by you, put your finger on it till the blood clots and rinse over the place till the flow dies down; then tie off as you should.	0.90451086
And what is lighter and easier than severing the artery is to cauterize the vessel with this two-bladed cautery after marking the two places with ink and applying it very hot until it reaches the bone and the vessel is cut in two places so that the space between its ends widens. For it will not heal with this cauterization at all.	Less serious and easier than excising the artery is to cauterize the vessel with this cautery provided with two blades, having first marked both places with ink. Bring it down, very hot, till it reaches the bone and the artery is cut in two places, so as to put some distance between the two ends, for it will certainly not unite after this cauterization.	0.8823998
And this is the image of the cautery:	This is the form of the cautery.	0.51812005
The sharpness of the two knives resembles the two small intestines, except that they are much less sharp than the knife, because if they were as sharp as the knife, the cold would reach them faster and the meat would not be cut quickly.	It should have two sharp blades like two small paring-knives, but they should be much less sharp than a knife, for if they are as sharp as a knife they will quickly lose their heat and the flesh will be slow in cutting.	0.82352936
So if there is some thickness in them, the heat of the fire will be retained in them, and they will cut the meat quickly.	If they have a certain thickness in them the heat of the fire will be retained in them and they will speedily cut the flesh.	0.90559196
And this method is better than any other method, lighter, and easier.	This operation is superior to all and less severe and easier.	0.7119409
And let the distance between the two knives be the thickness of a finger.	Let the distance between the two blades be the breadth of a finger.	0.86307013

chapter-2-subchapter-4.txt
The fourth chapter on the treatment of the constant flow of hot tears to the eyes.	CHAPTER FOUR. On the treatment of a chronic flux of bitter tears into the eyes.	0.80145925
If the tears are constant and their flow is from the veins that are on the skull from the outside, and there is no benefit from any medical treatment with medicines and you see that the patient's face has become red, and he feels a crawling in his forehead like the crawling of ants, and his eyes are sunken, moist, their lashes eroded, and their eyelids cracked from the sharpness of the tears then the ancients were compelled in its treatment to this procedure, and they call it treatment with the sword	When lachrymation is chronic and arises from the external vessels on the cranium, nor does treatment by any kind of medical remedy have any effect, and you see the patient's features flushed, and he feels a creeping in his forehead like that of an ant, and his eyes are wasted and moist, and the roots of the lashes itch, and the eyelids are burned by the bitterness of the tears, the Ancients were compelled to treat it by this operation which they called 'treatment by the sword'.	0.83783674
which is that you order the patient to shave the hair that is on his forehead, then you make three parallel incisions in the forehead along the length of the forehead, and the length of the incision should be about two fingers one incision parallel to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, the second a little distance from the movement of the muscle that is in the temple, and the third on the other side	You bid the patient shave the hair of his forehead; then you make three parallel incisions across his forehead a little apart; and let the length of each incision be two fingers' breadths; the first incision continuing the line of the nose in the middle of the forehead; and the second at a little distance from the temporal muscle; and the third incision on the other side of the forehead.	0.8837526
and beware of cutting the two arteries that are on the sides, and keep your hand away from the joining of the jaws and let the distance between each incision be the width of three fingers joined together	Beware of cutting the two arteries which are at the sides, and keep your hand away from the mandibular joint; and let there be a distance between each incision as of three fingers joined.	0.8665487
and let there be with you prepared pieces of sponge or many dry rags with which you dry the blood	Have ready by you some pieces of sponge or a number of linen towels to wipe away the blood.	0.70734143
then you insert the double-edged scalpel, which is this image of it From the incision that follows the temple to the middle incision, and you skin with it all the skin that is between the two incisions with the periosteum that is on the bone. Then you do that also from the middle incision to the third incision. Then you take out this scalpel and insert into the first incision also another instrument called a scalpel, sharp on one side and smooth, not sharp, on the other side.	Then introduce the double-edged scalpel shaped thus through the incision near the temple to the middle incision, and with it pare off all the skin between the two incisions with the periosteum; then do the same from the middle incision to the third one; then draw out this scalpel and introduce into the first incision another instrument which is known as 'the knife-shaped': sharp on one side, smooth and blunt on the other, thus.	0.89635974
And its sharp side is placed upwards towards the flesh attached to the skin, and its smooth side towards the bone. And you push it until it reaches the middle incision, and you cut with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes without the cut reaching the surface of the skin.	The sharp edge of it should be turned upward to the subcutaneous tissue and the smooth edge toward the bone; then push it on to reach the middle incision and with it cut all the vessels passing from the head down toward the eyes, without letting the incision come through the outer skin.	0.82854867
Then you do the same in the middle incision to the other incision.	Then do the same from the middle incision to the third.	0.8101976
And after a moderate amount of blood has flowed, you squeeze the areas of the solidified blood clots.	After a moderate quantity of blood has flowed, express the bits of blood-clot from the place and pack into each incision a pad of teased-out cotton wool.	0.65282416
Then you put a wick of cotton dipped in wine and oil or vinegar and oil in each incision. So that a hot swelling does not occur.	Over all put a pad soaked in wine and oil, or vinegar and oil, lest an effusion occur.	0.7595238
And on the third day you loosen the bandage and use frequent washing with lukewarm water. Then you treat it with basilicon ointment with rose oil and all other things with which you treat wounds until it heals, God willing.	On the third day loosen the bandage and rinse with plenty of tepid water and afterwards dress with balm of basilicon with rose-ointment and other treatments for wounds, until healed.	0.8727282

chapter-2-subchapter-5.txt
The fifth chapter on the treatment of tears and discharges to the eyes from inside the head.	CHAPTER FIVE. On the treatment of tears and defluxions in the eyes arising from within the head.	0.82248974
When someone experiences numerous, severe, sharp, and persistent episodes of nasal discharge, and their eyes appear sunken and small, with weakened vision, ulcerated eyelids, and loss of eyelashes, accompanied by a sharp, painful headache deep within the head and continuous sneezing, know from these symptoms that these substances and discharges originate from numerous deep vessels, and the best treatment for them is the following:	When anyone has a quantity of painful defluxions, acrid and continuous, and you see the eyes wasted and sunken and their sight is weakened and the eyelids are ulcerated and lose their eyelashes; while deep in the head there may be a vehement and grievous pain with incessant sneezing, then you may know from these occurrences that those humours and catarrhs arise from many deep blood-vessels.	0.8900957
Order the patient to shave their forehead, then make a single incision in the middle of the forehead, or slightly higher horizontally, starting the incision from the left temple to the right temple, reaching the bone. Keep your hand away from the temple muscles that move during chewing until the bone is exposed. Dry all the blood with a sponge, then separate the edges of the incision with worn cotton or a twisted piece of linen. Then bandage it from above with compresses soaked in wine and oil to prevent the formation of a hot swelling.	The best treatment in this case is that which follows: you bid the patient shave his forehead; then you make one incision in the middle of his forehead or a little above, crosswise (begin the incision from the left temple going toward the right temple; the incision should be down to bone; and avoid the temporal muscles that move during mastication) until the bone is laid bare. Wipe away all the blood with a sponge and separate the edges of the incision with teased-out cotton wool or with rolls of linen; then bind up with pads over; the pads should be soaked in wine and oil to guard against an effusion.	0.862244
When you remove the bandage and see that the hot swelling has subsided, you should scrape the bone until the flesh begins to grow. Then treat it with a drying remedy that promotes flesh growth, such as taking two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, preparing an ointment from them, and using it for flesh growth in such wounds.	When you undo it, if you see that an effusion has erupted, you should scrape the bone until a growth of flesh begins in it; then treat with a drying treatment which generates flesh. For example, two parts of wheat flour are taken and of colophonia four parts, and of them a salve is made which may be used to encourage the growth of flesh in wounds of this sort.	0.8961897

chapter-2-subchapter-6.txt
The sixth chapter on the treatment of what falls into the ear.	CHAPTER six. On the treatment of things that fall into the ear.	0.85357344
Everything that falls into the ear is one of four types: either a mineral stone or something like stone, such as iron and glass; or a plant seed, such as chickpeas and kernels, and so on; or a flowing thing, such as water and vinegar, and so on; or an animal.	All that falls into the ear comes under four categories: mineral stone, or what resembles stone, such as iron or glass; vegetable grain such as pea or date-stone or the like; or liquid such as water or vinegar; or animal.	0.9190389
When a pebble or something like a pebble, which does not grow in the ear, falls into the ear, face the ear towards the sun. If you see the pebble, drop in it a bit of violet oil or candle wax, then try to remove it by moving the head or by sneezing with hellebore, blocking the nostrils when the sneeze comes, after placing a ring of rags or wool around the ear and pulling the ear upwards; often it comes out with this treatment.	When a stone or something of that sort that does not grow gets into the ear, turn the ear toward the sun. If you see the stone, pour upon it a little oil of violets or sesame; then try to get it out by moving the head or by inducing sneezing with ptarmica and keeping the nose closed at the onset of sneezing, having first made round the ear a circle of pieces of cloth or wool and drawn the ear upwards. This treatment will usually bring it out.	0.9084202
If it doesn't come out, then try to remove it with the gentle instrument which is pictured here:	But if it does not come out, try to get it out with a fine pair of tweezers shaped thus.	0.6186779
If it comes out with the husk, fine, otherwise try to extract it with a smooth, blunt hook with little curvature.	If it comes out with the tweezers, good. But if not, try to extract it with a fine blunt hook slightly curved.	0.8488884
If it doesn't come out with that, then make a tube of copper and insert the end of the tube gently into the ear hole. And seal around the tube with pitch softened with oil so that the air has no path except through the tube. Then suck it out with your breath strongly and often it comes out with this.	And if this does not bring it out, make a bronze tube and introduce the end of the tube well into the meatus of the ear and fill in round with wax softened with oil so that there may be no outlet save through the tube; then suck it out with all your breath; it will often come out with this.	0.90334815
If it doesn't come out with what we described, then take a small amount of gum arabic or processed gum, which is used for catching birds. Place it at the tip of the probe after wrapping tightly around it some cotton. Then insert it gently into the ear hole after drying the ear from moisture.	But if it does not come out with these means we have described, take turpentine resin or bird-lime, a very little; twist some compact cotton wool on the end of a probe and put this on the tip; then introduce it gently into the ear after you have dried out all the moisture from the ear.	0.77751505
If it doesn't come out with all that we described, then proceed to incision before a hot swelling occurs or it becomes tense.	But if your treatment so far is unavailing, then be quick and incise before an abscess or spasm supervene.	0.6643535
The method of incision is to first phlebotomize the patient in the cephalic vein and draw blood according to his strength. Then sit the patient before you and turn his ear upwards and make a small incision at the base of the ear near its lobe in the lower part of it. And the incision should be crescent-shaped until you reach the stone. Then extract it with whatever instruments you can.	Now this is the way to incise: first, the patient's cephalic vein should be cut and blood drawn, in proportion to his strength; then seat the patient in front of you and turn his ear upwards; make a small incision at the lobule of the ear in the depression there (the incision should be crescent-shaped) until you reach the stone; then extract it with whatever instrument you may.	0.88181823
Then stitch the incision immediately quickly and treat it until it heals.	Immediately afterwards sew up the incision and dress it till healed.	0.7893628
But if the thing that has fallen into the ear is one of the grains that swell and expand, try to extract it with what we mentioned.	If the object that falls into the ear is one of those grains that grow or swell, then try to extract it by the means already mentioned.	0.80898494
If it doesn't come out, then take a thin, delicate scalpel like this: And try with it to break up that type of grain fallen in the ear.	If it does not respond to your efforts to get it out, take a fine narrow scalpel like this and with it attempt to cut out whatever kind of grain has entered the ear.	0.76352686
And you only do that if you are certain that that grain has been moistened by the ears vapor until it becomes many small pieces.	You should not do this except when you are sure that this grain has become moist by reason of the vapours of the ear, so that you may cut up the grain into several small pieces.	0.7567104
Then you extract it with the blind hook, or with soft date fibers, or by sucking, as we mentioned. For that makes its extraction easy.	Then you may extract them with a blunt hook or fine-headed tweezers, or by suction, as we have mentioned; for their extraction will be easy.	0.87524974
As for water that has entered the ear, the patient should first use sneezing with hellebore. And he should have filled his ear with some worn cotton while lying down on that ear in which the water is.	As for water getting into the ear, the patient should first employ sneezing excited by ptarmica, his ear having been plugged with a piece of teased-out cotton; he should lie upon that ear in which the water is; and if it so come out, well and good.	0.8003736
If it comes out with that, fine; otherwise, take many pebbles the length of fingers, thin and smooth. Warm them a little with fire. And the patient inserts one of them into the opening of his ear. And he hops on one foot on that side.	But if not, take a number of small stones about a finger's length, thin and smooth, and warm them a little in the fire; and have the patient put one of them into the meatus of the ear and let him hop on that one foot on that side; and, with another stone, tap upon the one put into the ear; he should keep this up with stone after stone till all the water has come out.	0.82764566
The water may also come out by taking one papyrus reed or feather. And insert one end of it into the ear. And set fire to the other end until most of it burns. Then repeat with another feather, doing this several times until all the water comes out.	Sometimes the water is extracted by taking a reed or quill and introducing one end into the ear; then the other end is set alight till the greater part of it is burnt; then repeat time after time with more quills till all the water is got out.	0.82279825
Or you can draw it out with the tube in the way that was described with the pebble.	Or else suck it out with a cannula as described for a stone.	0.7857832
As for removing an animal that has entered the ear, observe: if it is small-bodied like a flea or similar, treat it with what I mentioned in the section.	As for the extraction of a creature getting into the ear, look to see if it is small of body, such as a flea or the like, in which case treat by those means mentioned in the section.	0.78073156
But if its body is large, perceptible to the senses, try to extract it with date fibers and hooks. Its case is easier than anything that gets stuck in the ear.	But if it has a large body, conspicuous to the touch, try to get it out with tweezers and hooks; for of all things that stick in the ear this is the easiest to extract.	0.84884715
As for removing worms that have developed in the ear, if you treated it with what we mentioned in the section on ear drops and your treatment was not successful, then you should look into the ear in the sun, and if any worms appear to you, extract them with date fibers or soft hooks.	As for the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you have unavailingly treated it by those methods mentioned in the section in the treatise on instillations, you will need to examine the ear in the sunlight; and if you can see any worms, extract with tweezers or fine hooks.	0.8436073
If none appear to you, then take a tube; this is its form: Narrow at the bottom and wide at the top. And insert the thin end into the ear as much as the patient can bear. Then suck with it strongly.	But if you cannot see any, then take a cannula of this form narrow in its lower part, broad above; and introduce the narrow part into the ear as far as the patient can bear it; then make strong suction through it, repeatedly, till all the worms are extracted.	0.8002678
If it doesn't come out, seal around the tube with wax as I mentioned to you regarding the stone.	But if they do not come out in response to your treatment, plug all round the cannula with wax as bidden in treating for a stone.	0.67572105
If it doesn't come out with what we mentioned, use the ear drops that I mentioned. The ancients have tried it in killing worms. And you will find that in the article on ear drops.	If nothing will bring them out, employ the instillations which I mentioned as having been tried by the Ancients for killing worms; you will find that in the treatise on instillations.	0.80447924
As you see, you make it from silver or copper, narrow at the bottom, with a small hole in it, and wide at the top.	The instillation of oils or drugs should be done with an instrument like this, as you will see; you make it of silver or bronze, narrow at its lower end, with a small perforation, and wide at its upper part.	0.76435935
And if you wish, the nozzle that is inside the tube can be made of well-wrought copper. And if you wish, you take a probe and wrap cotton around its end tightly, then you put the oil or juice or whatever you want of these medications into the tube while it is in the ear, then you insert the probe with the cotton from above and squeeze it with your hand with a moderate squeeze until the oil is pushed into the ear canal and the patient feels it entering.	If you wish, you may make the obturator which goes in the cannula of strong bronze; or, if you like, take a probe and wrap cotton wool tightly round its tip; then pour into the cannula oil, juices, or whatever of these remedies you want, with the cannula in the ear. Then introduce the probe with cotton wool on it and press moderately until the oil is ejected into the meatus and the patient feels it enter.	0.88189584
And let what you pour into the ear be slightly warmed by the fire. And beware that the thing that is instilled in it not be very cold or very hot, because the ear cannot tolerate that.	Let that which you put into the ear first be slightly warmed at the fire; and be careful that it be neither very hot nor very cold, for the ear is not suited to bear that.	0.9095499

chapter-2-subchapter-7.txt
Chapter seven on the treatment of sudden blockage of the ear.	CHAPTER SEVEN. On the treatment of obstructions in the ear.	0.80296874
Some children may come out of their mothers' wombs with the pores of their ears not perforated.	Infants sometimes are born with an imperforated auditory meatus.	0.6153316
Also, some people may experience a blockage in the ear canal due to an injury or flesh growing in it.	Some people also get an obstruction in the passage of the ear, either from an injury or from flesh growing in it.	0.9138343
This blockage may be in the depth of the ear hole, imperceptible to sight. It may also appear slightly outside the hole and be perceptible to sight.	Sometimes this obstruction is at the bottom of the ear out of sight, but sometimes it occurs a little outside the passage and is invisible.	0.78807175
So the one that appears in the depth of the ear and is not perceptible to sight is, in most cases, difficult to see.	The sort which occurs in the depths of the ear and is invisible is, in general, difficult to cure.	0.7385336
And the one that is perceptible to sight, you should place the patient's ear in the sun and look into it. If you see the blockage apparent, open it with a delicate scalpel, which has this shape:	As for that which is within sight, set the patient's ear in the sun and examine it; and if you see that the object is something external you should make an opening with a fine scalpel like this.	0.75739306
Its tip should have some slight, limited width, and the rest of the scalpel should be smooth on both sides so as not to injure the ear.	Let its extremity be slightly broad, with a sharp point; while the rest of the scalpel should be smooth on both sides so as not to harm the ear.	0.8823908
If the blockage is due to flesh that has grown in the ear canal, grasp it with delicate forceps and cut it very gently until all the flesh is extracted.	But if the obstruction be from flesh growing in the auditory meatus, catch it with a fine hook and cut it, with the utmost gentleness, till all the flesh is gone.	0.7732478
If the blockage is deep in the ear, take a smooth, delicate probe, warm it slightly in the fire, then insert it into the ear canal. If you feel the blockage, along with the patient's experience of hearing difficulty, rub it gently with the probe, being careful not to injure the eardrum. Then, place a wick in the ear, sized according to the width of the opening, having coated it in Egyptian ointment. Do this for several days until you are sure the wound will not close up.	If the obstruction be in the depth of the ear, take a fine smooth probe and warm it a little in the fire; then push it into the meatus. If you feel the obstruction (what time the patient will experience hardness of hearing), seek to perforate it gently, being careful not to injure the nerve of the ear. Then put in a plug the width of the meatus, which you will have anointed with Egyptian ointment; do this for some days till you are sure that the wound is healing.	0.9137584
Or, take a wick, moisten it in water, sprinkle powdered vitriol on it, and use it.	Or take a plug and dip it into water and sprinkle it with powdered vitriol and use that.	0.875893
If you see that the ear has become swollen with a hot swelling, it is necessary to remove the wick and replace it with another wick that you have coated in a cerate made with rose oil until the hot swelling subsides, then continue treating it until it heals.	If you perceive the ear swelling with an abscess you should remove the plug and put in its place another previously prepared by soaking in wax made with oil of roses, till the abscess has subsided; then dress till it is healed.	0.82227874
If bleeding occurs, immerse a sponge or cloth in cold water, place it on the ear, and use the rest of the treatment that stops bleeding, as mentioned in the chapter on ear drops.	If a haemorrhage occur, dip a sponge or piece of material in cold water and put it on the ear, and apply the rest of the treatment to stop haemorrhage mentioned in the treatise on instillations.	0.90576434

chapter-2-subchapter-8.txt
The eighth chapter on the treatment of warts that appear on the eyelids.	CHAPTER EIGHT. On the treatment of warts on the eyelids.	0.79088724
These warts that appear on the eyelids may be moist and may be dry.	These warts which occur on the eyelids are sometimes humid, sometimes dry.	0.7920965
It is necessary to grasp them with tweezers or a hook and cut them with a scalpel from their roots. Then apply powdered vitriol to the area.	You should hold them with forceps or a hook, and cut them away from the roots with a scalpel; then put powdered vitriol on the place.	0.8901833
If it bleeds, cauterize it with a gentle lenticular cautery iron.	If there is bleeding from them, cauterize them with a fine lenticular cautery.	0.80799353
And cauterizing it is better after cutting. And often they return if anything of their roots remains. And if cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and they do not return.	Cauterization of them after excision is best, for they often return when a part of their roots is left behind; but when they are cauterized the roots are burnt and they will not come back.	0.84860283

chapter-2-subchapter-9.txt
Chapter nine on the treatment of the cold affecting the eyelids.	CHAPTER NINE. On the treatment of stones occurring in the eyelids.	0.70994675
Often, something appears in the eyelids that resembles hail in its intensity and hardness, and therefore it is called hail.	There often occurs in the eyelids a thing resembling a hailstone in its strength and hardness, and therefore called 'hail'.	0.9152684
It is a collection of thick moisture in the upper eyelid and the lower eyelid.	It is actually a collection of thick humours in the upper or lower lid.	0.70195115
The procedure for it is that you look, and if the hailstone is prominent on the outer surface of the eyelid, moving in every direction, then its treatment is easy.	The operative treatment for it is thus: examine; and if the stone is external on the outer aspect of the lid, and mobile in all directions, dealing with it is simple.	0.75754297
Make a horizontal incision on it, then gently peel it from each side until it is freed, then hook it with a fishhook and cut it off.	You make above it a transverse incision; then scrape gently around it till it is free; then catch it up with a hook and cut it away.	0.7875711
And if you are unable to cut it off unless after piercing through the eyelid with the cut, it will not harm the patient at all.	If it is in such a position that you cannot excise it without cutting through the lid, that will not harm the patient at all.	0.7458023
If the incision is large, then close it with stitches and treat it until it heals.	If the incision be big, gather it up with a suture and dress it till it heals.	0.8496387
And if it is small, there is no harm in it for you, because the ointment will strengthen it and heal it.	If it be small, it will be no trouble, for ointment will restore it and heal it.	0.83562565
If the hailstone is tilted towards the inside of the eyelid, towards the inner surface, then turn the eyelid over and hook the hailstone with a fishhook without needing an incision, and cut it off from each side.	If the stone is rather toward the inner aspect of the eyelid, then invert the lid and catch up the stone with a hookyou will not need to incise the lidand cut it all round.	0.7866181
If it pierces through the eyelid with the cut, it will not harm at all.	If the lid is pierced in the cutting, it will do no harm at all.	0.8260735
Then, after cutting off the hailstone, wash the eye with salt water and treat the area with something that heals until the patient recovers.	Then, after cutting away the stone, wash the eye with salt water; then treat with cicatrizing medicines till healed.	0.8172819

chapter-2-subchapter-10.txt
A sharnaq is a small lump that forms in the layers of the upper eyelid, and it occurs most often in children, making their eyes heavy and causing them to experience colds in the early mornings.	Hydatid is fat which arises in the folds of the upper lid. It is a disease chiefly occurring in children, irritating their eyes, giving them morning catarrh; they are unable to look full into the light of the sun, since they get an immediate secretion of tears.	0.62782913
They are unable to look at sunlight because tears quickly come to their eyes, and so you see them constantly leaning on their faces, and they sleep on them, and their eyelids under their eyebrows are moist, swollen, and the protrusion of the sharnaq is visible. And when you press the area with your fingers, you will feel the sharnaq between them.	And for that reason you will find them lying always on their faces, and they also sleep on their faces; and the eyelids below the eyebrows are moist and covered with swellings, while the hydatid stands out prominently; and when you press upon the place with your finger you can feel the fat beneath it.	0.6990465
The procedure is to place the patient's head in your lap, then take a linen cloth, prepare a wick from it, and make a circle from that wick to the extent that it surrounds the sharnaq from all sides, then place it on it and press with your fingers from all sides to gather the sharnaq in the center of the circle, then make a horizontal incision in the middle of that moist area with a lancet, and the incision should not be larger than the incision made for bloodletting.	The manner of operating is for the patient to let his head rest in your lap. Then you take a scrap of linen and prepare a pad of it. Make it into a circle of sufficient size to enclose the whole of the hydatid on all sides, then place it on it and squeeze with your fingers on all sides, so as to gather up the hydatid in the centre of the circle. Then in the middle of this humidity make a crosswise incision with a lancet, but do not let the incision be larger than that made for a venesection.	0.87990534
As for the depth, you should incise the entire skin until you reach the sharnaq, and in most cases the sharnaq will protrude from the incision in the form of a white piece of fat, so pull it out with a cloth that you have wrapped between your fingers while turning your hand right and left until it is completely removed.	As to the depth, the skin should be incised right through till you come to the hydatid, which in most cases will come out from the incision, in the shape of a white piece of fat. Draw it out with a cloth rolled between your fingers, turning your hand to right and to left till it is separated.	0.75884765
Beware of increasing the size of the incision, lest the lancet reach the eye and harm it.	Be careful not to go so deep with your scalpel that it sticks in the eye and injures it.	0.68954754
If the sharnaq does not appear to you at the beginning of the incision, then you should increase the incision slightly and gently until the sharnaq appears, then pull it out as we mentioned.	If you do not see the hydatid at the first incision, you must gently cut a little deeper till it comes forth, then draw it out as described.	0.67487466
Then dip a cloth in vinegar and water and place it on the area and bandage it with a soft dressing.	Then dip some cloth in vinegar and water, apply to the place and bind it up with pads.	0.8633038
Some people crush salt and place it in the cavity of the incision to dissolve what remains of that moisture, then treat it until it heals.	There are some who grind up salt and put it in the hollow of the incision to liquefy thereby the remains of the humidity. Then dress till healed.	0.8722055
If a hot swelling occurs in the area, treat it with soothing compresses until it heals.	If an effusion occur in the place, treat with sedative plasters till healed.	0.80363137

chapter-2-subchapter-11.txt
If extra eyelashes grow on the eyelid in an unnatural way under the natural eyelashes and persist, they harm the eye and cause various diseases such as constant tearing, relaxation of the eyelids, whiteness, and thickness, until this becomes a cause of blindness.	When superfluous lashes grow on the eyelid outside their natural place, below the natural lashes, and continue, they injure the eye and give rise to many kinds of disease, such as chronic lachrymation, dropping of the eyelids (ptosis), and whiteness and opacity, eventually resulting in the destruction of the eye.	0.8045801
Lifting the eye has four aspects: either by cauterization with fire, or with a sharp medicine as mentioned in the chapter on cauterization. Or the lifting can be done by cutting and stitching, or with reeds as I will mention.	The plastic operation on the eye is carried out in four ways: by the actual cautery; by caustic in the way mentioned above in the book on cauterization; by incision and suture; or with canes, as I shall describe.	0.74638355
Then you make an incision with the scalpel on the two lines that you marked, and start from the larger corner to the smaller corner, and one incision should be near the natural hair, about the thickness of the probe, then insert the hook into one of the corners of the skin, then peel it all off, then join the two edges by stitching with a needle and thin wool thread, and wipe the blood and stick the remaining threads on the eyebrows with some sticky substance if you want to do that, otherwise it doesn't matter.	Then with a scalpel incise over the two lines you have marked, beginning at the greater angle and going toward the lesser angle; and let one incision be close to the natural lashes, at a distance of about the breadth of a probe. Then introduce a hook into one angle of the skin and peel it all off; then join the edges with a needle and a fine woollen thread and wipe away the blood; and stick the ends of the threads to the eyebrow with adhesive, if you like; but if you do not it does not matter.	0.8972482
Then leave the stitching and the threads for about three or four days, then treat it.	Then let the suture and the threads remain for about three or four days, then dress.	0.91329634
If you wish, you can leave the wound without stitching and treat it with something that dries and constricts, for the eyelid will rise when the wound closes and joins, and stitching is better.	If you like, you may leave the wound without suture and treat it with drying medicaments and styptics; then the eyelid will be lifted as the wound heals and comes together; but suture is better.	0.79927313
This method of lifting was mentioned by the ancients, but it is a burden on the patient, although it is good work and there is no danger in it.	The Ancients mention this method of operating. It involves some burden for the patient; but the operation is good and safe.	0.8097495
And another method of lifting is to mark a shape on the eyelid like the shape of a myrtle leaf as we described, then lift the eyelid with three hooks that are either separate or joined in this way.	Yet another way of operating is to mark on the eyelid the figure of a myrtle leaf as we have described; then lift the eyelid with three hooks, either separate or joined thus.	0.8881042
Then you cut what remains of the eyelid with small scissors in this manner, cutting moderately.	Then cut away the superfluous lid with a small pair of scissors with an even incision.	0.69926214
If you cannot restrain the quivering and it does not settle for you, take a needle with thread in it and insert it in the middle of the figure, insert another thread near the larger corner, and a third thread near the smaller corner, and gather the threads between your fingers evenly, then raise your hand with it moderately and lift the marked skin entirely as we have described.	But if you cannot conveniently hold with the hooks, take a threaded needle and introduce it into the middle of the marking; and put another thread through near the greater canthus, and a third thread near the lesser canthus. With your fingers hold the threads evenly and then raise your hand evenly and you will raise up the whole of the marked skin as we have said.	0.87911105
Then bring the edges of the wound together by stitching and treat it until it heals; if a hot swelling appears at your cutting or incision, soothe that swelling with qayruti and similar soothing ointments.	Then bring the edges together with a suture and dress till healed. But if in your incision, or the opening you have made, a swelling arises, then allay the swelling with wax and similar sedatives.	0.78255093
It may also happen to the lower eyelid that its lashes turn inward, so it is necessary to use what we have mentioned of cutting, stitching, cauterizing with fire and with a sharp medicine, and cauterizing with fire or with a sharp medicine is more effective and gentler on the patient than cutting and stitching, and cutting and stitching are more effective.	Sometimes the lower lid also has the lashes inverted. For this you should use any of the methods we have mentioned: the incision and suture, and the operation by the actual cautery and by caustic. ( The operation by the actual cautery or caustic) is more effective, and easier on the patient, than incision and suture, (but incision and suture) is more workmanlike in either lid.	0.6817014
When it heals, the eyelid will be raised and the lashes will not prick the eye, and this is the picture of the two reeds, make it in this shape and this size in length and width precisely.	And when it is healed the eyelid will be raised and the lashes will no longer irritate the eye. Now this is the figure of the canes; you should prepare them exactly in this shape and of this length and breadth.	0.811043

chapter-2-subchapter-12.txt
Chapter twelve on lifting the irritating hair from the eye with a needle.	CHAPTER TWELVE. On the removal with the needle of irritating lashes from the eye.	0.78827363
If it is a hair or two, the procedure for that is to take a thin needle and insert in it a smooth, thin silk thread. Then bring its two ends together and tie them in a very gentle knot. And let the length of the thread be about a span.	If it be one or two hairs the operation will be to take a fine needle, thread it with a fine smooth silk, bring the ends together, and knot them with a tiny knot; the thread should be about a span in length.	0.87032056
Then attach to the loop another thin thread, shorter than it. And tie its ends if you wish.	Then in the loop insert another fine thread, shorter than the first, and join the ends with a knot if you wish.	0.86117625
Then have the patient place his head in your lap and let it be near the sun so that the work is clear, for it is delicate work.	Then let the patient put his head in your lap in full sunlight, so that the operation may be clearly seen, because it is very fine work.	0.85670686
Then insert the needle with the loop at the base of the extra hair and pass it quickly through the eyelid until you bring it out from above the natural hair.	Then introduce the needle with the loop to the root of the superfluous hair and run it quickly through the eyelid till you make it come out above the natural hair.	0.950951
Then pull the thread over the loop and insert that hair into the loop, whether it is one or two or three, no more.	Then draw the thread to the top of the loop and introduce that hair into the loop if it be one, two, or three, but not more.	0.8887172
Then pull it with your hand until the hair comes out with the loop in the eyelid along with the natural hair.	Then draw away your hand with it until the hair emerges with the loop on the eyelid among the natural hair.	0.93202865
If you pull the loop and the hair does not come out with it, pull the loop down with the thread you attached to it until the loop comes out of the upper hole.	If you pull the loop and the hair does not come out with it, you draw the loop down by means of the thread which you have previously passed through it, until the loop comes out at the upper perforation.	0.92548954
Then put the hair back in it and pull them both. Do this until it rises in the upper hole and you see it with your own eyes.	Then put the hair back in and draw them both up; keep on until the hair rises up in the upper perforation and you can see it.	0.8526895
Then release the loop and the thread and remove them. And tighten the eye and leave it tightened for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and the flesh grows over it.	Then extract loop and thread and take them both out, and bind the eye and leave it bound for two or three days till the hair be fixed in its place and there is regeneration of flesh over it.	0.92632645
If the hair is short, then either add to it a long hair from the natural hair, so it will rise with it, or leave it until it grows longer after a while, then you can remove it.	If the hair be short, put with it a long natural hair so that it may be raised together with that; or let the hair grow till it reach a greater length, then raise it.	0.8606823

chapter-2-subchapter-13.txt
Chapter thirteen on the treatment of the fissure that occurs in the upper eyelid.	CHAPTER THIRTEEN. On entropion occurring in the upper eyelid.	0.7026135
The eye that is affected by this fissure is called "hare-eye".	The eye that suffers this inversion of the lid is called 'leporine' (i.e. hareeye).	0.7288415
And this fissure is either natural or accidental.	Now sometimes this inversion is natural, sometimes acquired.	0.55922806
The accidental one results from the healing of a wound, a tear, a cauterization, or something similar.	It is acquired either from the cicatrization of an injury, or an incision, or cauterization, or the like.	0.7849226
The way to treat it is to incise that healed part and separate its edges and place between them a wick of linen and tie it until it heals.	The idea of the operation is to excise the scar, separate the edges of the wound, pack linen between them, and bandage up till healed.	0.7513952
And it is not appropriate to use in its treatment things that dry and constrict, because if you do that, the fissure will return worse than it was.	In the treatment of it you should not use anything styptic or drying, for if you do the inversion will return worse than ever before.	0.7053515
Rather, use things that soften, such as fenugreek and poultices with water in which marshmallow and flaxseed have been soaked, and diachylon ointment melted with some oil, and smear the wick with it and treat with it.	Employ relaxing substances such as fenugreek; and fomentation with water in which mallows and linseed have been boiled; and diachylon plaster which has been previously softened with one of the oils and spread on the packs; and treat it with this.	0.828895
And the key to its treatment is to strive by every means that it does not heal in the way it was originally.	The main thing in the treatment is to use every device to prevent the healing up of the place as it was before.	0.68401545
And this treatment that we mentioned is only a partial repair of the fissure, not that the appearance of the place returns exactly as it was originally.	This operation which we have described is but some correction of the inversion, not that the appearance of the place will necessarily revert to what it was.	0.75267935

chapter-2-subchapter-14.txt
Chapter fourteen on the treatment of the fissure that occurs in the lower eyelid.	CHAPTER FOURTEEN. On the treatment of entropion of the lower lid.	0.749912
This fissure that occurs in the lower eyelid is what is truly called a fissure. It can be natural, and it can be accidental.	This inversion in the lower lid is that which is truly called entropion; and it is either congenital or acquired.	0.6020307
The accidental one results from a wound, a cut, cauterization, and the like.	It is acquired by injury or incision or cautery or something like that.	0.73667485
The way to operate on it is to take a needle with doubled thread and insert it into the flesh, passing it from the left corner to the right corner until the thread is at both edges of the flesh.	This is the method of operating for it: you take a needle through which has been passed a double thread and you run it into the flesh, making it penetrate from the left angle of the eye to the right angle so that the thread is fixed in flesh both ends.	0.8625345
Then you stretch the flesh upwards with the needle and cut it with a wide scalpel.	Then with the needle stretch the flesh upwards and make an incision with a broad scalpel; and if the eyelid returns to its proper shape, well and good.	0.66872644
If the shape of the eyelid returns to how it should be, then fine; otherwise, you take a small probe and place it on the location of the fissure and turn the eyelid with it, and you make two incisions on the inner side of the eyelid, with the ends of the two incisions starting from the corners of the cut you made until they meet, forming an angle so that when they join, its shape becomes similar to this shape:	But if not, take a probe and put it on the site of the incision and with it turn back the lid. Then make two incisions on the inner side of the lid; the two incisions should begin from the angles of the incision already made and run together making an angle so that when they join they are like this.	0.7983758
And it is the letter lam in Greek.	It is the Greek letter lambda.	0.7628036
Then you remove that flesh as much as the sharp side of it is below what follows the eyelid. Then you gather the scattered parts with two stitches, sewing it with woolen thread.	You remove that flesh in proportion as the angled side is lower than that adjoining the lid; then bring the divided parts together with two sutures made with a woollen thread.	0.83221626
Then you treat it with what we mentioned of relaxing medicines and twisting until it heals.	Then treat with the relaxing medicaments and dressings we have mentioned, till healed.	0.8804023
And if the eyelid split occurred from an incision or stitching or cauterization, then it is necessary to make a simple incision below the hair of the eyelashes also as mentioned before. Then separate between the two lips by twisting as we mentioned.	But if the inversion is acquired, from incision, suture, or cautery, you should make a simple incision below the eyelashes, as has been described, then bring apart the two edges with a packing, as we have said.	0.8415259
The summary of the treatment of the eyelid split, if it is from above or from below, is that you perform the work according to what is available to you from the form of the eyelid split. Because it may have many differences in form.	The sum of what there is to say about the treatment of inversion, whether it is in the upper or the lower lid, is that you should make your procedure follow the actual lines of the inversion itself ; for this is of varying shape.	0.6629587
And the experienced craftsman manages the trick in any way possible until he restores the form to its natural state or close to it.	The experienced practitioner will make use of his skill in any way he can to re-establish the natural form or approximate to it.	0.7219325
The disease itself will guide you to what is suitable for it in terms of work and instruments in most cases.	The disease itself will generally indicate to you the appropriate operation and instruments.	0.79977226

chapter-2-subchapter-15.txt
The fifteenth chapter is on the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.	CHAPTER FIFTEEN. On adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.	0.8214538
This adhesion may occur to many people, where the upper eyelid adheres to the white of the eye, preventing it from easy movement and hindering its natural functions.	This adhesion happens to many people, the upper lid sticking to the white of the eye and hindering its movement and preventing its natural functions.	0.93079
Therefore, you should insert the tip of a probe under the eyelid and lift it upwards or stretch it with a hook, then cut the adhesion with a gentle scalpel, not as sharp as cutting scalpels, but somewhat blunt, so that the patient does not become anxious during the procedure and the scalpel slips and injures the eye with its sharpness.	You should introduce the end of a probe beneath the lid and raise it upward; or stretch it with a hook. Then cut the adhesion with a fine scalpel; it should not be so sharp as a cutting scalpel, but somewhat blunt, lest during the operation the patient should shake, and the scalpel slip, and the edge injure the eye.	0.8719591
And your cutting should be as if you are peeling off that adhesion, and wait until the eyelid returns to its natural state and the entire adhesion heals, then pour salt water into the eye, wash it with it, or instill in it a solution of vitriol suppositories dissolved in water.	Let your incision be as if peeling off the adhesion. Wait until the lid regains its natural shape and the adhesions be wholly healed. Then rinse the eye with saline and cleanse it; or instil into it drops of a watery solution of eye-lotion of verdigris.	0.7355182
Then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a linen wick and place cotton wool soaked in egg white over the eye, and after the third day use desiccating suppositories until it heals.	Then separate between the eye and the lid with a linen pad and put over the eye a piece of wool moistened with white of egg; and after the third day employ healing eye-lotions till it is better.	0.9072803

chapter-2-subchapter-16.txt
Chapter Sixteen on cutting the nail and the growth of flesh of the nail beds.	CHAPTER SIXTEEN. On incision of ungula and excrescence of the canthus.	0.7496748
The pterygium is of two types: either nervous, and it resembles a hard, thin membrane. Or it is non-nervous, resembling a solid white moisture; if iron touches it or you try to take it with a hook, it breaks apart and a hook will not hold in it.	Ungula occurs in two forms: either the nervous, which resembles a fine hard membrane; or the non-nervous, like a white congealed humidity; which, when the iron touches it or you try to pick it up with a hook, is cut through and the hook has no hold on it.	0.78273165
Both types begin from the greater canthus, and they slowly creep until they cover the pupil and obstruct the light and the movement of the eye.	Both kinds grow from the greater angle of the eye, whence they spread little by little until they cover the pupil and block both the vision and the movements of the eye.	0.8382982
The method of its removal is that the patient places his head in your lap, then he opens his eyes, and you lift the eyelid with your hand, then you grasp the pterygium with a slightly curved hook and pull it upwards. Then you take a needle and insert into it a hair from the mane of a horse or a cow and a strong thread, and you bend the tip of the needle slightly, and you insert it into the middle of the pterygium and pierce it with the needle, and you tie the pterygium with the thread and pull it upwards. And you peel with the hair the side of the pterygium that is next to the pupil, as if you are sawing it with the hair to its end.	This is the method of incision: the patient places his head in your lap and opens his eyes; then you raise the lid with your hand; then with a gently curved hook pick up the ungula and pull it upward; then take a needle threaded with a horse hair or an ox hair, and a strong thread; slightly curve the end of the needle; then thrust it into the middle of the ungula, piercing it with the needle; and tie the ungula with the thread and pull upwards; and, with the hair, peel the side of the ungula adjoining the pupil, and divide it with a sawing motion right through.	0.90051854
Then you cut the remainder at the base of the canthus with a fine scalpel or small scissors and leave the natural flesh of the canthus, lest constant tearing result from its cutting.	Then what is left in the root of the angle cut out with a fine scalpel, or with small scissors; and leave the natural caruncle in the canthus lest, in cutting it away, a chronic flux of tears occur.	0.8449524
And you may pull the pterygium with the hook alone or with the thread as we have said, then you peel with the smooth scalpel the edge which this is its picture:	The ungula may be drawn out with the hook alone or with the thread as we have said, and scraped away with the smoothtipped scalpel of this form.	0.7289689
And beware that the scalpel touches the cornea, causing a hernia in it, so the pupil swells.	But beware lest the scalpel touch the corneal covering and cause a fissure in it and the pupil protrude.	0.7611603
Then, after the incision, put in the eye some powdered salt or some zinc sulfate suppositories and leave it until the next day, then treat it as needed until it heals.	Then after the incision put into the eye a little powdered salt or an eye-lotion of verdigris, and leave it till the following day; then treat as may be necessary till it heals.	0.8187701
If the pterygium is not fleshy and you are unable to insert a needle in it, nor fix a hook in it, then this type of pterygium is often treated with medications and heals as described in the classification.	If the ungula is non-nervous in origin and you cannot transfix it with a needle nor get a hook to hold fast in it, this sort is often successfully treated by medical means. So treat as described in the section.	0.7000772
And if you want to excise it, open the patient's eye and take a fine, smooth scalpel with a weak edge, in this manner: Gently scrape the pterygium from above. If you see that it becomes loose and crumbles, and the scraping has had an effect on it, then immediately instill into the eye some copper sulfate collyrium, or red collyrium, or powdered salt.	So treat as described in the section. But if you prefer to cut it, open the patient's eye, and take a fine smooth scalpel, rather blunt, like this and with this gently scrape away the ungula from above; and if you see that it is crumbling away and breaking down under the scraping, then immediately instil into the eye some eye-lotion of verdigris, or the red eye-lotion, or a little powdered salt, and bind the eye up till next day.	0.80220747
Then repeat the procedure until it is all gone. Unless a hot swelling appears in the eye, then leave it and treat the hot swelling until it heals.	Then repeat the operation on it till you have removed it all, unless an abscess forms in the eye, in which case cease the operation and treat the abscess till cured.	0.853768
Then repeat the scraping procedure on it until it heals.	Then repeat the treatment with the same scraping till healed.	0.8227221
As for a fleshy outgrowth of the conjunctiva, if the outgrowth harms the eye excessively, then grasp that outgrowth with a hook and cut off some of it. Do not cut too deeply, lest it cause excessive tearing.	As for a protuberance of flesh in the angle, if it causes great hurt pick it up with a hook and cut part of it away, with not too big an incision lest there be a flux of tears.	0.78940666
Then instill into the eyes red collyrium or copper sulfate collyrium until it heals.	Then into the canthus instil red eye-lotion or lotion of verdigris till healed.	0.7957971

chapter-2-subchapter-17.txt
Chapter seventeen on cutting the warding and what grows of excess flesh in the eye.	CHAPTER SEVENTEEN. On cutting for chemosis and superfluous flesh in the eye.	0.76775193
Red, overlapping flesh may grow in the eyes of some people until it covers the pupil, or comes close to it, or overflows onto the eyelids. And sometimes the eyelids turn outwards, and it resembles a pomegranate flower.	Sometimes in the eye of certain people a red granulation grows up and increases so as to block the pupil or nearly so; or it grows over the eyelids and often turns the lids outward, and it resembles the blossom of the pomegranate.	0.84961206
The procedure for this is to have the patient place their head in your lap, then open their eyes, and you pick up all of that red flesh with suitable small hooks, or grasp it with tweezers or forceps, then cut the flesh bit by bit until it is all gone by cutting, and be careful of the eye so as not to harm it during the procedure.	You operate for this by having the patient put his head in your lap; then he opens his eyes and you gather up the granulation whole, with suitable hooks, or hold it with tweezers or forceps. Then you cut away the first bit of flesh and then the next, until you have cut it all away; and beware of damaging the eye in the course of operation.	0.8491212
Your cutting of it should be either with the scalpel that we described for cutting the pterygium, or with small scissors like those used to pluck hairs, as their image will appear in the chapter following this chapter.	Your incision should be made with the scalpel which we described for the incision of pterygium; or with small scissors like those with which one gathers up pannus, as shown in the chapter after this.	0.8885143
Once your cutting is complete and all the fleshy growth is gone, fill the eye with crushed salt, or drip into it red vitriol and similar corrosive medications, and apply cotton with egg white on the eye from the outside to prevent hot swelling.	And when you have finished your incision and removed all the chemosis, fill the eye with powdered salt or instil the red powder or similar corrosive; and apply to the outside of the eye cotton wool with white of egg to ward off an abscess.	0.80914235
If any of the fleshy growth remains and the bleeding overwhelms you, and you fear hot swelling, then leave the eye and treat it with something that soothes the swelling, then return to it with the procedure until it heals.	If there is any chemosis left and blood is getting the better of you and you fear an abscess, then desist and treat the eye with those means for settling a tumour. Thereafter return to your operation till cured.	0.779129
And likewise do the same with the excess flesh that appears in the eye of this type, except that you should avoid treating any eye that is weak by nature or by accidental cause with iron instruments.	So must you do with superfluous flesh that arises in the eye. But you must avoid treating surgically any eye that is weak, whether congenitally or by acquired disease.	0.753005
And do not put your hand to any of these procedures until you see that the organ can tolerate that procedure.	Never set your hand to an operation of this kind till you have seen if the organ can endure such an operation.	0.79132885

chapter-2-subchapter-18.txt
Chapter eighteen on dripping eye drops into the eye.	CHAPTER EIGHTEEN. On gathering up pannus from the eye.	0.7133117
Cobwebs are red veins that are woven over the eye, preventing it from performing its function of sight.	Pannus is a network of blood-vessels spreading over the eye so as to interfere with the function of sight and, in the course of time, weakening the eye.	0.51757693
And the eye weakens with the length of days, so it is necessary for you first to look; if the eye in which the cobwebs are is strong and there is no other disease in it other than the cobwebs, then the plucking is that you order the ill person to place his head in your lap, then hang those veins with one hook or two depending on your skill, and the hooks should be smooth in bending according to this picture:	You must first examine, and if the eye with the pannus be strong, with no fault other than the pannus, then the pannus should be gathered up. This is done by bidding the patient put his head in your lap; then, as skilfully as you may, pick up those blood-vessels with one or two hooks. The hooks should be of a gentle curve, like this.	0.7788905
Or it may be two double hooks in one body, in this form:	Or there can be two hooks joined together on one handle, thus.	0.7000667
Then you gently pick up those veins with fine scissors and gently wipe away the blood from time to time until you see that those veins have disappeared from the eye and the blood has been drained.	Then take up the blood-vessels gently with the fine scissors, and wipe away the blood constantly, till you see all those blood-vessels removed from the eye, and the blood wells forth.	0.8934819
And be careful with the eye, do not hurt it with the tips of the scissors.	But be careful of the eye lest you damage it with the points of the scissors.	0.7993697
And let your work be at midday, facing the sun. And be very steady in your work so that you do not cut anything other than those veins.	Let your work be done in broad sunlight at midday; and be very steady in your action so as to cut nothing beside the bloodvessels.	0.8757316
When you are finished, instill in the eye the green or red suppository so that its sharpness consumes what remains of the diseased tissue.	When you have finished, instil the red or green lotion into the eye to destroy by its caustic action the remnants of the pannus.	0.80547
If you cannot pick it all up at that time, then dress the eye with something that soothes the eye's pain and leave it for days until its pain subsides and you are safe from the hot swelling.	If you are unable to gather it all up at that one time, apply a plaster to the eye such as will allay the pain, and leave him* for a few days till* the pain be eased and there is no danger of an abscess.	0.7903755
Then repeat the procedure on it in this same manner until it heals.	Then repeat the operation in the same manner till it is healed.	0.92707014
This is a picture of the scissors:	This is a figure of the scissors. [	0.66117156
The basis of the procedure is that you open the eye with fixed or triangular openers, held by a skilled student, and the head of the patient is in the lap of the student, and another one dries the tears and verifies the gaze in the front of the eye and its back, and you have the choice to start the picking from the top of the eye or from its bottom.	The principle in the operation is that the eye be opened with double or triple openers held by a skilful pupil, the patient's head being in that pupil's lap, while another wipes away the tears and carefully watches the internal and external angles of the eye. You have the choice between beginning the removal from the top or from the bottom of the eye.	0.8660262
And it's best to dry two hooks on the upper side, one at the end of the corona and the other at its beginning, and hold them between the middle and index fingers.	The best method is to fix two hooks in the upper side, one at the end of the iris and the other at the beginning of it.	0.7103636
Then hold them between the little finger and the ring finger.	Hold them between your middle and first fingers.	0.7437498
And lift your hand lightly until you see that all the strands have risen.	Raise your hand slightly until you see that the whole pannus has been lifted.	0.76875085
Cut from the smaller west, if you wish, with scissors, and if you wish, with a fine scalpel.	Then cut from the lesser angle, with scissors or a fine scalpel, as you wish.	0.74353355
And insert the probe on a needle and clean all the strands until they rise over the conjunctiva.	Introduce the scraping-needle and cut away the entire pannus until it is lifted over the conjunctiva.	0.74070257
And do not cut the dryness, because tears and blood will become difficult (liquify?) for you.	Do not interrupt the wiping, for tears and blood will flow and hinder you.	0.5648998
Then cut with scissors what is beyond the corona, from above and from below, so that nothing remains attached except in the cornea.	Then cut with scissors what is left over the iris, from above and below, until nothing remains adhering except over the cornea.	0.9110411
If you can lift it from the cornea by peeling with the probe, it is better.	If you can remove it from over the cornea, peel with the scraping-needle, for it is better, and in some cases is easily done.	0.658826

chapter-2-subchapter-19.txt
Chapter nineteen on returning the feather to the nose.	CHAPTER NINETEEN. On turning a fistula into the nose.	0.7500124
Doctors call the fistula a fistula.	Doctors give the name 'fistula' to what laymen call 'a quill'.	0.8224491
If you treat it with cautery or with a sharp, burning medication as described previously, and it does not heal, then there is no remedy for it except to incise the swelling when it ripens and extract all the moisture or pus in it until the bone is exposed.	When you have treated it with the cautery or with caustic according to the instructions given previously, and it is not healed, there is no clear method of treatment except to cut down on the tumour at its ripening and let out all the humidity or pus therein, till you reach the bone.	0.8834417
So when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, scrape it with an instrument like this:	When bone is reached and you see necrosis or blackness, scrape it with an instrument like this.	0.78907156
And it is called the rough-headed one, made from Indian iron, and its head is round like a button, engraved with the engraving of a file or scalpel, a fine engraving.	It is called 'rough-head' and is made of Indian iron. Its head is round like a button but is engraved with markings finely engraved, like those of a file or a rasp.	0.81689596
You place it on the site of the corruption in the bone, then rotate it between your fingers while clenching your hand slightly until you know that the corruption has been scraped away.	Place it on the site of the diseased bone and spin it between your fingers, pressing down a little with your hand, till you are sure all the diseased bone has been scraped away.	0.7856574
And you do that repeatedly, then you dress the place with drying, astringent medicines.	Do this several times. Then let the place be dressed with stanching and styptic remedies.	0.67393124
If the place is sealed and flesh grows in it, and the pus flow stops and it remains for forty days, and it does not regenerate, nor fester, nor does anything happen to it, then know that it has healed, otherwise there is no solution except to return the fistula to the nose opening in this way, which is to expose the bone again with iron or with a sharp medicine. So, when the bone is exposed, take a branched instrument like this image:	And if the place heals and flesh is generated there and the flow of sanies is stayed and there is no return after leaving for forty days, and there is no swelling, and nothing emerges, you may know it is perfectly healed. But if not, there is no other means for it but to turn the fistula into the cavity of the nose, in this style, namely, that you lay bare the bone a second time, either by an instrument or by caustic; and when the bone is uncovered, then take a drill like this.	0.8888581
The tip of the instrument should be triangular, and its shaft conical, brought to a point, as you see.	Its extremity, which is of iron, should be triangular; and its wooden handle should be conical in shape, and, as you see, tapering to the extremity.	0.7508797
Then place it on the bone itself, and this should be near the suture, and keep your hand a little away from the eye. Then turn your hand with the instrument until the bone is pierced, and the patient feels it by finding air coming out of it when he holds his hand over his nose.	Then put it to the bone itself near the canthus; but keep your hand a little away from the eye; then with your hand rotate the drill till the bone is perforated; and the patient will have the sensation of this, since, if he holds his hands over his nose he will find the breath coming out through the hole.	0.9125437
Then at this point, treat the area with astringent and drying medications, as I have taught you.	And then dress the place with styptic and stanching remedies as I have taught you.	0.76851785
So when the flesh grows and the place hardens, the matter that was flowing outwards will return to the nose, and this will be easier for the patient, God willing.	And when the flesh begins to grow and the place gets hard, the matter which before was coming outward will be turned into the nose; and this will be easier for the patient.	0.8350986

chapter-2-subchapter-20.txt
If the eye swells in its entirety, and no damage or impairment occurs in vision, then it is necessary to give the patient a laxative, then bleed him in the cephalic vein.	When the whole eye is prominent and there is no reduction or impairment of vision, you should get the patient's bowels open.	0.6762078
Then place a cupping glass on the nape of the neck without scarification and perform a gentle suction. Then apply to the eye a poultice made from acacia, aloe, frankincense, and sarcocol. Then bandage the eye firmly over the poultice with many compresses.	Then venesect him in the cephalic vein; then apply cupping vessels to his neck without scarification and draw off by gentle suction; then put to the eye a poultice made of acacia and aloes and olibanum and sarcocolla; then bandage the eye over the application with many pads.	0.88735235
The method for the compresses is to take many soft rags and fold each rag into four folds, making many of them, then place them one on top of the other to the extent needed by the eye, then tie them firmly with a strong cloth.	The way to make pads is to take a number of soft rags and fold each into four thicknesses. Prepare a good many. Then put them one on top of the other as the eye requires; then bind on stiff bandages over these, tying them firmly.	0.86163235
And repeat the cupping with suction without scarification.	Repeat the cupping with suction and without scarification.	0.87572193
Then remove the cupping glass and leave the eye bandaged for a day and a night.	Then take away the cupping vessel and leave the eye bandaged a day and a night.	0.96540236
If the bandage loosens during that time, then it should be tightened well.	If the bandaging slackens during that time, it must be tied properly.	0.91110015
Then remove the bandage after a day and a night as we said.	Then remove the bandaging after a day and a night, as we have said.	0.9803726
If you see that the eye has returned to normal, then good, otherwise repeat the poultice, compresses, bandaging, and cupping until it returns to normal.	If you see that the eye has receded, good. Otherwise repeat the applications and pads and bandages and the cupping till it does recede.	0.81335974

chapter-2-subchapter-21.txt
Chapter twenty-one on cutting the uvea.	CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE. On cutting for staphyloma.	0.67515737
If a rupture occurs in the uveal layer, then it swells and protrudes outside the eyelids like a grape, thus disfiguring the person's appearance. And if you want to remove it, the procedure is as I describe.	When a rupture befalls the uveal membrane so that it swells and protrudes outside the eyelids looking like a grape, and on this account the man's features are disfigured; if you intend to cut it away the operation will be as I am about to describe.	0.88586533
It is that you insert a needle into the base of the grape-like swelling from bottom to top. Then you insert another needle, which has a doubled thread, from the side of the corner of the eye and pass it through, leaving the first needle as it is.	You introduce a needle to the root of the uvea from the lower to the upper segment; then you introduce another needle threaded with a double thread, from the region of the canthus major where you will perforate it; and leave the first needle in its place.	0.7686027
Then you cut the place where the doubled thread is folded and tie some of the swelling around the needle and tighten it well.	Then cut the place of doubling of the doubled thread, and with it ligature that part of the excrescence around the needle and tie it well.	0.851668
Then you remove the needle and place wool moistened with egg white on the eye and leave it until the threads fall off with the swelling.	Then remove the needle and apply to the eye wool moistened with egg-white; and leave till the thread falls away with the growth.	0.9157635
Then you treat the eye with what strengthens it until the wound heals.	Then treat the eye with fortifying dressings till the wound be healed.	0.87989455
The swelling may also be tightened from all sides with a circle of cloth so that the swelling increases well.	Sometimes the uvea is tied all round with a circle of material so that the prominence of the eye is greatly increased.	0.4887112
Then it is lanced with a thin scalpel that reaches the depth of the eye, so that the watery fluid flows out and the swelling subsides and withers on the spot.	Then you perforate it with a fine scalpel going to the depth of the eye; and an albuminous humour will flow out and the eye will shrink and return at once.	0.7539673
Then you tighten it until it heals.	Then bandage till healed.	0.84508777

chapter-2-subchapter-22.txt
Chapter twenty-two on the treatment of leukoderma.	CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO. On the treatment of hypopyon.	0.7386005
This ailment, which is called 'kamana', is a duration that gathers in the eye, resembling dripping water, but it is not water.	This disease which is called 'hypopyon' is a collection of pus in the eye which resembles cataract but is not so.	0.67601335
And the way to treat this is that you sit the patient upright on a chair, then you take his head with your hands from both sides and move it until you see the 'duration' move to the bottom of his eye, then it stabilizes and doesn't move, and the light is released, and the patient sees things as he used to see them.	The method of operating in this disease is to make the patient sit upright on a chair before you. Take his head on either side with your hands and shake it about till you can see the pus come down; then it will be fixed and not move; and the light will pass and the patient will see things as he was before.	0.8303168
And if it does not descend to the bottom, we know that it is water.	But if it does not come down, we know it is cataract.	0.7205457
If the descent of the 'duration' is not possible by what we mentioned, then sit the patient between your hands, then take a thin scalpel and make a small incision above the cornea at the junction of the conjunctiva with the cornea in the 'iklil' (limbus) until the substance comes out.  Once it comes out, instill in the eye hot water mixed with honey, or water in which fenugreek and honey have been boiled. Then treat with other treatments until he recovers.	But if the pus is not ready to be brought down by this method, then seat the patient in front of you; then take a fine scalpel and cut a little above the corneal tunic near the coronal junction of conjunctiva and cornea, till the pus comes out. When it comes out, instil warm water mixed with honey, or water boiled with fenugreek and honey. Then treat as usual till healed.	0.76085716

chapter-2-subchapter-23.txt
We have mentioned the types of water in the classification and which one is suitable for the cupping glass, with detailed and explained words, so you take it from there correctly.	We have already mentioned in the appropriate section the varieties of cataract and those in which depression is useful, in full detail; so you may take it accurately from there.	0.72339153
Then, you should sit the patient between your hands, squared facing the light near the sun, and tie his healthy eye, tightening it well.	You should cause the patient to sit down cross-legged before you, facing the light in full sun, and firmly bind up his sound eye.	0.77893907
Then you lift his eyelid with your left hand if the eye that has the water is the left eye, or with your right hand if it is the right eye.	Then lift up his eyelid with your left hand, if it be the left eye in which the humour is; or with the right hand if it be the right eye.	0.86435485
Then you place the tip of the cupping glass near the iris, with the thickness of a probe, in the white of the eye itself, from the side of the smaller canthus, then you push the cupping glass with force while rotating it with your hand until it penetrates the white of the eye and you feel with the cupping glass that it has reached something empty.	Then put the tip of the needle near the corona, about the thickness of a probe away, onto the white of the eye itself, on the side of the lesser canthus. Then thrust the needle firmly in, at the same time rotating it with your hand, until it penetrates the white of the eye, and you feel that the needle has reached something empty.	0.8977455
And it should be that the extent of the cupping glass's going into the depth is equal to the distance that is from the pupil to the end of the blackness, which is the iris of the eye, for you see the copper in the eye of the observer himself, due to the clarity of the cornea.	The depth the needle goes in should measure as the distance from the pupil to the edge of the iris, which is the corona of the eye; you will see the metal in the pupil itself because of the transparency of the corneal tunic.	0.7927245
Then you move the cupping glass upwards to the place where the water is, then you press it downwards repeatedly. If the water descends immediately, then the patient will see whatever his sight opens upon immediately, with the cupping glass in his eye. Then he rests a little. If the water rises, then lower it again without removing the cupping glass.	Then put the needle up to the place containing the humour; then press the point downwards time after time. If the humour comes down at once, the patient will at once see whatever his vision is opened upon while the needle is still in his eye. Then let him rest a little while; and if the humour goes back up again depress it a second time without taking the needle out.	0.8454941
And when it settles and doesn't rise, remove the cupping glass gently while twisting it with your hand little by little.	When it stays down firmly and does not come back again, gently draw the needle out, twisting it ever so slowly with your hand.	0.73116547
Then you dissolve in water a bit of pure Andarani salt and wash the eye with it from the inside, then you place on the outside of the whole eye lint or wool moistened with rose oil and egg white, and you tie the healthy eye with it.	Then dissolve a little pure rock-salt in water and wash the eyeball with the solution; then apply all over the outer aspect of the eye carded linen or wool moistened with oil of roses and egg-white, and bandage it up together with the sound eye.	0.825082
As for us and the people of our time, we put on it ground cumin with egg white.	Now we and our contemporaries apply pounded cumin with the egg-white.	0.77363217
If the cupping glass does not respond to you for entering the eye due to its hardness, because among people there are those whose eyes are very hard, then you should take the lancet that is called the 'barid,' which is this image:	But if the couching needle does not serve, failing to enter the eye on account of its hardness (for there are some whose eyes are hard indeed), you should take the scalpel called al-baridl figured thus.	0.6731284
So you pierce only the conjunctiva itself, and do not go deep in the piercing.	With this make a perforation in the conjunctiva only, not piercing any further; for that is only to make a little entrance for the needle.	0.72249967
It is only that you tap a fine spot for the lancet, then insert the lancet as we mentioned.	And then thrust in the needle as we said before.	0.5186917
And when your work is complete, prepare for the patient a firm bed in which he sleeps on his back in a dark room, and he refrains from all movements and from coughing, and you make his food what softens his nature, and he does not move his head right or left at all, and the bandage remains as it is until the third day, then you loosen it in that dark room, and test his vision, and show him things, then you return the bandage until the seventh day.	At the end of your operation, prepare a solidly-built bed on which the patient may lie on his back, in a dark room; and keep him from all movement or coughing. And prescribe such a diet for him as will relax his system; neither let him move his head to right or to left. Let the bandage remain in the same position till the third day. Then loosen it in the same dark room and make trial of his sight, putting before him objects to be seen; then replace the bandage till the seventh day.	0.9079729
And it is not appropriate that you do that at the time of treatment or after the lancing immediately, but it is appropriate that you avoid that before the water rises quickly with intense looking.	You should not do this at the time of treatment nor immediately after the perforation by the needle; but on the contrary you should avoid it, for intensive use of the eye causes a rapid ascent of the humour.	0.7393875
If a hot swelling appears, it is appropriate to unbind the eye before the seventh day and correct that with what calms the swelling, so that when it subsides, then you release his vision and place a veil over his face, training his vision from under it for days while he is in that dark room, then he leaves the room gradually and manages his affairs.	But if an abscess occur you should unbandage the eye before the seventh day and restore it to health by those methods that allay swelling. When it has subsided, allow him free sight, putting over his face a dark veil beneath which his vision may be exercised for a few days while he is still in the dark room. Then let him come out of the room gradually and take up the exercise of his business.	0.8198844
And know that in lancing, the learner cannot do without observation several times, then he proceeds to the work.	But you should know that in the case of a depression of a cataract the student cannot manage without having seen that operation performed several times; then he may perform it himself.	0.63958883
And it has reached me from some of the Iraqis that he mentioned that a perforated lancet is made in Iraq that sucks the water with it, and I have not seen anyone in our country do that, nor have I read it in a book of the early books, and it is possible that this is a recent innovation.	I have heard that a certain Iraqi has said that in Iraq he makes a hollow needle by which the humour is sucked out. In our land I have never seen anyone do it in this fashion, nor have I read of it described in any of the books of the Ancients; perhaps it is newly invented.	0.8250349
And this is a picture of types of lancets for those who are ignorant of them to understand:	Here are the figures of some kinds of needle for the information of those who do not know them.	0.568099
It is made specifically of copper. And its tip is of this exact thinness, triangular and sharp.	They are mostly made of brass; and their extremities should be of this very fineness, triangular at the tip and sharp.	0.75230396

chapter-2-subchapter-24.txt
Chapter twenty-four on the treatment of nasal polyps.	CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR. On the treatment of nasal polyp.	0.90828526
Various excess flesh may grow in the nose, some of which resembles a scorpion with many legs.	Sometimes there arise in the nose various superfluous fleshy growths.	0.6241583
And some of it is cancerous flesh, hardened and dark-colored.	One of these is a thing resembling a centipede; another, a cancerous growth, stony, hard, and pale in colour; another again is a soft growth, not pale.	0.52516925
And some of it is soft flesh, not dark-colored. So whatever of this flesh is soft, is not malignant or cancerous,	Any of these growths that is soft is not malignant or cancerous.	0.5935067
so you should sit the patient before you, facing the sun, and open his nostril, and cast the hook into that flesh, then pull it out, then cut what you reach of it with a fine, sharp scalpel from one side until you know that all the flesh is gone.	You should make the patient sit before you, facing the sun, and dilate his nose and introduce a hook into these polyps and draw them out; then amputate what you can take hold of, with a fine scalpel sharp on one side, till you know that all the growth is gone.	0.837554
If any of it remains that you cannot cut, scrape it with one of the fine instruments gently until nothing of it remains. If the blood overcomes you or a hot swelling appears, treat it as appropriate. Or if it is one of the malignant swellings, hasten to cauterize it until the blood stops and all the flesh is gone.	And if there be anything of them left behind that you cannot cut away, then gently scrape away with any fine instrument till nothing of them remains; and if the bleeding be too much for you, or an abscess occur, then combat it by suitable means. If it be a malignant swelling, then speedily cauterize till the bleeding stops and all the polypi are gone.	0.8896183
Then, after cutting, put vinegar and water or a drink into the nose. If the nose opens and the moisture flows from it to the throat, know that he is healed.	Then introduce into the nose, after the incision, vinegar and water, or wine; and if the nose be free and fluid flow into the throat from it, then know that he is cured.	0.8648449
But if the moisture does not flow as it should, know that inside him is growing flesh at the top of the spongy bones that the instrument did not reach by cutting.	But if fluid does not pass through it as it should, you may know that there is a polyp within in the upper part of the ethmoid bone where the instrument could not reach to make incision.	0.7200058
At that time, it is necessary to take a somewhat thick linen thread and tie many knots in it, making the distance between each knot the length of a finger or less. And the patient should contrive to insert one end of the thread into his nose with a probe or whatever he can, after making it like a button, and pull it until it reaches the uvula and comes out of his throat.	In this case you must take a linen thread, rather thick, and tie many knots in it with a space of a finger's breadth or less between each pair of knots; and let the patient try to get one end of the thread into his nose with a probe or anything he can, after making it into the form of a button; and let him make a full inspiration till it reaches the cartilage and comes out through the throat.	0.92476434
Boys in school often do such a thing, and it is easy for whoever wants to do it.	Boys at school often do this sort of thing, and it is quite easy for anyone who wishes.	0.97363454
Then, bring together the two ends of the thread, the one that came out of the mouth and the other that remained in the nose, then use the knots in the thread to saw the flesh, doing so until you know that the flesh has been cut by the knots of the thread.	Then hold together the two ends of the thread, one coming out through the mouth and the other remaining in the nose; then saw off the polyps by means of the knots in the thread ; continue doing this till you are sure that the growth has been cut off by the knotted thread.	0.83280116
Then remove the thread and, after wiping the blood, insert a wick into the nose that you have soaked in Egyptian ointment. Do this for three days or more until the ointment consumes all remaining flesh.	Then take out the thread and, after wiping away the blood, put into the nose a plug dipped in Egyptian ointment. Do this for three days or longer till the ointment has consumed the remnants of the polyp.	0.9434257
Then, lastly, insert a lead tube into the nose for several days until it heals.	Then, last of all, insert a lead tube in the nose for a few days till healed.	0.9785972
If it needs a drying treatment, use that.	If he need treatment with drying medicaments, use them.	0.8451425
And this is a picture of the syringe with which oils and medicines are dripped into the nose:	This is the figure of the instrument for instillation by which oil or medicines are dropped into the nose.	0.684545
He places something like a small lamp, open at its reservoir and channel, made of silver or copper.	It should be made of silver or bronze like a small lamp, its oil-container open, and with its channel likewise.	0.7283849
Similarly, if you wish, you make the tube closed, like a reed, with a flat surface for the perfume oil.	If you like you may make its spout closed like a reed; and the oil-container of the instrument can be made covered over.	0.6255983
It has a handle at its end, as you see, to hold it when you heat oil in it or what. You want from the expressed juices or flowing things.	It has a handle at the end, as you see, to hold it when heating the oil or whatever juice or other liquid you wish.	0.86939013

chapter-2-subchapter-25.txt
Chapter twenty-five on warts growing on the tip of the nose.	CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE. On warts growing on the end of the nose.	0.850435
Often a wart grows on the edge of the nose, it grows and increases with the days until its appearance becomes ugly.	There frequently spring from the end of the nose warts that grow and increase daily till they disfigure the man.	0.72224045
Therefore, it is necessary to cut it off at its first appearance and completely uproot it, then apply to the area either cauterization or a burning medication that acts as cauterization.	So you should cut them out when they first appear; totally eradicate them and apply to the place cauterization, either actual or by caustic.	0.74475396
If you miss cutting it until it grows, then look: if it is petrified, hard, dark in color, and has little feeling, do not touch it with iron, for it is a cancerous tumor.	But if excision of them has been overlooked till they have grown big, then examine, and if the growth is stone-like, hard, and pale in colour, and with little sensation, do not interfere with it with an instrument, for it is a cancerous tumour.	0.7191756
And I have often seen those who cut this tumor suffer a great affliction as a result.	For I have often seen people cut these tumours, and great affliction resulted to the sufferer.	0.8514506
If the tumor is soft to the touch, not dark in color, and you see that it is possible to cut it completely, then induce vomiting in the sick person, and cut it without hesitation or delay, and treat the area with something that dries and constricts until it heals.	But if the tumour be soft to the touch, not pale coloured, and you see it can be wholly removed, then purge the patient, and cut it off him fearlessly, and treat the place with astringents and styptics till healed.	0.8065821

chapter-2-subchapter-26.txt
Chapter twenty-six on suturing the nose, lip, and ear if their connection is severed by a wound or something similar	CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX. On suture of nose, lip, and ear, when there is discontinuity from a wound or the like.	0.83043694
Know that whenever a separation of connection occurs in one of these cartilages, the treatment rarely succeeds except in some people.	You should know that when discontinuity occurs in one of these cartilages, treatment of them rarely does any good, except in a few people.	0.8971449
So it is necessary, when something like this happens to someone, to see if the wound is fresh with its blood, to bring the edges of the wound together by stitching, then treat it until it heals.	When such a thing happens to anyone, look carefully, and if the wound be fresh and bleeding, bring the edges of the wound together with a suture, and dress them till they are healed.	0.752607
And if the separation of the connection has separated its lips and each side has become sound, it is necessary to excoriate each side with the thickness of its visible skin until it bleeds, then bring the two lips together by stitching and tighten them, and sprinkle on it ground costus and frankincense, and put over the powder a plaster of date palm ointment or other vulnerary ointments, and leave it tight for two or three days, then loosen it and change the medication, and leave it until the stitches fall out on their own, then treat it with the ointment until it heals.	If the discontinuity has separated the edges, and both edges have healed, it is necessary to scrape both edges on the external skin till they bleed; then bring the edges together with a suture and dust over it dragon's blood and olibanum; and put over the powder a plaster of Palm ointment or some other of the regenerative ointments, and leave bandaged for two or three days; then unbandage and change the medicine, and let the sutures come away of themselves; and afterward dress with ointment till healed.	0.8527704
The method of stitching is to bring together the separation of the connection either with needles as we described in stitching the abdomen, or with thread as I explained to you there.	Now the manner of suturing is to close the discontinuity, either with a needle, as we describe for suture of the belly, or with a thread as we tell you there.	0.8356123

chapter-2-subchapter-27.txt
Chapter twenty-seven on removing the nodules that appear on the lips.	CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN. On the extraction of nodules occurring on the lip.	0.8347462
Many people may experience small, hard tumors inside their lips. Some of them resemble chickpea grains, while others are smaller or larger.	A good many people sometimes get little hard swellings inside their lips, some resembling the vetch grain; some larger, some smaller.	0.8787666
It is necessary to turn the lip outward, make an incision on each nodule, catch it with a hook, and cut it from all sides.	You should invert the lip, incise all along each nodule, catch it up with a hook, and cut it away all round.	0.8854955
Then, after cutting, pack the area with powdered vitriol until the bleeding stops.	Then after incising rub pounded vitriol into the places until the bleeding stops.	0.8382503
Then, rinse the mouth with vinegar and salt, and treat the areas with astringents until the wounds heal.	Then let him rinse with vinegar and salt, and dress the place with styptic drugs till the wounds heal.	0.8283495

chapter-2-subchapter-28.txt
Chapter twenty-eight on cutting excess flesh in the gums.	CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT. On the excision of superfluous growths on the gum.	0.7576754
Often, excess flesh grows on the gums, which the ancients call epulis (a type of gingival swelling).	There often grows on the gum superfluous flesh which the Ancients call 'epulis'.	0.743804
It is necessary to hook it with a fishing hook or grasp it with forceps and cut it at its base. And you leave the wound to bleed (lit. and you leave the pus/matter or the blood to flow).	You should take it up with a hook or grasp it with forceps and cut it at its root and let the pus or blood flow out.	0.77063143
Then you apply powdered vitriol (hydrated ferrous sulfate) or one of the dried astringent peak substances to the area.	Then put on the place either pounded vitriol or one of the absorbent styptic powders.	0.7246944
If that flesh returns after the treatment, it often does return. So cut it again and cauterize it, for it will not return after cauterization.	And if the growth returns after treatmentfor they often returnexcise a second time and cauterize; it will not come back after cauterization.	0.8110016

chapter-2-subchapter-29.txt
Chapter twenty-nine on filing the teeth with iron.	CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE. On scraping the teeth with an iron instrument.	0.77059925
Rough, ugly scales may gather on the surfaces of the teeth, inside and out, and between the gums. And they may blacken, yellow, and turn green until corruption reaches the gums and the teeth become ugly because of that.	Sometimes there collect upon the inner and outer surface of the teeth and also between the gums, rough scales, ugly, sometimes black or yellow or green, from which corruption is communicated to the gums and thus the teeth become unsightly.	0.79698575
So, you should sit the patient between your hands with his head in your lap and scrape the molar and the tooth in which the scales and the thing resembling sand have appeared to you until nothing of it remains. And likewise, you do the same with the blackness, the greenness, the yellowness, and other things until you clean it.	The patient should sit before you, putting his head in your lap; and you should scrape the teeth or molars on which you can discern crusts or gritty substance, till nothing remains; do them all in the like manner, black, green, yellow, and the rest, until they are all gone.	0.8672974
If what is in it is gone from the first scraping, then fine, otherwise you repeat the scraping on it another day, and a second, and a third, until you reach the goal in what you want.	If they disappear at the first scraping, good; but if not repeat the scraping on the following day and the second and third until you attain your purpose.	0.8192437
And know that the molar needs scrapers of various forms and many shapes according to what is prepared for your work because the scraper with which the molar is scraped from the inside is different from the scraper with which it is scraped from the outside. And the one with which it is scraped between the molars is of another form.	You should know that molars need scraping-tools of many diverse forms and shapes according to the character of your undertaking; for the tool with which the inner surface of the teeth is scraped differs from the tool with which the outer surface is scraped; and that for scraping between the teeth is different again.	0.8315541
And these are several forms of scrapers that you should have, all prepared.	Here is a number of scrapers, all of which you will have ready by you .	0.69580674

chapter-2-subchapter-30.txt
Chapter Thirty on the Extraction of Teeth	CHAPTER THIRTY. On the extraction of teeth.	0.73089767
It is appropriate to treat the tooth for its pain with every possible remedy and to be hesitant about extracting it, for there is no replacement for it if it is extracted, because it is a noble substance, even if there is no alternative but to extract it.	You should treat toothache with every device and be reluctant to extract; nothing can replace the tooth when it is extracted, for it is a noble substanceuntil there is no means of avoiding extraction.	0.8146853
So it is appropriate, if the ailing person is determined to extract it, that you ascertain and verify that the aching tooth is indeed the one, for often the pain deceives the ailing person, and he thinks that it is in the healthy tooth, so he extracts it, and then the pain does not go away until the diseased tooth is extracted.	When the patient is determined to have it out, act with deliberation till you are sure which is the painful tooth; for often the pain deceives the patient and he thinks the pain is in a tooth that is sound, so he has that one extracted; but the pain does not abate until the diseased tooth is removed.	0.8208604
We have seen this from the actions of cuppers repeatedly.	We have frequently seen this happen in the practice of the barber-surgeons.	0.6934836
So if you are certain about the aching tooth itself, then it is appropriate to incise around the tooth with a lancet that has some strength, until you loosen the gum from every side, then move it with your fingers or with the gentle forceps first, little by little, until you loosen it, then at that point secure it firmly with the large forceps while the ailing person's head is between your knees, firmly held so he doesn't move, then pull the tooth straight so you don't break it.	When you are quite sure which is actually the painful tooth you should cut away all round the tooth with a scalpel having a certain measure of strength, until the gum is separated all round. Then, with your fingers, or with a pair of fine forceps, first move the tooth slowly and gently till you stir it; then get a good grip on it with a pair of large forceps, holding the patient's head between your knees so that it does not move. Then draw the tooth straight out so as not to splinter it.	0.8728232
If it does not come out, then take one of those instruments and insert it under it from every direction gently, and keep moving it as you did before.	And if it will not come out, then take one of these following instruments and gradually introduce it beneath the tooth all round; then try to move it as you did before.	0.8445078
And if the tooth is perforated or corroded, it is appropriate to fill that hole with a piece of cloth and plug it well with the tip of a thin file so that it does not shatter when you pull on it with the forceps, and it is appropriate to be thorough in incising around the gum from every side carefully, and be careful with your effort so you dont break it, and some of it remains, causing the ailing person a calamity greater than his first pain.	If the tooth has a hole in it or is decayed, you should plug the hole with a rag, forcing it in with the tip of a fine probe so that it will not break when you grip it with the forceps. You must completely scarify all round the gum. Take the utmost care not to splinter the tooth lest a piece should remain behind and arouse the patient's ills afresh, causing greater pain than before.	0.83923835
And beware of doing what the ignorant cuppers do in their haste and rushing into extracting it without using what we described, for they often inflict great calamities upon people, the least of which is that the tooth breaks and all or some of its roots remain. Or that they extract it with some of the jawbone as we have witnessed repeatedly.	Take care not to do those things that the ignorant barber-surgeons do in their rashness and haste in dental extraction, neglecting to employ the methods we describe. For they often bring great troubles upon people, the least of which is to break the tooth off short, leaving the whole or part of the root behind; or to remove the tooth together with a piece of the jaw bone, as I have often seen.	0.8402089
Then after extracting it, he should rinse his mouth with wine or with vinegar and salt.	Then after the extraction let the patient rinse with wine or vinegar and salt.	0.8571633
If bleeding occurs from the area, and this often happens, then crush some vitriol and pack the area with it, or otherwise cauterize it if the vitriol does not benefit you.	If there occur haemorrhage from the placea common occurrencethen pound up a little vitriol and stuff the place with it. If the vitriol does not avail, cauterize.	0.80008864
The shape of the gentle forceps with which you move the tooth first should be long-tipped, short-handled, and thick so that they do not bend when you grip the tooth with them.	The shape of the fine forceps with which you first move the tooth should be with long jaws and a short handle, thick, lest they bend when you take hold of the tooth.	0.9547717
And this is the shape of the large forceps:	And this is the shape of the large forceps.	0.8867054
It should be, as you see, thick in the handles so that when gripped it does not give way or bend, and short in the extremities.	As you see, they have thick handles so that when you apply pressure with them they do not give or bend; and short jaws.	0.7062551
And let it be made of Indian iron or of well-wrought, polished steel at the extremities. And at its end are teeth that interlock with one another, so it grips firmly and tightly.	They should be of Indian iron or of steel, strongly made, the jaws tempered and having teeth fitting into each other so that a sure and firm grip may be obtained.	0.74392813
And the extremities may be made in the form of a file, and it will also be strong in gripping.	Sometimes the jaws are made like a file, also to give a strong grip.	0.60915667

chapter-2-subchapter-31.txt
Chapter thirty-one on the extraction of the roots of the molars and the removal of the jaw bones.	CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE. On the extraction of roots and of broken pieces of mandible.	0.818007
The broken one, if upon extraction of the tooth a root remains that has broken, it is appropriate that you place on the area cotton with ghee for a day or two until the area softens. Then you introduce into it the husk or the forceps whose tips resemble the mouth of the bird that is called the hoopoe. And this is a picture of the forceps:	When, in extracting a tooth, a broken-off root remains behind, you should apply to the place cotton wool soaked in butter for one or two days to soften it; then insert the tongs or forceps with stork-bill jaws; this is the figure of the forceps.	0.8117424
It will have been made like a file from the inside or like a rasp.	The point should be made like a file or rasp on the inside.	0.773631
If it does not respond to you to come out with these hooks, then it is necessary that you excavate at the origin and expose all the flesh with the scalpel. Then insert the instrument that resembles a small lever, whose image is this:	If it does not respond to your attempt to extract it with these forceps, you must dig down over the root and remove all the flesh, and then insert the instrument that resembles a small crowbar; this is its figure.	0.845518
Short at the end, slightly thick, and it should not be watered/polished, lest it break.	It has a short rather thick extremity, and should not be tempered lest it fracture.	0.67275625
If the bone comes out with that, otherwise resort to these other instruments, whose image this is.	If the root comes out, good; if not, get assistance from the other instruments figured here.	0.641931
The first is triangular at the end, with some thickness in it.	First, with a triangular point, somewhat stout.	0.7365587
Another nice triangular image/diagram:	Another, triangular and slender.	0.48541635
And with other instruments and irons that were mentioned previously in the filing of molars	Sometimes also we get help from this forked instrument and beside this, from other instruments and appliances mentioned above under scraping of teeth.	0.42393064
And we may also use this instrument that resembles a large fishhook, which this is its image	Sometimes also recourse may be had to this instrument resembling a large hook, figured thus.	0.51147616
Triangular, the curved end having some slight thickness so that it does not break, and it should be unpolished.	The hooked extremity is triangular in section, of some thickness lest it break, not tempered.	0.81915885
And know that the instruments for molars are numerous, and likewise the other instruments are almost innumerable, and the experienced and skilled craftsman may invent instruments for himself according to what the work and the diseases themselves guide him to, because among diseases there are some for which the ancients did not mention instruments due to the difference in their types.	You should know that dental instruments are very numerous, as are the other instruments, almost beyond reckoning. And the experienced worker with a knowledge of his craft may devise fresh instruments according as his work on actual cases suggests them to him. For there are certain diseases for which the Ancients did not mention any instruments, on account of the variety of them.	0.86303526
So if a bone of the jaw or one of the bones of the mouth is broken or decayed, then probe it in its place with what is suitable for it from one of these instruments and hooks that were mentioned for extracting roots, and we use a forceps, this is its form:	Now if the mandible or one of the bones of the mouth be broken or decayed, explore the site with some instrument that is suitable for it, namely one of the instruments or forceps mentioned for extraction of roots. We also make use of forceps of this form.	0.86528677
It should have some slight thickness to hold the bone in place so it doesn't slip until the bone comes out.	They are fairly thick, to grip the bone firmly lest it slip before the bone has been got out.	0.7431329
And we treat the area with the appropriate medicines for that.	Then cicatrize the place with suitable drugs.	0.7151469
If the bone has some slight putrefaction, then scrape it from its putrefaction and blackness until it is clean, then treat it until it heals.	If the bone is only slightly decayed, scrape it clean of its decay and blackness, then dress till healed.	0.81431425

chapter-2-subchapter-32.txt
Chapter thirty-two on the spreading of molars that grow on top of others.	CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO. On the sawing-down of teeth growing on top of others.	0.7874419
If the molars grow in a way other than their natural course, they make the face ugly.	When teeth grow in other than their natural place the appearance is very bad, specially when it occurs in women or slaves.	0.46312195
And especially if this happens in women and slaves, then you should look, and if the molar has grown behind another molar and it is not possible to spread it or file it, then extract it.	So you should examine; if the tooth has grown out behind another tooth and it is impossible either to saw or file it down, then extract it.	0.6507303
And if it is attached to another molar, then cut it with this instrument which is pictured here:	But if it be attached to another tooth, cut it down with an instrument of this kind.	0.6818504
And it resembles a small beak. And let it be of Indian steel, very sharp at the tip.	It resembles a small chisel and should be of Indian steel with a well-sharpened end.	0.7753452
And your cutting of it should be over many days, due to the hardness of the tooth. And so that you do not loosen other teeth.	You should spread your cutting with it over several days on account of the hardness of the tooth and so as to leave the others undisturbed.	0.834659
then file it with a file of Indian steel which has this form:	If the tooth projects in such a way as to make filing possible, use a file of Indian iron, shaped like this.	0.58212596
It should all be from India, and its point should be very finely engraved, like the file with which needles are made.	It should be wholly manufactured of Indian iron, its handle too, and covered with very fine points to resemble the file used in making needles.	0.8137033
File the tooth with it little by little over many days, gently, so that you do not shake the tooth and it falls out. Then smooth it afterwards and scrape it with some scrapers.	You should file the tooth with it very slowly and gently over a period of many days so as not to shift the tooth and cause it to fall out; then finally smooth it and scrape it with one of the scrapers.	0.88125294
And if a tooth has been broken and it bothers the tongue when speaking, then it should also be filed until the roughness of the break disappears, and it becomes even and smooth, and does not harm the tongue, nor does it spoil speech.	If it be a tooth of which part has broken off and it hurts the tongue in speaking, file it down till you have disposed of the roughness of the break and the tooth is smooth and neither injures the tongue nor hinders speech.	0.84075046

chapter-2-subchapter-33.txt
Chapter thirty-three on joining loose molars with silver threads or with gold threads.	CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE. On interlacing loose teeth with silver or gold wire.	0.8603553
If the front molars become loose and move due to a blow or a fall, and the patient cannot bite on anything edible lest they fall out, and you have treated them with astringent medicines, but the treatment has not been successful	When the front teeth are loosened by some blow or fall and the patient cannot bite upon what he is eating lest they fall out, and you have without avail treated them with styptic medicines, the technique in this case is to bind the teeth with gold or silver wire.	0.70893997
then the trick is to tie them with a gold or silver thread, and gold is better because silver tarnishes and decays after a few days, while gold remains in its state forever and is not affected by that.	Gold is the better, for silver oxidizes and corrodes after some days, but gold remains for ever in its state and does not suffer this change.	0.7505158
The thread should be medium in thinness and thickness, as much as can fit between the molars.	The wire should be moderate in thickness in accordance with the distance between the teeth.	0.7876164
And the method of tying is that you take the thread and insert its bend between the two healthy molars, then weave with the ends of the thread between the loose molars, whether one or more, until you reach the healthy molar on the other side, then you return the weaving to the side you started from.	The method is to take the wire and run it doubled between two sound teeth; then with the two ends of the wire you weave between the loose teeth, either one or several, until you bring your weaving to a sound tooth on the other side; then you repeat your weaving back to the side whence you began; tighten it gently and judiciously till they do not move at all.	0.8164156
And tighten your hand gently and wisely so that it does not move at all, and your tightening of the thread should be at the roots of the molars so that it does not escape.	You should tie the wire at the root of the teeth lest it slip.	0.43253523
Then cut the ends of the excess thread with scissors, gather them, twist them with the husk, and hide them between the healthy molar and the loose molar so that they do not hurt the tongue. Then leave it tightened like this as long as it remains.	Then with the scissors cut off the two ends of the wire remaining over, and bring them together and twist them with forceps and hide them between a sound tooth and a loose tooth so as to not injure the tongue; then for the future leave them thus bound.	0.8165167
If it becomes loose or breaks, tighten it with another thread, and they will enjoy it like this for the rest of their life.	But if it comes undone or breaks, bind them with another wire; so may he have the use of them all his life.	0.77659476
This is a picture of the molars and the method of tying in two healthy molars and two loose molars, as you see.	This is a figure of the teeth and the manner of interlacing two sound and two loose teeth, as you see.	0.8176765
And one or two teeth may return after falling out, to their places, and become fixed, as we have described, and remain.	After one or two teeth have fallen out they may be restored to their place and bound in as instructed, and become permanent.	0.796178
And only a skilled and delicate craftsman does that.	This can be done only by an expert and gentle practitioner.	0.7764045
And he may carve bone from the bones of cattle, and make from it the shape of a tooth and place it in the location from which the tooth has gone, and fasten it as we have said, and it remains and benefits from that.	Sometimes a piece of ox-bone may be carved and made into the shape of a tooth, and placed in the site where a tooth was lost, and fastened as we have said, and it will last and he will get long service from it.	0.73744833

chapter-2-subchapter-34.txt
The thirty-fourth chapter on cutting the ligament that appears under the tongue and prevents speech.	CHAPTER THIRTY-FOUR. On incising the ligament below the tongue which is an impediment to speech.	0.77360576
This frenulum that appears under the tongue may be either natural, with which a person is born, or accidental, from a wound that has healed.	Sometimes this ligament that occurs under the tongue is natural and congenital; or it may be accidental, owing to scarring from an injury.	0.75744593
The procedure for it is to open the patient's mouth with his head in your lap and lift his tongue, then cut that frenulum transversely until the tongue is released from its restriction.	The operation for it is to open the patient's mouth, having his head in your lap, and lift his tongue; then cut that sinew-like ligament transversely till the tongue is freed from its hold.	0.856354
If there is some hardness and knotting in it, and that is from the healing of a wound, then insert a hook into it and incise it transversely until the frenulum is severed and the knot is loosened.	If it is hard and nodular, arising from scarring after an injury, catch it with a hook and slit it transversely until the ligament is severed and the knots undone.	0.73751295
Beware that the incision is not deep in the flesh, lest you cut an artery there and cause bleeding.	Beware of making the incision deeply into the flesh, or you may cut an artery there and haemorrhage may occur.	0.8746817
Then he should rinse his mouth after the cutting with rose water or with vinegar and cold water.	After the cutting, let him rinse with rose-water or vinegar and cold water.	0.8102119
Then place a wick of linen under the tongue, which the patient holds every night so that it does not reattach.	Then put under the tongue a pad of linen, which the patient must keep in position at night to prevent the adhesion from forming again.	0.89868486
If bleeding occurs, put powdered vitriol on the area. If the bleeding overcomes you, cauterize the area with a lenticular cautery suitable for that, then treat it with all other treatments until it heals.	If there should be haemorrhage, put pounded vitriol on the place; and if bleeding still prevails burn the spot with a lenticular cautery of suitable size and treat in the usual way till healed.	0.79980874

chapter-2-subchapter-35.txt
Chapter thirty-five on the extraction of the frog generated under the tongue.	CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE. On the removal of 'ranula' beneath the tongue.	0.69532585
A swelling may occur under the tongue, resembling a small frog, which prevents the tongue from its natural function. And perhaps it grows until it fills the mouth,	Sometimes there occurs under the tongue a swelling resembling a small frog, which hinders the natural movements of the tongue; sometimes it grows so as even to fill the mouth.	0.8487078
and the treatment for it is to open the patient's mouth facing the sun and examine the swelling. If you see it dark in color or black and hard, and the patient feels no sensation in it, do not touch it, for it is cancer.	The operation for it is to open the patient's mouth in the full light of the sun and inspect the tumour. If you see that it is dark or black, and hard, and the patient has no sensation in it, do not interfere with it, for it is a cancer.	0.90304995
But if it is tending towards white and has moisture in it, insert a hook into it and incise it with a fine scalpel and free it from every side, If the bleeding overwhelms you during your work, put powdered vitriol on it until the bleeding stops, then return to your work until you remove it completely.	But if it is inclined to be pale and has fluid in it, put a hook in it and incise it with a fine scalpel and free it all round; and if haemorrhage hinders you while operating apply pounded vitriol to it till the bleeding stops.	0.8546493
Then have him rinse his mouth with vinegar and salt, then treat him with all the other appropriate remedies until he recovers.	Then proceed with your work till all is extracted; then let him rinse his mouth out with vinegar and salt. Then give all the suitable treatment till healed.	0.82036734

chapter-2-subchapter-36.txt
Chapter thirty-six on the treatment of swelling of the tonsils and what grows in the throat from other swellings.	CHAPTER THIRTY-six. On the treatment of swelling of the tonsils and other swellings in the throat.	0.8585729
Swellings resembling those that appear externally, called tonsils, may occur inside the throat.	Sometimes there occur in the throat buboes called 'tonsils', which resemble the buboes occurring externally.	0.7508663
If you treat them with what I mentioned in the chapter and they do not heal, then observe: if the swelling is hard, livid in color, and has little sensation, do not touch it with an instrument.	When you have employed the remedies described in their own place, without effect, examine, and if the tumour be hard, dark coloured, and devoid of sensation, do not touch it with an instrument.	0.71704054
And if it is red in color and its base is thick, do not touch it with an instrument either, for fear of bleeding. Rather, leave it until it ripens, so that you either lance it or it bursts on its own.	If it be of a red colour, with a thick root, do not touch this with an instrument either, for fear of a haemorrhage; but let it be till it come to a head; then you may perforate it or let it burst of its own accord.	0.8610623
And if it is white in color, round, and its base is thin, this is the one that should be cut.	But if it be pale coloured, round, with a slender pedicle, this is the kind that should be cut.	0.7885139
And the procedure for it is that you look before the operation, if its hot swelling has subsided completely or decreased somewhat, then you should sit the patient beside the sun with his head in your lap, and open his mouth, and take an assistant to stand in front of you to press his tongue down with an instrument like this image:	The operation for this is first to see, before operating, whether his inflamed tumour has already completely subsided or to some extent diminished. Then make the patient sit down in the full light of the sun with his head in your lap; open his mouth; and have an assistant before you to press back the tongue with an instrument like this.	0.83104813
It is made of silver or copper, and it is thin like a knife.	It should be made of bronze or silver, and slender like a knife.	0.835956
So when you press the tongue with it, and the swelling becomes clear to you, and your sight falls upon it	And when the tongue is depressed with its help, the tumour will be made manifest to you and your direct vision will fall upon it.	0.7349261
then take a hook and insert it into the tonsil and pull it outwards as much as possible without pulling any of the membranes with it.	Then take a hook and fix it in one tonsil and pull it forward as far as it will go; but be careful to not pull away with it any of the mucosa.	0.7567408
Then you cut it with an instrument of this form: it resembles scissors except that its two ends are curved. The mouth of each one of them, next to the other, is very sharp.	Then cut it with an instrument of this form; it is like scissors except that its extremities are curved, the beak of each meeting the other, and very sharp.	0.8709182
It is made from Indian iron or Damascene steel.	It should be made of Indian iron or Damascene steel.	0.91949093
If this instrument is not available Otherwise, cut it with a scalpel	If you have not this kind of instrument, cut it with a scalpel of this form, on the one side sharp, on the other quite blunt.	0.6440137
So after you cut one tonsil, you cut the other one in the same way,	And when one tonsil has been cut away, remove the other in exactly the same manner.	0.7457787
Then after the cutting, the patient gargles with cold water or vinegar and water,	Then after the excision let the patient gargle with cold water or vinegar and water.	0.90296906
If bleeding occurs, gargle with water in which pomegranate peels or myrtle leaves or similar astringents have been boiled until the bleeding stops then treat him until he recovers.	But if there occur a haemorrhage let him gargle with water in which have been boiled pomegranate peel or myrtle leaves or similar styptics till the haemorrhage is stanched; then treat till healed.	0.8946074
And other tumors may grow in the throat besides the tonsils, and you cut them in the same way as I mentioned in cutting the tonsils.	Sometimes there grow in the fauces tumours other than the tonsils; remove them just as described for tonsils.	0.6874415
I treated a woman with a tumor that had grown inside her throat, tending towards numbness, with little sensation, which almost blocked the throat and the woman was breathing through a narrow passage	I once treated a woman for a tumour that had grown in her throat and was rather dark in colour and had little sensation.	0.663046
and the woman was breathing through a narrow passage and it had prevented her from eating and drinking water and she was close to death if she had remained a day or two	It had almost blocked the throat and the woman had only a narrow opening to breathe through, and was quite prevented from eating or drinking, so that she was at death's door, if she had so remained for a day or two.	0.7523616
and two branches had risen from the tumor until they came out of her nostrils	From the tumour there arose two offshoots, which had eventually emerged through the nostrils.	0.6044754
so I hurried and inserted a hook into one of them then I pulled it and a good piece was pulled out of it	So I made the utmost haste and, fixing a hook in one of them, drew it forward, and out came a sizeable piece.	0.78579766
then I cut it where I reached it from the nostril	Then I cut it off where I had hold of it near the nostril.	0.794714
then I did the same with what protruded from the other nostril	Then I did the same with the one projecting from the other nostril.	0.8457341
then I opened her mouth and pressed down her tongue then I inserted the hook into the tumor itself then I cut some of it and only a little blood flowed from it	Then I opened her mouth and depressed the tongue; then fastened the hook in the tumour itself and cut off a part of it, with only a little haemorrhage; and the woman's pharynx was freed and immediately she had a drink of water, then took some food.	0.8217342
so we continued to cut from that tumor repeatedly for a long time	And from time to time, for long after, I continued to cut away this tumour.	0.66265965
So I devised a plan and cauterized the tumor inside the throat from above so it stopped growing	Then I went about it astutely and cauterized the tumour high up in the throat, and it stopped growing.	0.6781144
then I traveled away from the area and I did not know what God did with her after me.	Then the woman left the district and I do not know what God has done with her since I had charge of her.	0.8014344

chapter-2-subchapter-37.txt
Chapter thirty-seven on the excision of the uvula tumor which is called grape.	CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN. On removal of the tumour of the uvula that is called 'uva'.	0.8142426
If a catarrh descends to the uvula and swells and is white and oblong, then it is called 'amood'.	When a flux descends to the uvula and it swells and the uvula becomes white and elongated, then it is called 'columella*.	0.7712977
And if it is thick at the bottom and round, then it is called 'inabah'.	And if it should be swollen below and rounded then it is called 'uva'.	0.82068765
If it is treated with what we mentioned in the division and the treatment is not effective, and you see that the hot swelling has subsided and it is thin, then it should be cut.	When it has been treated as mentioned in its section, and the treatment is unavailing, and you see the inflamed tumour subsiding and the uvula becoming thin, you should amputate it.	0.81251085
And what is of it gathered and round and does not have length and is bloody or the color of pus or black or has no sensation, then it should be avoided cutting it, for there is danger in it for the patient.	Now those of them that are bunched up and rounded and not elongated, full of blood, or of a dark colour or black, and without sensation, these you should avoid incising; for this course is dangerous for the patient.	0.8299264
Then it is necessary, if you see it in the manner that I mentioned of its whiteness and length, that you seat the patient by the sun and compress his tongue with the instrument which was previously described. Then you insert the hook into the 'inabah' and pull it downwards and cut it with one of the two instruments that I mentioned in cutting the tonsils.	But when you see them as I have described, somewhat pale and elongated, get the patient to sit in the sunlight and depress his tongue with the instrument described above; then take hold of the uva with a hook and draw it down and cut it off with one of the two instruments described for excision of the tonsils.	0.821085
And it is necessary that you do not cut from it except that which exceeds the natural order without addition, because if you cut more from it you will harm the voice and speech.	You should not cut away more than up to the natural limit. For if you cut more off you cause injury to the voice and speech.	0.77898365
Then after the cutting, use what we described in cutting the tonsils and treat it until it heals.	Then, after excising, carry on the treatment on the lines described under removal of the tonsils, and treat till healed.	0.8091867
If the patient is afraid of its cutting, then it is necessary that you use a trick in cauterizing it without fear or caution.	But if the patient flinch from operation, then you must contrive to cauterize it, fearlessly and boldly.	0.6927422
And the way of cauterizing it is only with the strong medicine, which is that you place the head of the patient in your lap, then you compress his tongue with the instrument that we mentioned. Then you take from the strong water which I mentioned in the chapter of cauterization and mix with it unquenched lime and make it neither thick nor thin and fill from it the cavity of this instrument and this is its image:	The method is to employ a caustic; you put the patient's head in your lap; then, having depressed the tongue with the instrument described above, take some of the corrosive fluid mentioned in the book on cauterization, make it up with quicklime to a medium consistency, and fill with it the hollow in this instrument, whose form is thus.	0.7753389
Its end, in which you place the medication, has a concavity like the concavity of a cautery spoon.	The end of it where you put the caustic should have a hollow like that of the spoon of a spoonprobe.	0.7831467
And you place the instrument with the medication on the uvula itself, with the patient lying on his side so that the saliva flows from his mouth from inside his throat, lest anything descend from it into his throat and harm him.	With the patient lying on his side, letting the mucous secretions flow from his gullet out of his mouth so that none of the corrosive may run down his gullet and cause harm, you place the instrument right on the uvula.	0.8301582
Then you hold the medication with your hand and you squeeze it on the uvula for about half an hour until you see that it has blackened and the sting of the medication has subsided.	Then, steadying the hand that is holding the medicament, press it out on to the uvula for the space of half an hour until you see the uvula turn black and the corrosive action cease.	0.90838253
And if you wish, you can take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a cautery iron, and soak the cotton in the medication, and insert the cautery iron with the cotton in a tube from above until the cotton adheres to the uvula; you do this repeatedly until you achieve what you want from cauterizing the uvula, then you leave it, for it will wither and fall off after three or four days.	If you wish, you can take some cotton wool twisted on the end of a probe, and, having soaked it in the caustic, apply the probe with the wool, down through a cannula till the wool sticks on the uvula. Do this over and over again till you have done all the cauterization you want, then let be; for it will shrink and fall off in three or four days.	0.9002166
If you need to reapply the medication, you reapply it.	If you need to repeat the treatment, do so.	0.7816666
And after the cauterization, you wipe around the uvula with cotton soaked in ghee and dry the medication around it with it.	After the cauterization, wipe all round the uvula with wool soaked in butter, and with that mop up all the caustic remaining round about it.	0.77332556
Then he gargles with cold water and is treated externally with poultices and internally with gargles until he recovers.	Then let him rinse his mouth out with cold water and do you treat with external embrocations, and gargles within, till he is well.	0.78087896
So, this type of treatment is safer than excision and further from fear.	This kind of treatment is safer than incision and less to be feared.	0.82434916
And the uvula can also be treated with something gentler than cauterization and excision: it is treated with fumigation in this manner. Take lavender, hyssop, savory, rue, wormwood, chamomile, and artemisia, and similar herbs, and gather them all or some of them in a pot and immerse them in vinegar and boil them, and the pot is lined with lute of wisdom, and there is a hole in the middle of the lid on which the hollow instrument is mounted; it is made in this way from silver or copper:	Sometimes uva is cured by a method milder than either incision or cautery, namely by means of vapour in the following manner: take pennyroyal and artemisia absinthium and organy and rue and wormwood and chamomile and southernwood and similar herbs and put them all, or some of them, in a pot, cover them with vinegar, and boil them.	0.751077
And you insert the end that contains the pomegranate into the patient's mouth so that the vapor rises to the uvula through the tube until the uvula is well fumigated.	The pot should be luted with clay; and there is to be a hole in the middle of the lid to which is fitted a hollow instrument like this, made of silver or bronze, and the end in which is the protuberance should be put in the patient's mouth so that the vapour passes up the tube to the uvula, which becomes of a very dark colour.	0.5179877
Then you repeat it several times until it withers.	Do this repeatedly till it sloughs away.	0.75269365
And beware of doing this treatment at the first appearance of the swelling, because it often increases the swelling. But it is appropriate to do this when its hot swelling subsides.	Be careful not to apply this treatment at the first appearance of the tumour, for often you will aggravate the tumour; but you should do it at the decline of the inflammation.	0.7926155
If this instrument is not available to you, then take a reed and attach an eggshell to its end so that the patient's mouth does not burn, because the eggshell prevents the heat of the vapor from burning the mouth.	If you do not have this instrument, take a reed and fit an egg-shell on the end so that the patient's mouth is not burned; for the egg-shell will prevent the heat of the vapour from burning the mouth.	0.9553048
And this is among the best treatments, along with its safety.	This is a really good and safe treatment.	0.62585825

chapter-2-subchapter-38.txt
Chapter thirty-eight on the removal of thorns and what gets stuck in the throat other than that.	CHAPTER THIRTY-EIGHT. On the extraction of a fish-bone or anything else that sticks in the throat.	0.72495925
Often a bone, a fishbone, or something else gets stuck in the throat.	There often sticks in the throat a bone or fish-bone or something else.	0.903291
It is necessary to remove from it what is visible to the eye after pressing the tongue with the instrument in the sunlight so that what is in the throat becomes clear to you.	After you have depressed the tongue with the instrument in the full light of the sun, so that what is stuck in the throat is made as conspicuous as possible, you should then remove whatever can be seen and comes into view.	0.78482807
And what is not visible to you and is hidden in the throat, it is necessary to make the patient vomit before his food is digested in his stomach. Perhaps the stuck object will come out with the vomit.	But when it is not visible to you, and lies hidden in the throat, you should make the patient vomit before the food in his stomach is digested, for often the object comes out with vomiting.	0.81593394
Or the patient swallows a piece of turnip or the root of lettuce. Or he swallows a morsel of dry bread. Or you take a piece of soft sea sponge and tie it to a thread, then he swallows it. When it reaches the location of the fishbone, pull the thread quickly.	Or let him swallow a piece of turnip or a heart of lettuce or a morsel of dry bread; or take a marine sponge, dry, and tie it on a thread; then let him swallow the sponge and when it reaches where the sharp body is then quickly pull on the thread.	0.88274944
Do this several times. Often the fishbone or bone sticks to it and comes out.	Do this a number of times; for often the sharp body or bone will stick to the sponge and will come out.	0.8712845
If it does not come out with what we have mentioned, then use a lead instrument in this manner:	If it does not come out by the methods described, in this case employ an instrument made of lead, thus.	0.78003436
It should be slightly thicker than the sound, and at its end there is a curve that the patient inserts gently into his throat, while raising his head upwards. And he should be careful not to touch his larynx, lest it cause him to cough.	It should be a little thicker than a probe, with a crook at its extremity. The patient himself should introduce it into his own throat gently; he should raise the head backwards and take care not to touch the larynx lest coughing be aroused.	0.8686843
And he pushes the bone or thorn with it, or the physician inserts it with his hand, and the patient's insertion of it is better because of his knowledge of the location of the embedded thing. And he pushes downwards or pulls his hand with the instrument upwards, all of this according to what is possible for him until it comes out.	And let him remove therewith the bone or sharp body. Or else let the doctor introduce it with his hand (although it is better if the patient himself introduce it, since he knows the site of the obstruction) and push it down and then draw up his hand with the instrument; all this according to the way it presents itself to him, till it is removed.	0.8473204

chapter-2-subchapter-39.txt
Chapter thirty-nine on removing the leech stuck in the throat	CHAPTER THIRTY-NINE. On the removal of a leech sticking in the throat.	0.8082485
If you treat the leech with what we mentioned in the division of treatment with medicines and it does not succeed, then look at that time in the throat of the sick person in the sun after you press his tongue with the instrument that was described to you, and if your sight falls on the leech, pull it with a small hook or with a smooth, tight piece of date fiber.	When you treat a leech by the medical means spoken of in the appropriate section, with no effect, then inspect the patient's throat in full sunlight after depressing the tongue with the instrument I have described. If your gaze falls upon the leech, pull it out at once with a small hook or a fine pair of forceps.	0.8259855
If you are not able to do it with it, then take a hollow tube and insert it into the throat of the sick person near the leech, then insert into the inside of the tube a piece of iron heated by fire; you do this several times and the sick person abstains from water for his entire day, then he takes a bowl filled with cold water and opens his mouth in it and gargles with it and does not swallow a drop of it and moves the water from time to time with his hand, for the leech will fall on the spot when it senses the water.	But if you cannot get hold of it, take a cannula and introduce it into the patient's mouth near the leech, then pass through the cannula a red-hot iron; do this repeatedly; while the patient must not drink at all that day. Then let him take a vessel full of cold water, open his mouth in it and rinse out with it, but let him not swallow a drop of it; and he should keep the movement of the water going by hand time after time; for the leech straightway falls off when it feels the water.	0.8753468
If it does not come out with what we described, then fumigate the throat with urine and with asafoetida with the instrument that was described in the fumigation of the uvula, you do that several times, for it will fall.	If it does not come away by these means, fumigate the patient's throat with urine or with the juice of asafoetida, using the instrument described for fumigating the uvula. Do this several times, for then it will fall away.	0.8047679
And the way to work in fumigation is that you take a pot in which there are embers heated by fire, and the pot is covered with a lid in the middle of which is a hole, and you install in that hole the end of the instrument, then you throw in the incense, and the sick person puts his mouth at the end of the tube and closes his mouth so that the smoke does not come out until he knows that the smoke has reached his throat, for the leech will fall on the spot.	In fumigating, this is the way to set about it: take a pot containing live coals, fitted with a lid and a hole in the middle of the lid into which is fitted the end of the instrument. Then put in the aromatic; and the patient should apply his mouth to the end of the cannula, with his mouth closed to prevent the escape of the vapour, until he knows that the vapour has reached his throat; for the leech will at once come away.	0.8739618
If it does not fall, then the fumigation is repeated several times and the sick person endures thirst and eats salty things and garlic and does not drink water, so it must come out with this procedure.	But if it does not come away, let the inhalation be repeated many times. Let the patient endure his thirst, and eat salty food and garlic and drink no water. It will inevitably be removed by this treatment.	0.8394915
And this is a picture of an instrument with which you pull the leech from the throat if the sight falls on it, and it resembles hooks, as you see, except that it has this curvature that enters the throat, and its two ends resemble the mouth of a bird, in it is the roughness of a file; if it bites on something, it does not leave it.	This is the figure of an instrument for extracting the leech from the throat when visible. It resembles forceps, as you see, except that it has this bend for entry into the throat; and the two extremities are shaped like a bird's bill, with the roughness of a file. When they have hold of a thing they do not let go.	0.8668181
And another instrument with which the tongue is depressed, and it is a wide ring of iron, as much as the mouth can accommodate above the tongue, enters the mouth standing on its side, so the mouth remains open without the patient's will. And he is absolutely unable to remove it until you remove it.	And another instrument with which to depress the tongue. It is a wide ring of iron, of such a size as to go into the mouth above the tongue. It is inserted into the mouth standing on its side, and the mouth stays open without the patient's volition; nor can he dislodge it at all until you turn it.	0.937837
(Description of the instrument with which the mouth is opened according to this exact measurement)	Inside the ring appear the words: 'The pattern of the instrument for opening the mouth; exactly of this size'	0.48767176

chapter-2-subchapter-40.txt
The fortieth chapter: in it is made of the discussion about lancing tumors and incising them.	CHAPTER FORTY. A general dissertation on the perforation and incision of tumours.	0.63874865
Tumors are of many various types, as will be mentioned one by one in this book, and they differ in their lancing and incising in two aspects: one is the type of tumor itself and the humors it contains.	The kinds of tumour are many and various, as will be mentioned in order in this book. They differ in the way they are to be perforated or incised, according to two criteria. One is the kind of tumour it is in itself and the humidities it contains.	0.85092425
The second aspect is the location in the body where they occur, because a tumor occurring in the head is different from a tumor occurring in the anus, and a tumor occurring in a fleshy area is different from a tumor occurring in a joint, each one having its own treatment rule.	The other is the part of the body where it occurs. For the tumour occurring in the head is different from the tumour occurring on the posterior, and a tumour occurring in a fleshy part differs from one on the joints; each having its separate category of operation.	0.8273898
It is necessary to lance the fresh, not fully matured tumor that is near the anus so that the depth does not putrefy and penetrate into the anus, becoming a fistula and becoming incurable.	The reason why you must open an abscess near the anus while still unripe, before it is brought to a head, is to prevent it from putrefying the cleft and penetrating to the inner part of the anus and becoming a fistula, and incurable.	0.7635367
You should know the time to lance tumors that have fully matured, which is when the pain of the tumor subsides, the fever disappears, the redness and throbbing decrease, the head of the tumor softens, and other signs.	It is necessary too to know the time to open fully mature swellings: it is when the pain of the swelling is lessened, the fever departs, the redness and the throbbing are reduced, and the head of the abscess becomes wrinkled, with other signs.	0.79474235
The lancing should be performed at the lowest point of the tumor if possible, so that it is easier for the fluid to flow downwards, or at the thinnest and most protruding point of the tumor.	The perforation should be made in the lower part of the swelling if possible, so that the pus may more easily drain downwards; or else in the thinnest and most swollen part of the swelling.	0.8642404
The lancing should be lengthwise along the body if the tumors are in areas such as the hands and feet, muscles, tendons, nerves, arteries, and in general in all flat areas without bending.	Your incision should be longitudinal if the swellings are in such places as hands or feet or in the site of joints, tendons, nerves, or arteries; and, in short, in all flat places where there is no curvature.	0.85251653
As for those that bend, the lancing should be done according to that area. If the tumor is in fleshy areas, it is best to leave it until it is fully matured, as we have said, because if you lance it before that, the flow of pus from it will be prolonged and it will be very harmful and dirty, and perhaps its edges and depth will harden.	In curved places let the perforation proceed according to the place. But when the swelling is in the fleshy parts it is best to leave the perforation, as we have said, until it is fully matured. For if you perforate it prematurely the sanious discharge will go on longer and will be excessively foul; and often both the edges and the depths of the opening will become indurated.	0.79795647
Some tumors may be lanced across the body when necessary or according to the needs of the limb.	Some swellings are perforated latitudinally if necessary, or having regard to the requirement of the part.	0.7256963
You should use a single lancing for small tumors and a wide lancing or multiple incisions for large tumors, according to the size of the tumor.	In small swellings you should use a single perforation; while in large ones you should use wide or multiple perforations according to the size of the swelling.	0.83324695
Some tumors may require the skin to be scraped and cut if it has become like a rag and is dead, such as what occurs in many boils and abscesses.	There are also some swellings that need a circular incision of the skin, and should be cut when they have become like a rag, and necrosed which actually happens often in abscesses and sinuses.	0.6820829
Some are incised with a three-cornered incision, some are cut in the shape of a myrtle leaf, like inguinal tumors, and some use a circular or crescent-shaped incision, and so on.	And there are some that should be incised triangularly; and others with an incision of myrtle-leaf form; e.g. a tumour on the groin. There are others again to which should be applied circular and lunate and similar incisions.	0.8092632
Those that do not have a head, such as smooth, flat tumors, should only be lanced simply.	Those that have no head, such as the smooth and flat ones, should be incised with only a simple perforation.	0.8949654
If the tumor is large and has accumulated a lot of fluid and you lance it, you should not rush to remove all the pus at that time, but rather remove some of it, then bandage the tumor until the next day, then remove some more pus, doing this gradually until you remove all of it, especially if the patient is weak, a pregnant woman, a small child, or an elderly person, because the vital spirit often dissolves with the sudden removal of pus, so the patient may die without you realizing it, so be very careful about this.	When a swelling is large and has collected a large quantity of pus, and you perforate it, do not be in a hurry to get it all out at once; but get some of it out and then bandage it till another day; then again remove part of the pus; and so do, again and again, gradually, till it is all got out. This particularly applies if the patient be in a weak state, or a pregnant woman, or a baby, or a decrepit old man; for the animal spirit is very often dissolved with the sudden evacuation of the pus, and the patient dies unexpectedly. Be very careful therefore, with this sort.	0.85597765
After lancing these tumors, you should wipe the wound and examine it. If the wound of the tumor is small or the incision is single and simple, use linen or worn cotton thread. If the tumor is large and the incisions are numerous, you should insert a wick into each incision until they reach each other.	Then, after you have opened the tumour, you should cleanse the wound and consider: if the tumour has only a small opening, or it is one simple incision, employ swabs of lint or cotton wool; but if it is a large tumour with multiple incisions, introduce a swab into each incision so that they meet.	0.88247156
If some of the skin of the tumor has been cut or scraped, you should fill it with worn cotton or linen lint without moisture and bandage it until the third day, then remove it and treat it with appropriate ointments until it heals.	And if the tumour was such that you cut away a part of the skin, or sliced the tumour, you will need to pack it with cotton wool or plucked linen, dry; and bandage until the third day. Then remove it and treat with the needful ointments until healed.	0.872302
If bleeding occurs during your work, use cold water and vinegar after soaking a linen cloth in them and applying it to the bleeding area several times.	If a haemorrhage occurs while you are operating, use cold water and vinegar, soaking a lint rag in both and frequently applying it to the place.	0.8221693
If the bleeding continues, you should use the management, treatment, and peaks that we have described in many places in this book and in the division.	And if the bleeding still persists then it is necessary to employ the method and the treatment and the powders that we have prescribed in many parts of this book and in their own sections.	0.7578493
If you are in the winter season and the location of the tumor is rich in nerves, you should moisten the pads with hot wine and oil and place them on the area.	Now if this should be in winter and the site of the tumour abound in nerves, you should have some pads soaked in hot wine and oil and then apply to the place.	0.8709254
If you are in the summer and the areas are fleshy, you should apply pads soaked in cold water and oil or cold wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said, then you should untie the tumor, wipe it, and use similar treatment until it heals.	But if it be in summer and the parts be fleshy, apply the pads soaked in water and oil, or wine and oil, all being cold, till the third day, as we have said. Then unbandage the tumour and wipe it and give it the treatment suitable to it, until cured.	0.88587004
This is what you need to know about the treatment of tumors in general. As for the detailed method, I have mentioned each tumor and how to treat it, categorized and summarized.	This is the information you need about the treatment of tumours in general. As for the particulars, I now review the way to treat each tumour, by chapters, in detail.	0.86099166

chapter-2-subchapter-41.txt
Chapter forty-one on incising the tumors that occur on the scalp.	CHAPTER FORTY-ONE. On opening superficial tumours of the scalp.	0.72009087
Small tumors appear on the scalp. And they are of the types of sal'a (wens/cysts), contained in membranes that have sacs like the crop of a chicken.	Small swellings form in the scalp, which are of the various kinds of cyst, contained within membranes which form a capsule to them like the crop of a chicken.	0.75944084
And its types are many, some of them are fatty.	There are many kinds of these.	0.5302832
And some of them contain moisture resembling pus and broth and the like. And some of them are petrified and hard.	There are fatty ones, there are those containing a liquid resembling black slime, there are those containing a liquid resembling porridge and gruel and the like, while others are stony hard.	0.7435874
And there is no danger in incising them and extracting their contents, unless an artery obstructs you when you incise it.	It is not dangerous to open and extract any of them, so long as you do not encounter an artery in excising them.	0.7892299
The procedure for incising it is to first probe it with the instrument whose image comes after this, which is called al-Midass (the probe), so that you know what it contains.	The operation for incising them begins by exploring them with the instrument called an explorer, figured lower down, so as to get to know what sort of contents they have.	0.66227514
So if what it contains is moisture, incise it lengthwise with a simple incision in this manner:	If they are the sort that contain fluid, incise them with a simple longitudinal incision, thus.	0.7413159
And begin the incision from line B to line C. Once the fluid has emptied, peel off the sac that contained that fluid and cut it all out, leaving nothing of it at all, for it often returns if anything of it remains.	Begin your incision at the letter b, to letter g; and when the humidity is emptied dissect away the capsule containing it, whole, not leaving the least remnant. For often it comes back if any has been left behind.	0.8115438
Then dip cotton in the Egyptian ointment if it is available, and if not, in salt water, and fill the wound with it, and leave it until the next day, as it will consume what remains of the sac.	Then dip some cotton wool in Egyptian ointment if you have some; if not, in saline; and pack it in the wound and leave till next day, for that will destroy the remains of the capsule.	0.85315573
Then repeat the application of the cotton with the Egyptian ointment a second and third time, if needed, until you are certain that nothing of the sac remains.	Then repeat the cotton wool with Egyptian ointment a second time, or a third if need be, till it is certain there is nothing of the cyst left.	0.9236133
Then treat the wound with ointments until it heals.	Then treat the wound with ointments until healed.	0.9955337
And if the swelling contains a fatty mass, incise it in this manner. Make a cruciform incision and insert the hooks into the lips of the wound and peel it from every side. And exert your utmost effort in extracting the membrane that contains it.	If the tumour contains a fatty cyst, incise thus, a cruciform incision; then hook up the edges of the incision, dissect away every direction, and strive to extract the containing capsule.	0.7861334
If an artery obstructs you, do what I described to you later, and do the same for the swelling if it is hardened from the incision, and the treatment is the same as I mentioned.	If you should come across an artery, deal with it in the manner already described. Carry out the same manner of incision and treatment for a stony tumour, just as I have described.	0.7890723
The incision on the hardened swelling is easier because it has little blood and moisture, and some of these swellings that are in the head in some people may have no moisture at all, and that is because I incised a swelling in the head of an old woman, and I found the swelling like a hard, rough, white stone, I could not break it, and if someone threw it, it would injure him.	It is easier to open a hard tumour, for it has little blood and humidity; and sometimes these tumours on some people's heads have no humidity at all. I myself cut down upon a tumour in the head of an elderly woman and I found the tumour as hard as a stone, rough and white, which it was impossible to break, and which if thrown at anyone would have injured him.	0.8832298
And what was of the other swellings occurring in the head other than this, such as the swellings that appear in the heads of children and at the bases of the ears, incise them all with a simple incision and make its bottom from its lower part to facilitate the flow of the material to the bottom, then treat it with what is appropriate for it of treatment.	For all tumours arising in the head other than these, such as those which occur in children's heads and those at the root of the ear, make a simple incision. You should always begin your incision from below to allow an easy downward flow for the pus. Then treat with suitable after-treatment.	0.80135226

chapter-2-subchapter-42.txt
The forty-second chapter on the incision on the scrofulas that appear in the neck.	CHAPTER FORTY-TWO. On the incision of scrofulous glands in the neck.	0.70443016
These tumors frequently occur in the neck, under the armpits, and in the groins, and they may occur throughout the body.	Tumours of this kind often occur in the neck and in the axilla and in the groin; and sometimes in other parts of the body.	0.7587216
Those that occur in the neck can be single or multiple. And some of them arise from others. And each scrofulous tumor (khanazira) is within its own membrane, as is the case with hernias and head tumors, as we have described.	Those occurring in the neck are sometimes single and sometimes multiple, one arising from another; and each scrofula is contained in a capsule of its own, like the cysts and tumours of the head that we have described.	0.8624128
And the types of these scrofulous tumors are many: some are hardened, some contain fluids, and some are malignant and do not respond to treatment.	There are many kinds of these glands; some are stony, some contain humidities, some are malignant and do not respond to treatment.	0.75880384
So, if I find one of them that feels good to the touch, and its appearance is close to the color of the skin, and it moves in every direction, and it is not attached to a nerve of the neck, nor to a vein, nor to an artery, and it is not deep, then it should be incised with a simple incision from top to bottom of the growth in this manner, from line C to line B.	But those that you find by touch to be benign and are of a colour not greatly differing from the skin, freely movable in any direction, not adherent to the nerves of the neck nor to a jugular vein, nor to an artery, and are not deep-lying; these should be incised with a simple incision from above downwards, from line g to line b	0.7550483
And skin it from every side, and stretch the lips of the skin with a hook or with two hooks, or with many hooks, if you need that, as we said regarding head tumors, and extract it little by little, and be careful not to cut a vein or a nerve.	and dissect away all round and draw the edges of the skin apart with one or two hooks or with several if necessary, as we said on the subject of tumours of the head, and draw them out very slowly. Be most careful not to cut a blood-vessel or nerve.	0.86955297
And let the scalpel not be very sharp, lest your hand cuts more, or the patient moves, so you cut what you don't need to cut.	The scalpel should not be over sharp lest you make the incision too big, or the patient flinches and so you cut open that which does not need cutting.	0.82506734
If you cut a vein or an artery and it hinders you from working, then put in the wound crushed vitriol or some of the powders that stop the blood, and tighten the wound and leave it until the intensity of the tumor subsides, the wound relaxes and starts to suppurate, then the blood will stop then, so return to your work until you are finished.	If you cut a vein or artery and be thus hindered in your operating, apply powdered vitriol or some styptic powder to the wound, and bandage the wound and let be till the worst of the swelling has subsided and the opening is relaxed and threatens to turn purulent; for then the bleeding will stop. Then return to your operation and finish it.	0.8852361
Then search with your index finger, if other small tumors remained, then cut them and clean them.	Then feel with your forefinger to see if there are any small glands left, in which case dissect and clean them away.	0.8399714
If there is a large vein at the base of the tumor, then it is appropriate not to cut that tumor from its base, but it is appropriate to tie it with a doubled tight thread and leave it until it falls by itself without harm, then fill the wound with worn cotton having dipped it in the Egyptian ointment, then treat it.	If there is a large blood-vessel at the root of the gland, then you should not cut that gland at its root but should ligature it with a strong double ligature and leave it till it sloughs away of its own accord without harm. Then pack the wound with cotton wool previously soaked in Egyptian ointment; then continue dressing.	0.8758899
And if you cut the whole tumor, then it is appropriate to bring together the lips of the wound and sew it immediately after you know that no excess remains at all, but if you see that some excess remains due to the size of the tumor, then you should aim to cut it to its origin and base, and use stitching and what we mentioned.	If you excise the whole gland, you should at once draw together the two edges of the wound and suture them, when you are absolutely certain there is nothing of it left. But if you see that, on account of the size of the scrofula, there is still some superfluity left behind, you should carry the incision to the root and base of it, and employ suturing and the rest of the remedies mentioned.	0.8183596
And for tumors that contain fluids, poultice them with a simple poultice where their ripeness appears to you, and make the poultice from the lower part, as we said, then after the poultice, use the wick with the Egyptian ointment and the like to eat away what remains of the corruption, until you see the wound has become clean, then treat it with ointments that promote flesh growth until it heals.	The glands that contain humidities you should open with a single perforation where they seem to have matured; make your perforation from below, as we have said. Then after opening use swabs soaked in Egyptian and similar ointments to do away with the unhealthy remains, till you see that the wound is clean; then dress with nourishing ointments until healed.	0.75302327

chapter-2-subchapter-43.txt
Chapter forty-three, on incising the larynx due to a swelling occurring inside the throat.	CHAPTER FORTY-THREE. On incising the larynx for a tumour arising in the throat.	0.7618956
The ancients mentioned this incision in the larynx, but I have not seen anyone in our country perform it, and this is the order of their words.	The Ancients mentioned this laryngeal incision, but I have not seen anyone in our parts who has done it. Now here is the gist of what they say.	0.8543563
As for those with angina, they should avoid incising the larynx, as they will not benefit from it because all the vessels and the lungs are diseased.	Incision should be avoided in those suffering from quinsy, for they will not benefit from it, since all the passages and the lung will be diseased.	0.84028673
But for those who have a hot swelling in the mouth, throat, or tonsils, if there is no ailment in the trachea, it is necessary to use the incision of the larynx to escape the damage that results from choking.	But in those with an abscess in the mouth, throat, or tonsils, and when there is no disease in the windpipe itself, you must employ laryngotomy to avoid the mischief of suffocation.	0.86207956
So, if we want to do that, we should incise the larynx below three or four rings of the trachea, a small horizontal incision between two rings, as much as the incision is in the membrane, not in the cartilage, and this place is suitable for the incision because it is devoid of flesh and blood vessels are far from it.	Now when we wish to undertake this we should incise the larynx under the third or fourth ring of the windpipe with a small incision transversely between two rings, so that the incision may be through the membrane, not the cartilage. This spot is suitable for incision, for it is deficient in flesh, and there are no blood-vessels near.	0.88969046
If the practitioner is cowardly, he should stretch the skin of the throat with a hook, then incise the skin until, when he reaches the trachea, he avoids the blood vessels if he sees any of them, then he incises the membrane that we described.	If the practitioner be nervous, he must stretch the skin of the throat with a hook, then cut down through the skin till he reach the windpipe, and avoid blood-vessels if he see any. Then let him incise the membrane which we have spoken of.	0.9130479
The incision of the trachea is indicated by the phlegm that comes out of it with what is pierced and by the interruption of the voice, and you leave the wound open for a while, so when the time in which choking is feared is over, the lips of the skin wound are brought together and stitched alone without the cartilage, then the medicines that grow flesh are used until it heals.	You can be certain of having opened the trachea by the emission of phlegm when it is pierced, and by the loss of voice. Then leave the wound open for some while. When the danger of suffocation is passed, bring the two lips of the wound together by the skin, which alone must be sutured, without the cartilage. Then use medicaments stimulating granulation till healed.	0.7572953
The author of this book said, "The explanation of all these words that we have narrated is only if they see that the patient's throat has been blocked by one of these swellings that they mentioned, and the patient is near death, and his breathing is about to stop, they go to incise the larynx so that the patient can breathe a little through the wound site and be saved from death.	The author of this book says, the interpretation of this account that we have given is this: when they see that one of the tumours that they mention has obstructed the patient's throat and he is approaching death and is anxious himself to be incised, they resort to laryngotomy so that the patient may breathe somewhat through the wound and his life be saved.	0.8601937
And they were only ordered to leave the wound open until the course of the illness is over, and its course is three days or so, so then they were ordered to suture the wound and treat it until it heals.	They bid leaving the wound open till the worst of the disease abates; its height will last about three days; then they bid sew up the wound and dress till healed.	0.8179765
And what I witnessed myself is that a servant took a knife and put it to her throat and cut some of the trachea with it, so I was called to treat her, and I found her gurgling like a slaughtered animal, so I uncovered the wound and found the blood that came out of the wound was little, so I knew that she had not cut a vein or a jugular vein, and the air was coming out of the wound, so I proceeded and stitched the wound and treated it until it healed.	My own experience was this: a slave-girl seized a knife and buried it in her throat and cut part of the trachea; and I was called to attend her. I found her bellowing like a sacrifice that has had its throat cut. So I laid the wound bare and found that only a little haemorrhage had come from it; and I assured myself that neither the jugular vein nor an artery had been cut, but air passed out through the wound. So I hurriedly sutured the wound and dressed it until healed.	0.9012753
And nothing happened to the servant except hoarseness in the voice, nothing more, and she returned after a few days to her best condition, so from this we say that there is no danger in incising the larynx.	And no ill befell the maid except for a hoarseness in the voice, but nothing more; and after some days she was restored to the best of health. Hence we may say that laryngotomy is not dangerous.	0.8631832

chapter-2-subchapter-44.txt
The forty-fourth chapter on incising the swelling that appears on the larynx from the outside. And it is called the elephant of the larynx.	CHAPTER FORTY-FOUR. On cutting down upon the tumour which occurs on the outside of the throat, and is called 'Elephant of the throat'.	0.7803037
This swelling, which is called "flat al-alqm" ("elephant of the larynx"), is a large swelling, the color of the flesh. And it is common in women.	This tumour which is called 'Elephant of the throat' is a large tumour of the colour of the body; it commonly occurs in women.	0.7591522
It is of two types: either it is natural or it is accidental.	It is of two kinds, congenital and acquired.	0.73306465
As for the natural, there is no remedy for it.	As to the congenital, there is no treatment for it.	0.8204013

chapter-2-subchapter-45.txt
Chapter forty-five, on fissuring in different kinds of goods/commodities.	CHAPTER FORTY-FIVE. On incision for various kinds of cyst.	0.6983754
Merchandise has many types, and I have mentioned all of its types in the classification.	There are various kinds of cyst. We have already mentioned all their varieties in the proper place.	0.611232
And it is necessary that we explain here the difference between merchandise and abscess, as it is problematic.	But we need here to set forth the difference between a cyst and an abscess, for it is complicated.	0.73619276
So I say that with an abscess there is heat, fever, and frightening pains until the boiling of the excess subsides and the putrefaction is complete, at which point the fever and the acuteness subside.	The abscess will be accompanied by heat and fever and fearsome pain, until the boiling-up of the superfluous matter settles down and the suppurating process is completed: then will the fever and intensity subside.	0.7210336
With merchandise, there is neither heat, nor fever, nor pain, and it is contained in a peritoneal sac that is its special container, and it is the color of the body, and its beginning is like a chickpea, and it becomes like a duck, and bigger and smaller, and it is of two types, either fatty or it contains moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many, as I mentioned in the classification.	But with a cyst there is neither heat nor fever nor pains, and a membranous capsule encloses it, its own particular covering. The cyst is flesh-coloured, and it begins like a pea and becomes like a melon, more or less; and is of two kinds: either fatty or containing humidity; and the colours of the humidities are several, as we mentioned in the appropriate section.	0.76406217
So, when you come to treat merchandise, it is appropriate to probe and examine it first with the instrument called the probe, as its image comes in the chapter after this.	When you come to treat the cyst, you should first sound it and examine it with the instrument called the explorer, which is figured in the next chapter.	0.7141435
The method for examining all tumors and merchandise is that you take this instrument and insert it in the softest place you find in the tumor while you rotate your fingers with it little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the skin, then press your hand according to the size of the tumor.	The way to examine all tumours and cysts is to take this instrument and press it in at the spot where the tumour is softest, and revolve it gently with your fingers till you know you have pierced the skin; then press it in proportionately to the size of the tumour.	0.9296532
Then take out the probe and look at what comes out after it. If flowing moisture comes out, whatever color it may be, then incise it with a simple incision as I mentioned in other tumors. And if no moisture comes out after the probe, know that it is fatty, so incise it with a hardened incision in this way, as I have taught you.	Then remove the explorer and see what comes out after it. If a humidity should flow, whatever the colour, make a simple incision, as I said for the other tumours. But if no humidity come out along the track of the explorer you know at once that it is fatty.	0.88999104
And hang it with hooks, and skin the skin from each side gently, and preserve the sac if you are able to remove it intact with the merchandise.	Therefore make a cruciform incision upon it in this shape, as I have told you, and attach hooks and dissect away the skin gently from all sides. Be careful with the capsule; if you can, get it out whole, together with the cyst.	0.61892134
If the sac ruptures during the procedure and you are unable to remove it intact, this happens often, so remove it piece by piece until nothing remains of it, because if something remains of it, little or much, the merchandise will mostly return.	But if the capsule is torn in the course of the operation, and you cannot get it out whole, which frequently happens, remove it bit by bit until there is none of it left. For if a part of it is left behind, either great or small, the cyst will generally return.	0.8127841
If it overcomes you and a little of it remains, cauterize the wound when you are finished with some sharp, corrosive peaks, and tighten the wound and place over it something that soothes the hot tumor, and treat it with other treatments until it heals.	If it defeats you and some little piece of it remain, pack the wound, when you have done all you can, with some caustic powder and bandage it and put on it something to ease the inflamed tumour, and treat in the usual way until healed.	0.78482497
If the merchandise is large, then stitch its lips and treat it with what heals.	If the tumour be large, sew the edges of the incision together and treat with stimulants.	0.7098992
If you encounter a pulsating or non-pulsating vein and bleeding occurs, immediately cauterize the area with powdered vitriol and leave it tight for two or three days until the wound putrefies and the boiling of the blood subsides, then return to cutting what remains of the merchandise.	If you should come across a blood-vessel, pulsating or not, and there be haemorrhage, hasten to pack it with pounded vitriol; and leave bandaged for two or three days until the wound becomes purulent and the boiling-up of the blood is allayed; then resume cutting open the rest of the cyst.	0.86100495

chapter-2-subchapter-46.txt
Chapter forty-six on the forms of instruments that are used in lancing and cupping.	CHAPTER FORTY-SIX. On the shapes of the instruments used for incising and perforating.	0.85417897
Among them are forms of suppositories, and they are of three types: large, medium, and small.	Among these are the various explorers. There are three varieties of this instrument, large, medium, and small.	0.76512337
Picture of a pessary in the middle:	Figure of the medium explorer.	0.54622775
Image of a small mdass:	Figure of the small explorer.	0.53001285
It is made of steel, square-shaped at the ends, well-made to facilitate entry into tumors.	They should all be made of the best Damascene steel, with quadrangular points, and strong, to assist entry into the tumours.	0.57392466
And these are images of the probes, and they are called al-Bard (cold probes), and they are also of three types: large, medium, and small. [This is an] image of a large probe:	And this is the shape of the probes; they are also called burud. There are three kinds of this, too: large, medium, and small. Figure of the large probe.	0.87903804
Image of a medium probe:	Figure of the medium probe.	0.8110411
Picture of a small probe:	Figure of the small probe.	0.80237645
It is suitable for examining tumors, wounds, fistulas, and hidden places, to see what is inside them, such as bones and other things.	They are suitable for exploring tumours, wounds, fistulas, and sinuses, to see what is inside them such as bones, etc.	0.89863694
It is made round, polished, and smooth, like probes, from Chinese copper or Spanish copper, or from copper, or from iron, or from silver, and the best of them are those made from Spanish copper.	They are made round, polished, and smooth, like packing-needles, of Chinese copper or of white copper, or of brass, silver, or iron. The best are those made of white copper.	0.8578347
Probes are also made from black lead. And it is suitable for probing fistulas that have a curvature in their depth so that it bends with its flexibility with that curvature.	Sometimes probes are made of black lead, for investigating fistulas whose deeper course is devious; so that by reason of their softness they can adapt themselves to the curves.	0.7463673
It is also of three types, because some of them are long, some are medium, and some are short, according to the depth of each fistula.	Of these, too, there are three varieties: the long, the medium, and the short, proportioned to the requirement of the depth of every fistula.	0.8591198
And its thickness is made according to the width and narrowness of the fistula.	Their thickness also should be proportioned to the width or narrowness of the fistula.	0.71660453
Image of a probe made of large lead:	The large lead probe.	0.5757984
Image of a probe made of medium lead:	The medium lead probe.	0.58778405
Image of a small lead probe:	The small lead probe.*	0.59558237
Pictures of hooks, which are of many types, because among them are simple ones, I mean those that have one hook, and they are of three types: large, medium, and small.	Figures of hooks. There are many kinds of hook. For example, there are the simple hooks, that is, having only one prong; there are three kinds of this: large, medium, and small.	0.8402693
And among them are the blind hooks, and they are of three types.	There are also the blind hooks, of which there are three kinds.	0.79412603
And among them are the hooks with two hooks, and they are of three types.	And there are the hooks provided with two prongs, of which there are three kinds.	0.8631519
And among them are the curved hooks with two hooks, and they are of three types.	And there are the bent hooks with two prongs, of which there are three kinds.	0.906368
And among them are the hooks with three hooks, and they are of three types.	And there are the hooks provided with three prongs, of which there are three kinds.	0.85473925
And all these types, each one of them is needed in its place; picture of a large simple hook:	All of these kinds are necessary in their place.	0.51561487
Picture of a small, simple fishing hook:	The large, medium, and small simple hook.	0.46841836
Picture of a large blind fishing hook:	The large and medium blind hooks.	0.4039673
Picture of a small blind fishing hook:	The small blind hook.	0.50972676
Picture of a large hook with two barbs: Image of a median uvula with two hooks: Picture of a small hook with two barbs:	The large, medium, and small, double-pronged hooks	0.45025474
Picture of a large hook with three barbs:	The large triple-pronged hook.	0.6072409
Picture of a small hook with three barbs:	The medium, and small triplepronged hooks.	0.4151924
And these are images of the scalpels with which goods and tumors are incised and excised, and they are of three types, because among them are large, and among them are medium, and among them are small,	These are the figures of the scarifying scalpels with which you incise and dissect away cysts and tumours. They too are of three kinds: large, medium, and small.	0.7513379
Image of a large scalpel:	Figure of the large scarifying scalpel.	0.75049126
Image of a medium scalpel:	Figure of the medium scarifying scalpel.	0.735645
Picture of a small scalpel:	Figure of the small scarifying scalpel.	0.75885916
Its blades, with which it cuts, are limited, while the other ends are unlimited.	The cutting edges should be sharp, and the other ends blunt.	0.566844
And they were made like this so that they could be used in skinning the merchandise when there is a fear of cutting a vein or nerve. And so that the sick person can be comforted by them and find some relief from the burning sensation he experiences when the growth is being skinned.	The reason for making them like this is so that they can be utilized in dissecting away cysts where there is a fear of cutting a vein or nerve, and also that the patient may console himself thereby and find some small relief from the pain involved in the dissection of a tumour.	0.7700182
And these are the forms of the scalpels, and they are of three types, because some of them are large, some are medium, and some are small. Image of a large scalpel:	Here are the figures of the 'deceivers' of which also there are three kinds, large, medium, and small. They are made of brass and resemble the rod for instilling eye-salve.	0.6782698
It is made of copper, similar to the collyrium stick used for applying kohl, and at one end is something like a wide spoon made of two layers, in the head of which is the blade of the lancet hidden within it, resembling a bird's tongue, moving in and out whenever you want, as you see.	They are made of brass and resemble the rod for instilling eye-salve. At one end there is the likeness of a broad spoon made of two plates, in the extremity of which is the point of a hidden scalpel; thus the knife is masked like a bird's tongue, moving in and out at will, as you see.	0.76104844
Images of lancets that are concealed between the fingers when incising tumors, the patient does not feel them, and they are of three types, because among them are large, medium, and small.	Figures of the scalpels which are hidden between the fingers when tumours are to be opened, so that they are not noticed by the patient. They are of three varieties: large, medium, and small.	0.80658454
Pictures of the cupping glasses with which bleeding is stopped, and they are of three types, because among them are large, medium, and small ones,	Figures of the cupping vessels with which haemorrhage is stanched. There are three kinds: large, medium, and small.	0.82124966
It is made of copper or Chinese porcelain, slightly rounded lengthwise as you see. And it should be thin.	They are made of bronze or of Chinese alloy, round but slightly elongated, as you see, and also rather thin.	0.80221796
It is necessary to have these types of cupping vessels, both large and small, to cut off the blood quickly when necessary and when you do not have medicine.	You should have these kinds by you, large and small, so that haemorrhage may be quickly stopped in an emergency and when you have no medicine.	0.8160605
But it is not used to cut off blood in every part of the body, but rather it is used in fleshy places such as the muscles of the leg and thigh, the muscles of the arm, the breast, the abdomen, the groin, and similar moist fleshy organs.	But they are not to be used for suppressing haemorrhage in all parts of the body, but only in the fleshy parts such as the calf and thigh muscles, the arm muscles, the breasts, belly, and groin, and other similar fleshy soft parts.	0.9187728
Other small instruments may be made from it, resembling pistachio shells, in this way:	Sometimes of this class small instruments, like nutshells, are made, like this.	0.62449116
It stops bleeding if it flows from the place of phlebotomy or when a vein or artery is cut.	Haemorrhage from a venesection is stopped by these; or in the case of a cut artery or vein.	0.7145299
And it may be made circular in this way:	Sometimes round ones are made, like this.	0.50784576

chapter-2-subchapter-47.txt
Chapter forty-seven on the treatment of men's breasts that resemble women's breasts	CHAPTER FORTY-SEVEN. On the treatment of the male breast when it resembles the female.	0.7868376
The breast of some people may swell at puberty until it resembles a woman's breast, remaining swollen and unsightly.	The breasts of some males may swell on attaining puberty so as to resemble the female breast, and they remain permanently swollen and ugly.	0.8658569
So whoever dislikes this, it is appropriate to make a crescent-shaped incision on the breast in this manner from line B to line C. Then, remove all the fat. Then, fill the wound with the healing medication. Then, bring the edges of the wound together with sutures and treat it until it heals.	If this is abhorrent, a semicircular incision should be made on the breast, like this figure, from b to g. Then dissect away all the fatty tissue and pack the wound with a cicatrizing compound and sew the lips together and dress until healed.	0.76663506
Then, bring the edges of the wound together with sutures and treat it until it heals. If the breast droops downwards and becomes loose due to its size, as happens with women, then it is necessary to make two incisions on its upper sides, resembling a crescent shape, with each one joining the other at their ends so that the larger line surrounds the smaller one, in this way:	But if the breast is pendulous and flabby on account of its size, as happens with women, you should make two semicircular incisions on the upper side, the ends joining one another, in such wise that the longer incision encircles the other like this, from b to g. Then dissect away the skin between the two incisions and remove the fat and sew up as we have described; and apply styptic powder and the necessary dressings until healed.	0.77244675
If you are unable to completely cut what you should cut due to the patient's restlessness or because of bleeding, then you should pack the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment, and leave it until it eats away what remains of the fat, then treat it until it heals.	But if you cannot make the incision as full and perfect as it ought to have been, because the patient is restless, or because haemorrhage arises, you should pack the wound with cotton wool soaked in corrosive ointment and leave till it eats away the remainder of the fat; then dress until healed.	0.876194

chapter-2-subchapter-48.txt
These tumors that appear under the armpit are of the pig type, hard, contained in a sac.	These tumours under the armpit are of the type of scrofulous tumours, hard, enclosed in a capsule.	0.8281947
When all the pus has been discharged from the swelling, wipe it with worn-out cotton. And leave it until the next day.	Those that contain humidity should be opened with a semicircular incision like this, from b to g. When you have removed all the pus that had been in the tumour, pack the wound with teased-out cotton wool and leave till another day.	0.693625
Then remove the cotton and treat it with the appropriate ointment until it heals.	Then remove the cotton wool and dress with a suitable ointment until healed.	0.94634926
If the swelling is of the type of scrofula, then incise it as we mentioned in the incision on scrofula, similarly.	If the tumour be of the nodular scrofulous kind, cut directly down on it just as we prescribed for that kind.	0.7528167
If the wound persists until it produces pus, then use cauterization on it as we mentioned previously.	If the wound continue to discharge pus, apply the cautery to it as prescribed before.	0.8170513

chapter-2-subchapter-49.txt
Chapter forty-nine on incising the swelling that appears because of the artery or vein and is called aneurysm.	CHAPTER FORTY-NINE. On opening a tumour arising from a bloodvessel, called an aneurysm.	0.74922955
If an artery is wounded and the skin above it heals, a swelling often occurs, and similarly, the vein may also experience inflation and swelling.	When an artery is injured and the overlying skin scars, a tumour very often arises from this; the same thing happens to a vein: a swelling and a tumour.	0.791731
The signs by which it is known whether the swelling and inflation are from an artery or a vein are that if the swelling is from an artery, it is oblong, gathered in the depth of the body, and if you press the swelling with your finger, you feel it as if it has a creaking sound, and if it is from a vein, the swelling is round, on the surface of the body.	And these are the signs by which you may diagnose whether the swelling and tumour arise from an artery or a vein: if it be from an artery the tumour will be a deep and elongated mass; and when you press upon it with your finger there will be a feeling of pulsation. But if it arises from a vein the swelling will be circular and superficial.	0.8436893
Incision on these swellings is dangerous, especially those in the armpit, groin, and neck, and in many places of the body, and are very large, so you should avoid treating them with iron, and also those in the extremities or the head, so you should avoid [treating them].	It is dangerous to make an incision on tumours of this kind, specially in the axilla, the groin, the neck, and in many other parts of the body; it is indeed highly dangerous, so in these you must avoid treatment by the knife; also in those in the limbs and in the head it must be avoided.	0.8880305
If the swelling is from an incision of the vein, you should hold with your hand as much of the swelling as you can, along with the skin, then insert a needle below the place that you held with your hand, and pass it through, and in it a double thread, until you bring it out from the other side, then tie the swelling well with it, according to what I mentioned to you in tying the uvula from both sides with the ends of the thread.	If the swelling be due to a vein that has been penetrated, you should gather up with your hand as much of the tumour as you can, together with the skin; then pass a needle beneath the place which you have grasped in your hand and run it through, threaded with a double thread, until it emerges at the other side; then with it tie a strong ligature round the swelling as I mentioned to you on ligaturing the swollen uvula, from either side, with the ends of the thread.	0.93481797
If you fear that the threads will slip, then insert another needle with another thread under the entire swelling at the intersection of the first needle and tighten your threads in four places, then incise the swelling in its middle, so that when what is in it comes out, cut the excess skin and leave what was tied of it.	If you fear that the threads may come loose, pass a second needle and thread beneath the whole tumour to intersect with the passage of the first needle; and tie your threads in four places. Then incise the tumour in the centre to extract the contents. Then cut away the superfluous skin and leave what has been ligatured.	0.88927627
Then put on it a pad that you have dipped in wine and oil, then use the treatment that is with bandages and ointments until it heals.	Then put on that a pad previously soaked in wine and oil; then apply the treatment with lint and ointments until healed.	0.9080897

chapter-2-subchapter-50.txt
Chapter fifty on the swelling that arises from the twisting of a nerve.	CHAPTER FIFTY. On the tumour arising from the twisting of a tendon.	0.7604042
Just as a swelling may occur in an artery or vein, so too may it occur in a nerve, whether due to a blow or from excessive fatigue or similar causes.	As a tumour arises on an artery or a vein, so may it also come in a tendon when it has been bruised; or it may arise from excessive fatigue, or such causes.	0.8665832
This occurs most frequently in the wrists and heel, and in every place where joints move. It is a protruding swelling, its color similar to the rest of the body, and it is most often painless. If pressed firmly, the patient feels a kind of numbness.	This occurs mostly at the wrists, at the heel, and at all sites of articular movement. It is a hard tumour of the same colour as the rest of the body, and is generally painless, and when strong pressure is put upon it the patient has a numb feeling in it.	0.8985064
The swelling is not located deep within the body, but rather under the skin. It moves in every direction, yet doesn't go forward or backward.	It is a tumour that does not form in the deeper tissues but is subcutaneous. It is freely movable laterally, but will not go forward or backward.	0.80464184
So those that are in the joints, it is inadvisable to treat with iron instruments, for it may cause chronic pain.	Those that are situated on joints should certainly not be tackled with the knife, for that often causes palsy.	0.6359497
And as for those that are on the head or forehead, incise the skin with a scalpel.	Incise the skin of those occurring on the head or forehead, and if the tumour be small take hold of it with the forceps and cut it away by the root.	0.56894505
If the swelling is small, grasp it with forceps and cut it off at the base. If it is large, hook it with a snare, peel it off, then extract it and close the wound with sutures, treating it until it heals.	But if it be large, catch it up with a hook and dissect it away and remove it; and sew up the incision and dress until healed.	0.6842923

chapter-2-subchapter-51.txt
Chapter fifty-one on the excision of warts that appear on the abdomen	CHAPTER FIFTY-ONE. On the amputation of warts occurring on the belly.	0.76191163
Warts, called fungal warts due to their resemblance to fungi, frequently appear on some people's stomachs and other parts of their bodies. Their base is thin, and their head is thick, with inverted lips. Some are small, while others become very large.	Some people often get warts on the belly and on the rest of the body, called fungous warts, because of their resemblance to fungi. They have a slender pedicle and a broad head, the edges of which are sometimes inverted ; and some are small, whereas others of them grow very big.	0.8718129
I have indeed seen a man with two warts on his stomach, resembling fungi exactly, white, with a thin base and inverted, cracked lips, constantly oozing moisture.	I myself once saw a man who had two warts on his belly that looked more like fungi than anything else; they were white and had thin pedicles. Their edges were inverted and had split open, and a humour flowed continually from them.	0.783813
I cut them off, and I estimated the weight of one to be about eighteen ounces and the other about six ounces.	I amputated them both and weighed them: one came to about eighteen ounces, and the other six ounces.	0.8623317
The procedure for removing them is to examine the patient; if the patient is of a moist constitution and the wart's color is white, moist, and thin-based, then cut it with a wide scalpel, keeping cauterizing irons at hand in the fire, as often profuse bleeding occurs when cutting them, so be prompt. If the bleeding overcomes you, cauterize it.	This is the operation for amputating them: examine the patient carefully, and if he be of a humid temperament and the colour of the warts be white, and if they are soft, with a thin stalk, amputate them with a broad scalpel. But you should also have at hand cauteries in a fire; for often in amputating them there is much haemorrhage. So, if the bleeding be a hindrance to you, be quick and cauterize them.	0.8733895
If you find the patient is cowardly and fears cutting with iron, take a tightly twisted lead thread and tie it around the wart with these characteristics. Leave it for two days, then tighten the lead. Continue tightening the lead whenever it affects the wart, until it cuts off and falls by itself without any effort.	On the other hand if you see that the patient is frightened and dreads the cutting of them with the scalpel, take a wire of stout lead, and ligature this type of wart and leave for two days. Then increase the stricture by the lead wire and go on doing this as it sinks into the wart, until the wart is cut through and spontaneously falls away with no trouble.	0.82457936
If the wart is thick-based, cutting it involves some risk and danger, especially those located on the stomach. However, it is possible to cut off half or part of it and then cauterize it to prevent its recurrence.	But if the warts have stout pedicles there is some risk and fear in the cutting of them, especially those that occur on the belly. Sometimes, however, you can cut away the half, or some part, and then cauterize to prevent recurrence.	0.8643489
Then treat it until the wound heals.	Then dress until the wound is healed.	0.8749315
Beware of cutting a wart that is dark in color, has little sensation, and has an unpleasant appearance, as it is a cancerous tumor, and we will discuss cancer after this.	But beware of trying to cut away growths that are dark in colour, with little sensation and hideous in appearance, for they are cancerous tumours. I shall soon be mentioning cancer.	0.7398073

chapter-2-subchapter-52.txt
Chapter fifty-two on the treatment of umbilical hernia.	CHAPTER FIFTY-TWO. On the treatment of protruding navel.	0.81608355
The protrusion of the navel happens for many reasons: either from a tear in the peritoneum over the abdomen, from which the omentum or the intestine emerges, as happens in all hernias, or from blood that flows from a vein or artery, as mentioned before, or from wind that accumulates in it.	The navel becomes prominent from many causes; either from a rupture of the peritoneum over the abdomen, so that omentum or intestine comes through it as in other ruptures; or from blood extravasation from an artery or vein, as we have mentioned; or else from wind trapped in it.	0.8813579
If it is from a tear in the peritoneum and the exit of the omentum, then the color of the swelling is similar to the color of the body, and it is soft, without pain, and appears in different positions. If it is because of the exit of the intestine, then its state is, along with what we have described, more variable, and if you press it with your fingers, it disappears and then comes back, and perhaps it is accompanied by a gurgling, and it increases greatly when entering the bath and with intense fatigue.	If it be due to ruptured peritoneum and protruding omentum, the colour of the tumour will be the same as the rest of the body; it will be soft and painless and will seem to change its position; But if it be due to an escape of bowel the change of position, compared with what we have described, will be greater, and it will disappear on digital pressure, and then will recur; and often there will be crepitus with it, and it will increase in size on entering the bath or on violent exertion.	0.81573176
If it is from moisture, then it is soft, does not disappear if you press it with your hand, and does not increase or decrease.	If it be due to fluid, it will be soft and will not disappear on manual pressure, nor will it grow larger or smaller.	0.8147689
If it is from blood, then, along with these signs, the swelling appears dark.	If it be due to blood, then in addition to these signs the tumour will appear blackish.	0.8608639
If it is from growing flesh, then the swelling is hard, and remains at one size.	If it arise from a fleshy overgrowth, the tumour will be solid and hard, remaining always constant in bulk.	0.7661265
If it is from wind, then its touch is soft.	If it be due to wind, it will be soft to the touch.	0.8614493
And the action in this is that you observe. If the protrusion of the navel is from the blood of the artery or the vein or wind, then you should refrain from treating it, as there is fear and danger in that, as I informed you in the chapter in which I mentioned the swellings that occur because of the artery and the vein.	The operation for these is to examine, and if the exomphalos be due to arterial or venous blood, or wind, you should withhold treatment since it is dangerous in these cases, with an uncertain outlook, as I taught you in the chapter on tumours arising from an artery or vein.	0.77772206
If an artery or vein obstructs you, tie it off quickly and return to your work. Take two needles, insert two strong threads into them, and insert the two needles, hardened, into the incision you made around the swelling, having passed them through.	And if you come across an artery or vein, tie it securely and go on with your work: take two needles and thread them with two strong threads and insert the two needles into the incision that you have made around the tumour, pushing them in so that they cross one another.	0.8385963
Then tighten the swelling in four places on the needles. If you wish, remove the needles and leave the place until the pulled flesh rots and falls off by itself, or cut it when it becomes thin and rots.	Then ligature the tumour in four places over the needles. If you wish, you may remove the needles and let be until the ligatured tissue necroses and falls away of its own accord; or cut it away when it is thin and necrosing.	0.89645725
Then treat it with what is necessary of ointments until it heals.	Then dress with the needful ointments until healed.	0.88909703
If the protrusion of the navel is from flesh growing in it or from moisture, then it is necessary to scrape out the swelling as we said, and remove the blood or moisture that you find in it, then treat it with what will heal the place.	But if the prominent navel be due to an overgrowth of flesh there or from humidity, you should slice the tumour as we have said and get out all the blood or humidity to be found there.	0.8025829

chapter-2-subchapter-53.txt
Chapter fifty-three on the treatment of cancer	CHAPTER FIFTY-THREE. On the treatment of cancer.	0.7884971
We have mentioned in the classification the types of cancer and how to treat it with medicines and the warning against treating it with iron so that it does not ulcerate.	We have spoken, in the relevant section, of the kinds of cancer and of the way in which medical treatment of them is to be attempted; with a warning against treatment by the knife lest they ulcerate.	0.8085194
And we mentioned the cancer generated in the uterus and the warning against treating it.	We also mentioned the cancer arising in the uterus and gave a warning against its treatment.	0.93661624
And the ancients mentioned that whenever the cancer is in a place where it can be completely eradicated, such as the cancer that is in the breast or in the thigh and similar accessible organs, to remove it entirely, especially if it is nascent and small.	The Ancients said that when a cancer is in a site where total eradication is possible, such as a cancer of the breast or of the thigh, and in similar parts where complete removal is possible, and especially when in the early stage and small, (then surgery was to be tried).	0.82403237
But when it is advanced and large, it should not be approached, for I have not been able to cure anyone of it, nor have I seen anyone before me reach that.	But when it is of long standing and large you should leave it alone. For I myself have never been able to cure any such, nor have I seen anyone else succeed before me.	0.80238914
And the procedure in it, if it is accessible as we said, is that you proceed to purge the patient with black bile several times, then bleed him if there is a clear fullness in the veins.	The procedure in a case amenable to treatment, as we have said, is first for the patient to be purged several times from black bile; then bleed him if his veins seem full.	0.8533194
Then you position the patient in a position that allows you to work, then you place in the cancer the hooks that are suitable for it, then you scrape it from every side with the skin thoroughly so that nothing of its roots remains. And let the blood flow and do not cut it off quickly, but squeeze the areas and drain all the thick blood with your hand or with whatever instruments you can.	Then put the patient in the most convenient position for operating. Then attach to the tumour hooks suited to it; then make a circular incision all round to include the skin with the utmost thoroughness so that not the least root of it remains; let the blood flow and do not stanch it quickly; but put pressure upon the place and squeeze out all the thick blood, either by hand or with any instrument you can.	0.8680441
If you encounter in the procedure a large bleeding from the cutting of an artery or vein, cauterize the vessel until the bleeding stops, then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.	If in operating you get a very severe haemorrhage from cutting an artery or vein, cauterize the vessel until the bleeding stops; then dress in the usual way until healed.	0.87059903

chapter-2-subchapter-54.txt
Chapter fifty-four on the treatment of acne.	CHAPTER FIFTY-FOUR. On the treatment of dropsy.	0.7991332
We have already explained in the section on classification the types of ascites, how water accumulates, the signs of each type, and its treatment with medications.	We have mentioned in the section the kinds of hydrops, and the manner in which the fluid collects; the signs of each kind; and the medical treatment of them.	0.76232624
And the one that is treated with iron is only the ascitic type,	The only kind which is to be treated by operation is the one called 'ascites'.	0.59915304
and the drum-like type and the fleshy type should not be approached with iron at all, because that is deadly.	But neither the kind called 'tympanites' nor general anasarca are to be treated by operation at all, for that would be fatal.	0.55434
If you have treated this type of ascitic swelling with medications and your treatment has not been successful, then consider: if the patient is extremely weak, or has another disease besides the swelling, such as a cough or diarrhea, and so on, then beware of treating him with iron, because it is dangerous.	When you have been trying medical treatment for this kind, for ascites, and your treatment is ineffectual, then consider; and if the patient be in a low state or suffer from other disease beside the ascites, such as cough or diarrhoea or some such, then beware of attempting operative treatment since it will be of uncertain outcome.	0.83093965
If you see that the patient is strong, has no disease other than the swelling alone, and is neither a child nor an old man, then the way to proceed is to have the patient stand before you and have a servant behind him squeeze his abdomen with his hands and push the water down towards the pubic area,	But if you see that the patient has plenty of strength and suffers under no other complaint beside the dropsy, and is of neither tender nor advanced age, then the operative procedure in this case is for you to place the patient, standing, before you, with an assistant behind him to apply manual pressure to his abdomen and push the fluid down into the pelvis.	0.81075597
then take a pointed scalpel like this: Long, limited on both sides, with a defined tip like a scalpel, except that it has a slight bluntness so that it does not pass through to the intestine during the procedure and harm it.	Then take a pointed scalpel of this shape, sharp along both sides, long, and very sharp at the end like a scalpel, but slightly stubby so that in operating you do not reach the intestines and damage them.	0.7819526
Then look, if the hernia originates from the intestines, it is appropriate to distance the incision from the navel by three fingers downwards, along it, above the pubis.	Then consider; and if the dropsy arises from the region of the intestines then you should make an incision three fingers' breadth directly below the umbilicus, above the pubes.	0.84581995
If the hernia originates from liver disease, let your incision be three fingers to the left of the navel.	If the dropsy arises from disease of the liver, let your incision be three fingers to the left of the umbilicus.	0.87950575
If it originates from spleen disease, let the incision be on the right side, about three fingers.	If it arises from disease of the spleen, let the incision be three fingers to the right.	0.9259176
It is also not appropriate for the incision to be on the side on which the patient wants to lie down, so that excess fluids do not flow to that weak spot.	Moreover, the incision must not be on the side which the patient wishes to lie on, so that the superfluities may not flow to the damaged part.	0.87283814
Then pierce the entire skin with the instrument. Then insert the instrument into that incision and lift your hand with the scalpel between the skin and the peritoneum as if you are skinning it, and the amount you skin should be the size of a fingernail or so.	Then pierce the skin with the instrument, introduce the instrument into that incision, and bring the scalpel up between the skin and the membrane, as if excoriating, over an area about the size of a fingernail.	0.84010565
Then pierce the peritoneum until the scalpel reaches an empty space, which is the location of the fluid. Then remove it and insert into the hole the instrument, of which this is an image: It is similar to a tube of thin reed, made of silver or copper or polished smooth steel, having in its bottom a small hole, and on its sides three holes, two from one side and one from another, as you see.	Then pierce through the membrane till the scalpel reaches a cavity, which will be where the water is; then withdraw the scalpel and put into the opening the instrument shaped like this; it resembles a fine section of reed, made of silver, bronze or white copper; smooth and well polished, with a small opening at the lower end and three at the sides, two on one side and one on the other, as you see.	0.86349905
Its end may be sharpened like the point of a pen, in this form: At its upper end is a ring.	Its extremity may be cut to the shape of a writing reed like this; the upper end of it is supplied with a ring.	0.8168353
For when the instrument reaches the water, it will descend from its reservoir onto the instrument, and it will discharge a moderate amount of water at that time.	When the instrument reaches the fluid, the fluid will at once pass down into it.	0.68372005
Because if you discharge from it more than is necessary at the time, the patient may die from the dissolution of his animal spirit, or he may experience fainting close to death.	Evacuate at one time only a moderate amount of fluid; for if you evacuate more than you should at a time, the patient may die through a dissolution of his animal spirits, or he will undergo a fainting that is next door to death.	0.79583776
But discharge from it according to his strength and what the patient's condition indicates to you, from the strength of his pulse and the goodness of his color.	But let out such quantity of fluid as is proportionate to his strength and as is indicated to you by the patient's condition: the strength of his pulse and the goodness of his colour.	0.84132123
Then remove the instrument and stop the water.	Then withdraw the instrument and keep (the rest of) the fluid in.	0.7208972
This is because it stops from its reservoir due to the leather that covers the hole on the peritoneum, which I told you to pad in that manner.	For it will be immediately held back by the skin that closes the opening in the peritoneum, which, as I have told you, must be perforated in that manner.	0.7760457
Then return the instrument another day if you see the patient can tolerate it, and also extract a small amount of water.	Then repeat the use of the instrument another day if you see that the patient can tolerate it, and withdraw again a small quantity of fluid.	0.91882265
Do this for several days, while being cautious and guarding against error, until only a small amount of water remains.	And do this daily, watchful and on guard against error, until there is only a trace of fluid left.	0.7393538
If you fear for the patient and have left a large amount of water, treat him by burying him in hot sand, and with profuse sweating in the bath and sun, and make him endure thirst, and treat him with drying medications until he recovers.	But if you are afraid for the patient and leave a large amount of fluids treat him by burying him in hot sand, and by heavy sweating in the bath and in the sun, and letting him go thirsty; while you treat him with drying medicines, till he is well.	0.91812444
And cauterize him on the stomach, liver, and spleen after extracting the water as I described previously.	He should also be cauterized on the abdomen and on the liver and spleen after the paracentesis, as I have previously described.	0.7440978

chapter-2-subchapter-55.txt
Chapter fifty-five on the treatment of children who are born and places.	CHAPTER FIFTY-FIVE.	0.40711483
Their urine [opening] is not perforated, or the perforation is narrow, or in the wrong place.	On the treatment of boys born with imperforate urinary meatus; or with the meatus small or not in the proper place.	0.46132088
Some boys may come out of their mother's womb with their urethra not perforated.	Sometimes a boy is born from his mother's womb with the glans penis not perforate.	0.75719887
So it is necessary to hasten to perforate it from the hour he is born with a very thin scalpel in this way:	So at the moment of his birth you should be quick and make a perforation with a fine scalpel figured thus.	0.7196363
Then you put in the hole a thin nail made of lead, tie it and keep it for three or four days, and when he wants to urinate, remove it and let him urinate, then put it back.	Then put in the opening a slender leaden sound, tie it and keep it in for three or four days. When he wishes to make water, it will be removed and he will do so; then put it back.	0.86372674
And if you do not use the lead, it is possible that the urine that passes over the place will not let it close.	If you do not put in the leaden sound it may be that the urine passing through the place will prevent the wound from healing.	0.6943284
As for the one whose hole is narrow, it is treated with the lead, as we said, for many days until it widens.	The case having too narrow a meatus should be treated with the leaden sound, as we have said, for many days until it is wide enough.	0.7594658
And those whose hole is not in its place, that is, some of them are born with the hole at the end of the penis, so he cannot urinate forward until he lifts the urethra with his hand upwards. And he is not born from the front because the semen cannot reach the uterus in a straight line, and this is a very ugly condition.	In those cases having a misplaced meatusfor example, there are some born with the opening at the edge of the glans so that they cannot make water forwards until the opening of the penis is lifted up by hand, nor can they beget, since the semen cannot reach directly to the uterus, a disorder which is very ugly.	0.76753503
The way to do this is to have the patient lie on his back, then stretch his penis with your left hand with a strong stretch, and sharpen the head of the urethra with a blade or a sharp scalpel the size of a pen, or as if you were carving something so that its middle would be prominent, similar to a penis, and so that the hole would be in the middle as it should be.	The manner of operating in this case is for the patient to lie back; then with your left hand draw out his glans firmly and cut the end of the glans at the place of the meatus with a broad knife or sharp scalpel, as if sharpening a pen, or as if you were whittling something, so that the middle of it protrudes like a glans penis and the opening falls in the middle as it should.	0.87628484
And beware of bleeding during your work, for it often happens, so counteract it with something that stops the blood and treat the wound until it heals.	And beware, in your operating, of haemorrhage, which often happens; meet it with styptics and dress the wound until it heals.	0.72540903

chapter-2-subchapter-56.txt
Chapter fifty-six on the rash that appears on the foreskin, glans, blackness, corruption, and adhesion of the foreskin to the glans.	CHAPTER FIFTY-SIX. On pustules occurring on the prepuce and on the glans; and blackness and necrosis and adhesions between glans and prepuce.	0.7379929
This ulcer often appears in the urethra, and it is a fleshy, foul growth, and it can be malignant or benign.	These pustules very frequently occur in the urinary meatus and are excrescences of foul tissue. Some are malignant and some are not.	0.6535185
The benign one should be grasped with a delicate hook and cut until it is completely cleaned, then apply to it cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then treat it afterwards with palm ointment until it heals.	The nonmalignant you should seize with a fine hook and pare away until they are altogether gone; then apply to the place cotton wool soaked in Egyptian ointment; then afterwards dress with Palm ointment until healed.	0.84378034
But if the ulcer is malignant and foul-colored, then cauterization should be used after cutting and scraping it.	But when the pustules are malignant, of a dirty colour, for these you should employ the cautery after cutting and scraping them.	0.8339171
If the ulcer is on the foreskin of an uncircumcised person, and some of the ulcer is inside the foreskin and some of it is outside, then the ulcer that is inside should be extracted first until it heals, and then treat it from the outside because if you treat them both together, you cannot be sure that the foreskin will not be perforated.	If the pustules be on the prepuce of an uncircumcized unbeliever and there are some inside the prepuce and some outside, those that are inside should be removed first; and when they are healed over, then treat those outside. For if you deal with both at the same time you are in danger of going through the prepuce.	0.8452438
Blackness and decay may also occur in the labia and in the foreskin, so it is necessary to scrape all that has blackened and is about to decay or has decayed, then smear on it honey with ground, sifted pomegranate peels and kirsana, then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.	Sometimes there occurs a blackness and necrosis in the testicles and prepuce; then you should scrape away all the black part which looks ready to go necrotic or has already necrosed. Then afterwards smear on the place honey with pounded and sifted pomegranate peel and bitter vetch. Then carry on with the usual treatment until healed.	0.7138624
If bleeding occurs, use cauterization with a crescent-shaped iron in this way:	If haemorrhage set in, cauterize with a lunate cautery figured thus.	0.6331455
Cauterization is beneficial for both conditions, I mean bleeding and a wound if it becomes infected.	For the cautery serves a twofold purpose, namely against haemorrhage and for a putrefying wound.	0.618785
If the glans penis is eroded and completely gone at some point, then a lead tube should be inserted into the urethra so that the patient can urinate through it.	If at any time the penis mortifies and goes entirely, you should pass into the urethra a leaden cannula so that the patient can make water.	0.8494152
As for the adhesion of the foreskin to the glans penis, and this adhesion only occurs in someone whose foreskin is intact and who is not obligated to be circumcised, and its adhesion may occur due to a wound or swelling, it should be peeled off with a blunt scalpel until the bond dissolves and the glans penis is freed from every side.	As to the adhesion of the glans to the prepuce (which occurs in him who has his prepuce intact, being under no obligation to be circumcized; sometimes too adhesion may occur by reason of a wound or an abscess) you should scrape it with a flat-nosed scalpel until the adhesion is divided and the glans penis is freed all round from the prepuce.	0.8525089
If it is difficult to distinguish them upon investigation, then something from the glans penis and the foreskin should be peeled off, because the foreskin is thin, so it may be perforated quickly due to its thinness.	But if the complete separation of the two be difficult then you should dissect away a little of the glans and of the prepuce; for the prepuce is thin, and consequently it is often pierced quickly.	0.72365326
Then separate the foreskin and the glans penis with a thin linen cloth that has been soaked in cold water so that they do not stick together again, then treat it with an astringent drink until it heals.	Separate then between the glans and the prepuce with a piece of fine linen dipped in cold water to prevent further adhesions. Then let it be dressed with some styptic wine till it heals over.	0.7652956

chapter-2-subchapter-57.txt
Chapter fifty-seven on purifying/circumcising boys and treating what befalls them of errors/mistakes/accidents.	CHAPTER FIFTY-SEVEN. On the circumcision of boys; and the correction of their erroneous treatment.	0.7509383
It should be a sharp, straight scalpel, with a smooth nail. And the length of the two blades should be equal to the length of the two handles.	They should be fiat-nosed, sharp, with no bend in them, and with the pivot tempered ; and the length of the handles should be equal to that of the blades.	0.6605155
As for the error that occurs during circumcision, sometimes the inner skin is completely or partially inverted during the cutting.	Now the mistake often occurring in circumcision is for the inner layer of skin, either the whole or the part, to be inverted at the cutting.	0.7545479
Therefore, you should immediately stretch it with your fingernail before the area swells and cut it evenly.	So you should at the start draw it out with your finger-nail before the place swell; then make an even incision.	0.73006606
If you are unable to grasp it with your fingernail, pull it with a hook and cut it.	And if you are unable to get a hold with your finger-nail then pick it up with a hook and make your incision.	0.7982529
If three days have passed and what is under the head of the urethra remains swollen and inflamed, leave it until the hot swelling subsides, then gently peel it off and cut it as you see fit.	If after three days there still remains some inflation and swelling of the part below the tip of the penis, let it be until the effusion subsides, and then gently peel it away and cut it as best you may.	0.8184483
Be careful of the head of the urethra, for if something is cut from the head of the urethra, it will not harm it.	Be careful of the tip of the penis; though if any of the tip is cut away that will do no harm.	0.74197805
Treat it with what heals the wound from the peaks that we described in the article on peaks.	And dress the wound with stimulating medicaments from among the powders that we described in the treatise on powders.	0.67180014
And if some of the skin is cut beyond the required amount and it retracts upwards, that also does not cause much harm.	Should more of the skin be cut away than necessary and the skin is wrinkled up, that will do no great harm either.	0.80814576
So treat it with what we have mentioned until it heals.	Continue such treatment as we have mentioned, until healed.	0.7961467

chapter-2-subchapter-58.txt
Chapter fifty-eight on the treatment of urine retained in the bladder	CHAPTER FIFTY-EIGHT. On the treatment of retention of urine.	0.7803404
The urine retained in the bladder is due to its blockage from a stone, or clotted blood, or pus, or growing flesh, and so forth.	Retention of the urine is caused by an obstruction, from a stone or a clot of blood or pus or a fleshy tumour, or similar cause.	0.8486781
So if you treat that with the types of treatment described in the classification that we mentioned, and the urine is not released, and you see that its retention is from a stone that has become lodged in the neck of the bladder, then it is appropriate to make the patient kneel on his knees, squatting. Then a man rides on his back and extends his belly to his back, and the patient holds himself as much as he can, thus forcing the neck of the bladder to push the stone backwards, so the urine is released.	When you have carried out treatment in the ways we have prescribed in their place and the urine is not released; and when you see that it is held back by a stone sticking in the neck of the bladder, then you should have the patient down on his knees, squatting; then mount a man on his back to press his abdomen against his back; and let the patient himself hold his breath as tightly as possible; for then pressure will be put on the neck of the bladder to force the stone back and liberate the urine.	0.83634067
But if it is not released by what we mentioned, and the matter intensifies for the patient, it is appropriate to resort to extracting it with the instrument called a catheter, which is pictured here:	But if these measures do not free it and the matter is very urgent with the patient, then you should attempt to bring it out with the instrument called a catheter, of which this is the figure.	0.8131196
It is made of silver and is thin, smooth, and hollow like the tube of a bird's feather in the thinness of the , long about a span and a half, and has a delicate funnel at its head.	It is made of silver, slender and smooth and hollow like the quill of a bird's feather; as slender as a probe; about a span and a half in length; and with a tiny funnel at the end.	0.8778801
And the way to draw urine with it is to take a doubled thread and tie at its end wool or cotton with a good knot and insert the end of the thread into the bottom of the catheter and cut with scissors if any of the wool remains so that it enters the tube, plugging it like a button.	This is the manner in which you draw off the urine through it: take a double thread and with a strong knot tie a little wool or cotton on the end, introduce the end of the thread into the lower end of the catheter, and trim off with scissors any superfluous wool, so that it will go into the tube and close it like a tassel.	0.80522144
Then grease the catheter with oil or butter or egg white and sit the patient on a chair and anoint his bladder and urethra with moist ointments or oil and lukewarm water.	Then smear the catheter with oil or butter or egg-white. Make the patient sit down; then anoint the bladder and the meatus of the penis with humid oils or with olive-oil and warm water.	0.9140029
Then insert the catheter gently into the urethra until it reaches the base of the urethra, then bend the urethra upwards towards the navel, then push the catheter inside it until the urethra is bent, then push the catheter inwards until, when it reaches near the anus, tilt the penis downwards with the catheter inside it, then push it until it reaches the bladder and the patient feels that it has reached something empty, and it is made in this manner because the passage in which the urine flows is crooked.	Then gently introduce the catheter into the urethra until it reaches the root of the urethra. Then turn the end of the penis upward toward the umbilicus; then push the catheter inwards until the curve of the catheter ends, and push the catheter in until it reaches nearly to the seat. Then turn the penis down, with the catheter in it, and push until it reaches the bladder, and the patient now feels that it has entered a hollow. The reason why the operation is done in this manner is that the passage by which the urine is excreted is curved.	0.9240073
Then pull the thread with the wool gently, for the urine will follow the wool. Then take it out and the urine will pour out.	Then withdraw rather firmly the thread with the wool plug attached, for the urine follows the wool; then pull it right out and the urine will pour out.	0.89071536
And reinsert the catheter and continue doing this until the bladder is emptied and the patient feels relief.	Apply the catheter again and again until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.	0.8516779

chapter-2-subchapter-59.txt
Chapter fifty-nine	CHAPTER FIFTY-NINE.	0.6638667
How to inject the bladder with a syringe and images of the instruments suitable for that	On the manner of irrigating the bladder with a syringe, and the forms of the instruments that serve for that.	0.71039736
It is made of silver or hollow ivory, it has a long thin tube, and if you want to instill water and medicine into it, this will be by a tool called a syringe	When there occurs an ulcer in the bladder, or there is a clot of blood or a deposit of pus in it, and you wish to instil into it lotions and medicaments, this is done with the help of an instrument called a syringe.	0.6013283
It is made of silver or ivory, hollowed out, with a long, thin, hollow tube, except for the tip, which is solid and has three holes, two on one side and one on the other, as you see.	It is made of silver or ivory, hollow, with a long fine tube, fine as a probe; entirely hollow except for the end, which is solid with three holes in it: two on one side and one on the other, as you see.	0.9025277
And the hollow place in which the piston is, should be of a size that it fills it without any extra space, so that if you pull something of the fluids with it, it is drawn, and if you push with it, it is pushed to a distance, similar to how the pump is made, which is used to throw naphtha in sea battles.	The hollow part containing the plunger is exactly of a size to be closed by it, so that any liquid is drawn up with it when you pull it up; and when you press it down it is driven in a jet, as is done by the projector whereby naphtha is thrown in naval battles.	0.77736807
So if you want to introduce fluids into the bladder, you insert the tip of the syringe into the fluid and pull the piston upwards, then the fluid is drawn into the cavity of the syringe.	So when you wish to inject fluid into the bladder, dip the end of the syringe into the fluid and draw up the piston, for the fluid will be drawn up into the cavity of the syringe.	0.9098909
Then you insert its tip into the urethra, according to what we described for catheters, then you push the fluid with the piston, and that fluid reaches the bladder at the spot until the patient feels it.	Then introduce the end into the urethra as we described for catheterization; then expel the fluid by means of the piston; the fluid will immediately flow into the bladder and the patient will have a sense of its entry.	0.86752987
And this is a picture of a nice syringe also, with which you inject the bladder:	This is the illustration of a fine clyster also for irrigation of the bladder.	0.59751236
It is made of silver or "espadroia", its upper head resembles a small funnel, and below it is a groove in which the bandage is placed.	It is made of silver or white copper. The upper part of it is like a small funnel and beneath it is a groove where falls the thread of the ligature.	0.6345071
Then you take a camel bladder and put in it the moisture that you want to inject into the bladder, then tie it between the two partitions tightly with a doubled thread and warm that moisture a little on the fire.	Then take a camel's bladder and fill it with whatever fluid you wish to wash the bladder out with, and tie it to the syringe with a strong ligature of double thread between the two ridges. Warm the fluid a little over the fire; then introduce the end of the siphon into the end of the urinary meatus.	0.7966788
Then you insert the tip of the syringe into the urethra, then tighten your hand on the bladder with the moisture tightly until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.	Then apply strong pressure to the bladder containing the fluid until the patient can feel the fluid has entered his own bladder.	0.7629845
If you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of thin leather, make a circle out of it, and pierce it all around, then insert a strong thread into that hole as you turn.	But if you have not a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and cut out a circle; then make holes in the edge all round the circle; then pass a strong ligature through these holes all round and draw the circle in, as a bag is closed with a draw-string, first putting into it whatever fluid, oil, or water, you desire.	0.7038004
Then gather the circle as you gather the tablecloth after putting in it what you want of moistures, oils, and water, then tie it in the instrument and do with it as you did with the bladder by squeezing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.	Then tie it to the instrument and do with it as with the camel's bladder, squeezing until the fluid reaches the bladder of the patient.	0.534195

chapter-2-subchapter-60.txt
Chapter Sixty on Extracting the Stone	CHAPTER SIXTY. On the extraction of the stone.	0.7438865
and it is easy for boys to recover from them until they reach fourteen years of age, and it is difficult in old men, and as for young men, it is intermediate between that, and the one whose stones are larger, his treatment is easier, and the small ones are the opposite of that,	The cure of boys under the age of fourteen years is easy; but the treatment of old people is difficult; and that of young men midway between the two. And the larger the stone the easier the cure; with a small stone the cure is otherwise.	0.8676
Then you take the lancet, which is this image: And you incise between the anus and the testicles, not in the middle, but to the side of the left buttock, and the incision should be on the stone itself, with your finger in the anus, and you press it outwards, obliquely, so that the incision is wide from the outside and narrow from the inside, just enough for the stone to come out, not bigger, for perhaps the finger that is in the anus presses the stone at the incision, so it comes out without difficulty.	Then do you take a lancet like this and make your incision in the space between the anus and the testicles, not in the mid-line but on the side of the left buttock; and cut down upon the calculus itself, keeping your finger in the anus and pressing it outwards. The incision should be oblique, wide externally and narrowing inwards down to dimensions allowing the exit of the stone, not larger. Now you may press with the finger that is in the anus upon the stone as you make the incision, and it comes out without difficulty.	0.9153969
And know that some stones have angles and edges, so their exit is difficult for that reason, and some are smooth, resembling acorns, and rounded, so their exit is easy.	You should know that sometimes there are stones which have angles and edges, on which account their extraction is difficult. Some are smooth like acorns and rounded, and these come out easily.	0.8644077
So what has angles and edges, you increase the incision a little, and if it does not come out like this, then you should contrive against it, either by grasping it with a tight forceps, the tip of which is like a file, so that it grips the stone and it does not escape from it, or by inserting a fine instrument with a hooked tip under it.	But in those cases where the stone is rough and angular you should slightly increase the incision. Then if it still will not come out you must then resort to a device namely to catch hold of it with strong forceps having an extremity like a rasp, to get a tight hold of it so it shall not slip out; or else introduce beneath it a narrow instrument with a crooked end.	0.824002
If you cannot manage it, then widen the incision a little, and if some blood overcomes you, stop it with alum.	And if you then cannot get the stone out, widen the incision slightly; and if there is any bleeding stanch it with vitriol.	0.7366868
If there is more than one, then first push the large one to the mouth of the bladder, then incise on it, then push the small one after that, and likewise, you do if there are more than two.	If there should be a number of stones first push the largest of them into the neck of the bladder, then cut down upon it; then push a smaller one down after it; and do the same if there be more than two.	0.856967
If it is very large, then it is ignorance to make a large incision on it, because it exposes the patient to one of two things: either he dies, or he has constant dribbling of urine, because the place does not heal at all, but try to push it until it comes out, or contrive to break it with hooks until you bring it out in pieces.	But if the stone be very large it is foolish to make a great incision down upon it; for the result is that the patient either dies or has a chronic urinary fistula because the place will not heal at all. Try rather to manipulate it so that it protrudes; or else attempt to break it up with the forceps so that you can extract it piecemeal.	0.76981276
So when you finish your work, pack the wound with frankincense, aloe, and costus, and tighten it, and put over it rags soaked in oil and syrup or rose oil and cold water to soothe the hot swelling, then the patient lies on his back, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day, and when it is loosened, wash the area with plenty of water and oil, then treat it with the palm ointment and the basilicon ointment until it heals.	And when you have completed the operation pack the wound with frankincense and aloes and dragon's blood, and bind it up and apply a pad soaked in olive oil and wine or oil of roses and cold water, to reduce the swelling. The patient should lie flat on his back and the bindings should not be undone before the third day; and when they are undone foment the place with plenty of oil and water. Then dress it with Palm ointment and basilicon ointment until it heals.	0.9050323
If an excessive hot swelling and erosion or the like occurs in the wound, such as blood clotting in the bladder and urine being prevented from it, and this is known by the exit of blood with the urine, then insert your finger in the wound and remove that blood, for if it remains, it leads to corruption and putrefaction of the bladder.	If an increasing and cankerous abscess occur in the wound, or anything similar such as clotting of blood within the bladder, with stoppage of the urine (which would be signified by the urine being accompanied by blood) pass your finger into the wound and remove the blood; for if it lies in it it will lead to sepsis and necrosis of the bladder.	0.8607669
Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and address each type with its corresponding treatment until it heals.	Then wash out the wound with vinegar and water and salt, and apply whatever treatment is suitable for the case until it heals.	0.9148921
It is necessary during all treatment times to tie the thighs and bring them together to stabilize the medicines that are placed on the area.	Also at all times during treatment his hips should be bound and kept together so that the medicaments applied to the place may not be disturbed.	0.7741503
If the stone is small and it goes into the urethra and gets stuck in it, and urine is prevented from exiting, then treat it with what I am describing before it reaches the incision, for I have often dispensed with the incision with this treatment, and I have tried it, which is that you take a branched instrument of steel, this is its form:	Now if the calculus be small and be impacted in the opening of the urinary passage, preventing the exit of the urine, treat it with the means I am about to describe before you go on to make your incision, for often I have found this treatment suffice without incision; I have experience of this. You take a drill of the finest steel, of this shape.	0.8355312
Triangular-tipped, sharp, and embedded in a stick.	It should be triangular at the point and sharp, with a wooden handle.	0.5632923
Then you take a thread and tie the penis with it below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.	Then take a thread and with it bind the penis beneath the calculus to prevent the stone from returning to the bladder.	0.90673643
Then you gently insert the forked instrument into the urethra until the fork reaches the stone itself, and you turn the fork with your hand on the stone little by little while you intend to pierce it until you penetrate it from the other side, then the urine will flow immediately.	Then introduce the iron of the drill gently into the meatus until the drill reaches the stone itself, and then very very gently revolve the drill upon the stone with your hand, and try to perforate it, till you pierce it through to the other side. Then the urine will at once be released.	0.8761623
Then you squeeze your hand over what remains of the stone from outside the penis, for it will crumble and come out with the urine, and the patient will recover.	Then, with your hand outside the penis, squeeze the remains of the stone, and they will crumble and be washed out by the urine and the patient will be cured.	0.8932356
If this treatment is not feasible for you due to an obstacle preventing you from doing so, then tie a thread below the stone and another thread above the stone, then cut on the stone in the penis itself between the two ties, then remove it, then untie the tie and clean the clotted blood that has formed in the wound.	But if this treatment is not possible for you on account of some impediment, then tie a thread beneath the stone and another above; then make an incision down upon the stone in the penis itself between the two ligatures, extract it, then undo the ligature and clean away the blood that has clotted in the wound.	0.9230031
It is necessary to tie the thread below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other tie from above so that when the thread is loosened after the removal of the stone, the skin returns to its place and covers the wound.	The purpose of the ligature beneath the stone is lest it return to the bladder; and the purpose of the one above it is that when you loosen the ligature after removing the stone the skin may fall back into place so as to cover the wound.	0.82066464
Therefore, it is advisable for you, if you tie the upper thread, to lift the skin upwards so that it returns when you are finished and covers the wound as we have said.	On this account, when you tie the upper ligature, you will have to raise the skin so that when you have finished operating it may go back and cover the wound as we have said.	0.77685523

chapter-2-subchapter-61.txt
Chapter sixty-one on removing stones for women	CHAPTER SIXTY-ONE. On the extraction of a stone from the female.	0.72295177
Stones rarely form in women.	It is very uncommon for women to have stone.	0.8087654
If one of them develops a stone, its treatment is difficult and prevented for many reasons.	But if it should happen to a woman the treatment is indeed difficult and is hindered by a number of things.	0.6426736
One of them is that the woman may be a virgin.	One is that the woman may be a virgin.	0.9498159
The second is that you will not find a woman who allows herself to be examined by a physician if she is chaste or has close male relatives.	Another is that you will not find a woman who will expose herself to a (male) doctor if she be chaste or married.	0.75698316
The third is that you will not find a woman who is skilled in this craft, especially working with the hand.	A third is that you will not find a woman competent in this art, particularly not in surgery.	0.8424183
The fourth is that the location of the incision for the stone in women is far from the location of the stone, so it requires a deep incision, and in that is danger.	Then a fourth is that the place for cutting upon the stone in a woman is a long way from where the stone lies, so the incision has to be deep, which is dangerous.	0.88160646
If necessity calls for it, then it is best to find a skilled female physician.	If necessity compels you to this kind of case, you should take with you a competent woman doctor.	0.77187353
And they are rarely found. If you cannot find one, then seek a chaste and gentle male physician, or bring a skilled midwife in women's matters, or a woman who has some knowledge of this craft, and have her do all that you instruct her to do, starting with examining the stone.	As these are very uncommon, if you are without one then seek a eunuch doctor as a colleague, or bring a midwife experienced in women's ailments or a woman to whom you may give some instruction in this art. Have her with you and bid her do all that you enjoin; first of all, in searching for the stone.	0.82304406
That is, she should see if the woman is a virgin, then she should insert her finger into her rectum and search for the stone. If she finds it and presses it under her finger, then you should instruct her to make an incision over it.	If she perceive that the woman is a virgin she should pass her finger into the anus and palpate for the stone. If she finds it and keeps her finger on it, then bid her cut down upon it.	0.8444156
If she is not a virgin but is a widow, then instruct the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's vagina and search for the stone, after placing her left hand on the bladder and squeezing it well.	But if the patient be not a virgin bid the midwife pass her finger into the vulva and palpate for the stone, after she has placed her left hand upon the bladder and applied a good pressure.	0.83091503
If she finds it, she should move it from the opening of the bladder downwards as far as she can until she reaches the base of the thigh, then make an incision over it opposite the middle of the vulva at the base of the thigh, from whichever side she can reach it and feel the stone in that area, with her finger not moving from the stone, pressing it underneath.	If she finds the stone she should gradually push it down from the outlet of the bladder as far as she can until it reaches the bottom of the pelvis. Then she should cut down upon it from about the middle of the pudenda near the root of the hip on whichever side she can conveniently feel it; she must keep her finger on the stone, pressing from below.	0.87461287
The incision should be small at first, then insert the probe into that small incision. If she feels the stone, then she should increase the incision to the extent that she knows the stone will come out of it.	The incision should start by being small; then let her introduce a sound into the small incision, and when she finds the stone then she will enlarge the incision until she knows that it is big enough for the exit of the stone.	0.87468946
Know that the types of stones are many, including small and large, smooth and rough, long and round, and branched. Know their types to be guided by that to what you want.	You should know that there are many kinds of calculus: some are large and some are small; smooth and rough; long, rounded, and pronged. Learn to recognize these types and you will have an indication of what to do.	0.801679
If the bleeding overcomes you, sprinkle crushed vitriol on the area and hold it for an hour until the bleeding stops, then return to your work until you remove the stone.	If you are hindered by a haemorrhage, scatter powdered vitriol on the place and keep it there for a time until the haemorrhage has ceased, and then return to your operating until the stone is out.	0.8988726
Make sure you prepare for yourself the instruments that I mentioned for removing stones in men, to help you in your work.	See also that you have ready the instruments mentioned for the extraction of stone from the male, to assist you in operating.	0.82082856
If the bleeding overcomes you and you know from the pulse of the blood that it is from a severed artery, then place a cautery on the area and tighten it with bandages tightly, and leave it and do not return to it, and leave the stone and do not remove it, as the patient may die. Then treat the wound. When the intensity of the bleeding subsides after a few days and the area putrefies, return to your work to remove the stone.	If you are hindered by a haemorrhage and you know, by the spurting of the blood, that it comes from an artery that has been cut, then put styptic powder on the place and bind up tightly with bandages and leave it and do not come back to it; let the stone be and do not extract it, for often that loses the patient; then dress the wound. And after some days, when the acute haemorrhage has subsided and suppuration has set in, return to your operating until you get the stone out.	0.8858638

chapter-2-subchapter-62.txt
Chapter sixty-two on incising the watery vein.	CHAPTER SIXTY-TWO. On opening a watery hernia.	0.73262215
Hydrocele is the collection of moisture in the white membrane that is under the skin of the testicles surrounding the testicle, which is called the scrotum, and it may be in a special membrane prepared for it by nature on one side of the testicle, so that one might think it is another testicle, and it may be between the skin of the testicles and the white membrane that we mentioned, and this only occurs rarely.	A watery hernia is a collection of fluid in the white membrane lying beneath the skin surrounding the testicle, which is called the scrotum. Sometimes it has a capsule of its own which nature has formed alongside the testis so that one would think it another testicle; it may also form between the skin of the scrotum and the white membrane which we mentioned; however, this occurs very rarely.	0.8310759
This hydrocele arises from a weakness that affects the testicles, so this substance flows to it, and it may result from a blow to the testicles, and this moisture is of many colors, either yellowish, or bloody red, or turbid black, or watery white, which is the most common.	This hernia arises from a weakness occurring in the testicles and this matter drains into it; sometimes it happens from a blow upon the testicles. The fluid is of different colours, sometimes yellowish, sometimes blood-red, sometimes like lees, black, and sometimes the fluid is watery-pale; this actually is the commonest.	0.7720934
The signs by which the collection of water is known are that if it is in the white membrane that we mentioned, the swelling will be slightly elongated and round, like the shape of a testicle, and the testicle will not appear because the moisture surrounds it from all sides.	Now these are the signs whereby we know where the fluid is collecting: if it be in the tunica albugnea, as we have said, the tumour will be round and slightly elongated like the shape of an egg. The testis is not apparent since the fluid hems it in all round.	0.7623631
And if the moisture is in a special membrane for it, the swelling will be round on one side of the testicle, and for this reason, one might imagine it is another testicle.	But if the fluid be contained in a capsule of its own the tumour will be round, to one side of the testicle; therefore one imagines that it is another testicle.	0.7580824
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white membrane, it will be perceptible by touch.	If the fluid be situated between the skin of the scrotum and the tunica albugnea it will be obvious to the touch.	0.6655105
And if you want to know the color of the moisture, probe the swelling with the square probe whose picture has been presented, and whatever comes out after the probe, you will judge it by what is inside it.	If you wish to know the colour of the fluid, take a sample from the tumour by means of the four-sided exploring needle which has been figured previously; and by what comes out in the track of the explorer you may know the colour of the contained fluid.	0.7539475
Then you pad the water-filled membrane with wide padding and remove all the water.	Then open up the membrane containing the fluid with a wide perforation and draw off all the fluid.	0.8208965
Then you separate the edges of the incision with hooks and stretch the membrane upwards, and do not touch the containing skin of the testicle, and you cut the membrane however you can cut it, either all at once or piece by piece, especially its thin side, because if you do not complete its cutting, you cannot be sure that the water will not return.	Then with hooks separate the two edges of the incision and draw the membrane upwards but do not touch the skin overlying the testes; then cut away the membrane in whatever way is possible, either as a whole or piecemeal, particularly the side piece; for unless you use the utmost diligence in cutting it away you cannot be certain that the fluid will not come back.	0.88044393
If the testicle protrudes out of its skin during your work, when you have finished cutting the membrane, put it back, then bring together the edges of the skin of the testicle with sutures, then treat it as you would treat other wounds until it heals.	If the testicle should protrude from its covering of skin while you are operating, return it when you have finished cutting the membrane; then bring together the two edges of your incision with a suture. Then dress with the usual dressings for wounds until healed.	0.8183619
If you find that the testicle has been corrupted by another disease, you should tie the vessels that are in the spermatic cord for fear of bleeding, then cut the testicle from the spermatic cord and remove the testicle, then treat it as we have mentioned.	If you find the testicle corrupted by some other disease, you will have to tie off the vessels which are in the suspensor, for fear of haemorrhage. Then cut the testicle from the suspensor and remove it and dress as we said above.	0.9124324
If the collected water is on both sides, know that they are two hydroceles, so cut the other side as you did on the first, and if it is possible for you to perform the operation as one, then do so.	If the accumulation of fluid be on both sides you may know it to be a double hydrocele; so make another incision on the other side as you did for the first. If it is convenient for you to make one operation of it, do so.	0.8643972
Then you wipe the blood and insert wool dipped in oil or rose oil into the incisions, and put other wool dipped in syrup and oil on the outside and spread it over the testicles and the flank, and place folded rags over it, which are the compresses, and tie them from above with the bandage that has six ends, in this way:	Then wipe away the blood and apply to the incisions wool that has been soaked in olive-oil or oil of roses and on that again more wool that has been soaked in wine and oil, and spread that over the testicles and over the hypogastrium; and over that again folded pieces of linen forming pads and bind them down with a bandage having six heads.	0.8486283
Then two pieces of cloth are taken, sewn together, and stuffed with carded wool according to this example.	Two pieces of cloth should be taken and sewn together and packed in between with carded wool to this pattern.	0.77962404
And the ends with which it is tied are made of cotton or moist wool. And they are gathered by tightening in the waistband of the trousers.	The ends by means of which it is attached should be made of cotton or soft wool and should be drawn tight at the waist of the breeches.	0.72975534
And one of the ends is taken on the buttocks to the back. And the second is taken towards the pubis. And the two ends are on the thighs from below. And the two remaining ends are on the groins.	One of the ends you take over the seat toward the back: the second end you take toward the pubes, the two ends round the thighs below, and the remaining two ends over the groin, and the whole is bound up tight with the belt of the breeches.	0.7966361
And this bandage may also be made by cauterization instead of incising with iron.	This rupture may also be treated by cautery instead of surgery.	0.7085345
Which is that you take a fine knife-shaped cautery and incise with it the skin of the testicles while it is hot, as we have described, until the white membrane containing the water is exposed.	This will mean taking a knife-edged cautery and cutting with it the skin of the testicles; it should be hot, as we told you before, and used until the white membrane covering the hydrocele be exposed.	0.7971683
Then take another cautery of this shape: And it resembles the Greek eye,	Then take another cautery of this type, which resembles the Greek letter tau; and with it perforate that membrane.	0.65977705
then you cauterize with it that peritoneum while it is hot until all the moisture comes out,	It should be hot so as to draw out all the humidity.	0.5144835
then you stretch the peritoneum with hooks and peel off the containing layer with the cautery iron and cut it as much as you can until you completely eradicate it and be careful with the testicle, do not touch it with the fire,	Then stretch the membrane with hooks, dissect away the capsule with the cautery and cut it away as best you are able until you have completely removed it. But be careful that the heat do not touch the testicle.	0.7629017
and know that this procedure is safer and further from bleeding and better than the incision procedure,	You should know that this operation is safer, further removed from the danger of haemorrhage, and better, than operation by incision.	0.8064854
if you encounter during the incision or during cauterization a hot swelling or bleeding or something else, then you should treat whatever you encounter of that with the appropriate treatment as mentioned before,	If, while operating either with the knife or the cautery, you are hindered by an inflammatory swelling or haemorrhage or anything else, you should deal with all of them by suitable treatment in accordance with what has been said before.	0.83413976
if the patient is cowardly and does not have patience for this procedure because of its ugliness, then let him use the lancing as I will describe it,	If the patient be timid and will not suffer this operation on account of its unpleasantness, then treat by perforation as I shall now describe.	0.80113095
and if it is confirmed for you by the evidence we presented that the hydrocele is watery, then you should sit the patient on a high chair,	When by the signs we have mentioned you are certain that the hernia is watery, you should seat the patient on a high chair and pierce the tumour in its lower part with a broad scalpel.	0.68673086
then lance the swelling at its bottom with a wide scalpel and make the lancing along the body and let the opening be wide so that all the water flows out,	The perforation should run in the long axis of the body, and it should be an ample opening to let all the fluid run out.	0.66758287
then put cotton on the area and bandage it and leave it to absorb the remaining water, then treat it until the wound heals,	Then put cotton on the place and bind it on and leave it so as to soak up the rest of the fluid; then dress the wound until it heals.	0.8988198
if the exit of the water is difficult during your lancing of it, and that is only because the white membrane obstructs the mouth of the wound and prevents the exit of the water, then you should insert into the wound a goose feather or the instrument with which the water of lovers is extracted, whose image has been presented before, or increase the opening of the wound a little,	But if the fluid fail to flow out when the opening is made, which would be due to the tunica albuginea's obtruding into the opening and preventing the outlet of the fluid, you should then introduce into the wound a goose-quill or an instrument such as is used for ascites, already described; or else the opening should be widened a little.	0.71637046
and know that the water may return and collect after six months or so, so if it collects, lance it in the same manner, and the patient should endure his days.	But you should know that after six months or so the fluid may come back and collect again; when it does so, perforate him in exactly the same manner; so will the patient prolong his life.	0.7704815

chapter-2-subchapter-63.txt
Chapter sixty-three on incising the fleshy vein and its treatment	CHAPTER SIXTY-THREE. On cutting for a fleshy hernia and its treatment.	0.80450803
Know that incising this testicle is one of the dangers that leads to death in most cases, so we recommend leaving it alone and ensuring safety from it.	You should know that cutting for this kind of hernia has an uncertain outcome and in most cases results in death; and therefore I think it better to let it be and to safeguard the patient.	0.7284491
I will mention the procedure for it and the types of swelling, and I say that many swellings may occur in the bodies in which the testicles are located, and this may happen for many reasons.	However, I shall mention the manner of operating for this and all kinds of tumour. Now I say that many tumours arise from the bodies composing the testicles; and this from several causes.	0.7686042
Either from excess sharp humor flowing to the testicles or from a blow.	It may be from an acrid superfluity running down into the testicles, or from a blow.	0.76203465
And the color of the swelling is the same as the color of the body, and it has no fluid, and the swelling is hard.	The colour of the tumour will be like that of the rest of the body and there is no water to it.	0.5732223
Perhaps the swelling is petrified, its color is like pus, and it has no sensation.	The lump will be solid and often will be stony hard, of a dark colour, and without sensation.	0.55837166
It may also be from a thickening and swelling of the arteries, as mentioned before, or from a swelling of the veins.	Sometimes also it arises from a knotting and inflation of the arteries, as has been mentioned, or from an inflation of the veins.	0.8257154
So what is from a swelling of the arteries is known by the dissipation of the swelling if you press it with your fingers, and it should not be touched at all.	The sort arising from a swelling of the arteries may be recognized by a dispersal of the lump when you press upon it with your fingers; this should not be interfered with at all.	0.798651
As for that which is from the swelling of the veins, nothing of it dissipates when pressed with the fingers.	The sort arising from a swelling of the vein will not disperse when you press upon it with your fingers.	0.72187734
This type can be incised, as well as the other flesh, and that is by incising the skin of the scrotum, then extending the testicle upwards and taking it out of the white membrane, and freeing the spermatic cord from the vessels, and tying the vessels, and cutting the spermatic cord after freeing it from every side of the testicle.	It is sometimes possible to cut down on this kind and also on the other fleshy tumours thus: make an incision in the skin of the testicles; then draw the testicle upward and out of the tunica albuginea, and free the suspensor from the vessels and tie the vessels, and cut the suspensor after you have freed it from all round the testicle.	0.79475653
If the testicle has adhered to that growing flesh, then the testicle should be taken out and cut off.	Should it happen that the testicle is adherent to the fleshy growth, you will have to cut away the testicle itself and remove it.	0.81118244
And if the adhesion is between some of the membranes or between the vessels, then all of that adhesion should be freed and cut off in a circular cut.	But should the adhesion have formed somewhere inside the membranes or in the space between the vessels, then you must free the adhesion as a whole and cut it away with a circular incision.	0.856508
If the growth of the flesh is in the place of the adhesion, which is from behind, then all of it should be cut and the testicle taken out as we said.	If the fleshy growth should be at the site of the junction which is behind, you will have to cut the whole thing away and remove the testicle as we have said.	0.9260106
So, when your work is completed, pack the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and syrup, then treat it with other treatments until it heals.	And when your operation is finished, pack the wound with wool moistened with oil of roses and wine; then dress in the usual manner until healed.	0.7614276

chapter-2-subchapter-64.txt
Chapter sixty-four on the treatment of urinary incontinence with dialia.	CHAPTER SIXTY-FOUR. On the treatment of hernia with varix.	0.71943665
The dalia is a twisted, somewhat convoluted swelling, resembling a cluster of grapes, accompanied by relaxation of the testicles and difficulty for the patient in movement, exercise, and walking.	A varix is a twisted tumour resembling a cluster of grapes, with relaxation of the testicles, which makes movement and exercise and walking difficult for the patient.	0.7686963
And in the treatment of this ailment, there are dangers close to what has been mentioned before, but it is necessary to mention the procedure in it as the predecessors did.	The treatment of this condition is of uncertain outcome, akin to those conditions just spoken of. Nevertheless we must describe the operation for this condition as it was performed by the Ancients.	0.614171
Then, make an incision in the middle, a straight incision along the length of the body, and remove the turbid, corrupt humors that have gathered there. Then, treat the wound with the treatment of other wounds that you want to heal over time so that the vessels that nourish one of the testicles fall off, and there is no harm in that.	Then run through them a needle doubly threaded and tie at the spot where the varix begins and tie it again where the varix ends, then cut through the varix in the middle with an incision at right angles to the length of the body and draw out the turbid corrupt humidity that has gathered in it. Then dress the wound with the wound dressings usual where you wish to encourage suppuration, so that the vessels nourishing the one testicle may perish; there is no harm in that.	0.7840421
If the dalia affects all the vessels, it is necessary to remove one of the testicles with the vessels so that the testicle does not lack nourishment because of the cutting of the vessels, and thus wither and become useless.	But if all the vessels are varicose then you will have to remove one testicle with its vessels lest the testicle be deprived of nourishment through cutting into the vessels; for it will wither and be of no use.	0.77966

chapter-2-subchapter-65.txt
Chapter sixty-five on the treatment of intestinal strangury.	CHAPTER SIXTY-FIVE. On the treatment of intestinal hernia.	0.8724461
The occurrence of this hernia is from a tear that happens in the peritoneum extending over the abdomen towards the groins from the soft parts of the abdomen, so the intestine pours from that rupture to one of the two testicles, and this rupture can be either from a tear in the peritoneum or from its extension.	This hernia is due to a split occurring in the membrane stretched from the hypogastrium over the belly in the region of the groin. Through this opening the bowel descends upon one of the testes; this opening is due to the membrane's splitting or stretching.	0.8072613
And these two types occur from many causes, either a blow, a jump, a shout, or lifting a heavy object, and so on.	And these two kinds occur from a number of causes: from a blow or jumping or shouting, or lifting a heavy weight, or a similar cause.	0.86846673
And its sign, if it is from the extension of the peritoneum, is that it occurs little by little over a long period, and it does not happen suddenly, and the swelling will be level towards the depth because the peritoneum squeezes the intestine.	The symptoms of it, when it arises from a stretching of the membrane, are that it is a slow and chronic development and does not happen on a sudden, and the swelling is even and deep down, because the membrane is pressing the bowel.	0.71043825
And its sign, if it is from a tear in the peritoneum, is that from its beginning it causes great pain suddenly, and the swelling will be distinct, appearing under the skin nearby, and that is due to the exit of the intestine and its passage outside the peritoneum.	When it is due to a split in the membrane, the signs will be that it starts with a sudden severe pain, and the lump varies in consistency, appearing close under the skin; that is due to the emergence of the bowel and its passage outside the membrane.	0.77080584
And the omentum might come out with the intestine, so this hernia is called intestinal and omental, and it may be with flatulence.	Sometimes also the omentum comes out with the bowel, and this hernia is called intestinal and omental; sometimes it contains wind.	0.7872219
And excrement might run in the intestine and be trapped there, so with it comes the demise of the patient because it causes difficult pain and rumbling, especially if squeezed.	Sometimes also the excrement comes down with the bowel and gets held up there, and this involves the patient's death, for thence arises an intractable pain and borborygmi, specially when pressed upon.	0.7758473
And the treatment of these types of illness with iron is dangerous, so one should beware of falling into it.	The treatment of the varieties of this disease with the knife is dangerous; so be cautious of rushing at it.	0.76721185
The method of operation is that you order the patient to return the intestine with his hand to inside his cavity, if it is possible to return, then he lies on his back between your hands and raises his legs, then you stretch the skin next to the groin upwards and incise the entire skin of the testicle lengthwise, then you insert hooks into the edges of the incision as much as needed to open the incision with them, and the incision should be as much as the testicle can come out of.	The manner of operating is to bid the patient reduce the bowel back into the belly if it be disposed to return, then lie back before you and raise his legs. Then do you stretch upward the skin adjacent to the groin, and cut the whole length of the skin of the testicles; then attach to the edges of the incision as many hooks as are necessary to open the incision. The incision should be sufficiently large to allow the testicle to be drawn out.	0.9053899
Then you peel the peritoneal layers that are under the skin of the testicle until the hard white peritoneum is exposed from all sides, then insert your index finger next to the testicle between the white peritoneum that is under the skin of the testicle and between the second peritoneum, and release with it the adhesion that is behind the testicle.	Then dissect away the tissues that lie beneath the skin of the scrotum so that the hard tunica albugnea be exposed all round. Then introduce your forefinger in around the testis in the space between the white membrane beneath the skin of the testicle and the second membrane, and with your forefinger free the attachment at the back of the testicle.	0.8502804
Then you bend with the right hand to inside the skin of the testicle, and with this you stretch the white peritoneum upwards with the left hand, and you raise the testicle with the peritoneum towards the incision, and you order the assistant to stretch the testicle upwards, and you release the adhesion that is behind completely, and you search with your finger so that there is nothing of the twisted intestine in the hard white peritoneum, and if you find something of it, push it to the lower abdomen.	Then with your right hand explore within the scrotum and fold back the covering of the testicles, at the same time stretching the tunica albugnea upwards with the left hand, and bring the testis with the membrane up into the opening, and bid your assistant to stretch the testis upwards; and do you fully free it from the posterior attachment. Feel with your finger that there be no part of the intestine that has got twisted within the tough white membrane; and should you find any push it back into the abdomen.	0.87891626
Then you incise below the skin of the testicle an incision from which blood and pus flow, as we described previously.	Then make a counter-incision in the lower part of the skin of the testicles, to let the blood and matter drain away as we bade you before.	0.824878
Then wool dipped in oil is used and placed in the wound, and the bandage that we described is used. And the white peritoneum that we mentioned may be cauterized after cutting it, as a precaution against bleeding, as this often happens.	Then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound, and the bandage that we prescribed (sometimes also the white membrane that we spoke about is cauterized after the incision to forestall haemorrhage, for that usually happens) and let the ligatures be until they fall away spontaneously.	0.7896681
And you leave the bandage until it falls off on its own, and if its falling is delayed, then it should be soaked with hot water and something that makes him sweat should be applied to him until it falls off, then the wound is treated with all other wound treatments until it heals.	If they are slow in coming away, then foment with hot water and apply something to sweat them off. Then dress the wound in the usual manner until it heals.	0.62861764

chapter-2-subchapter-66.txt
Chapter sixty-six on flatulence.	CHAPTER SIXTY-SIX. On flatulent hernia.	0.7229887
This airy adra, I have not seen anyone dare to treat it with iron.	On flatulent hernia. I have not seen anyone pluck up enough courage to attempt the operative treatment of this kind of rupture.	0.5340904
And the ancients mentioned that it should be made as we described in the adra that is with dalia. And that is to tie the vessels gently below after the incision on it, then incise in the middle.	The Ancients indeed said it ought to be done in the same way as hernia with varicocele; namely, to ligate the blood-vessels after cutting down upon them, gently, and lower down.	0.64086115
And treat the swelling with what opens it until the vessels fall off.	Then make an incision in the middle and apply to the tumour such things as will keep it open until the blood-vessels fall away.	0.55933434
And treat the wound as we mentioned until it heals.	And dress the wound in the manner we have already mentioned until it heals.	0.9233737

chapter-2-subchapter-67.txt
Chapter sixty-seven on the hernia that is in the groin.	CHAPTER SIXTY-SEVEN. On the treatment of the rupture that occurs in the groin.	0.7392664
A hernia may occur in the groin, as we have said, and the place swells, and nothing of the intestine descends to the testicles.	Sometimes there occurs a rupture in the groin as we have said, and the part protrudes.	0.55737233
And if it does descend, it is slight and returns at all times.	No portion of the intestine descends into the scrotum; or if anything it will be only a tiny portion and will reduce at any time.	0.40230784
But if time passes, the tear in the peritoneum increases until the intestine and omentum descend into the scrotum.	But if it goes on for a long time the rupture in the membrane increases until the bowel and omentum descend into the scrotum.	0.86712563
This occurs from the extension of the peritoneum that is in the groin, as we have said, and that is that the peritoneum extends, then relaxes, and the place swells and protrudes.	It arises from a stretching of the membrane in the groin, as we said; the membrane stretches and then relaxes and the place swells.	0.82525563
And its treatment is by cauterization, as I have previously described.	Its treatment by the cautery is as I have already described.	0.8537866
It may also be treated with iron in this manner: The patient lies on his back between your hands, then you incise the place of the swollen hernia transversely to the extent of three fingers, then you pad the peritoneal layers that are under the skin until the white peritoneum that follows it is exposed, then you take a probe and place it on the protruding part of the peritoneum and press it into the depth of the abdomen, then you sew the two protruding places on the edge of the probe from the peritoneum and stick one to the other with the stitching.	Sometimes also it is treated with the knife in this manner: With the patient lying back before you, make an incision three fingers wide, transversely across the swelling of the rupture which projects. Then perforate the subcutaneous tissues so as to expose the white membrane that lies under the skin alongside the rupture. Take a probe and place it upon the projecting part of the fascia and push it back into the depths of the abdomen. Then sew together the two swollen portions of membrane over the end of the probe and suture the one to the other.	0.81168514
Then you pull the edge of the probe and do not cut the peritoneum at all, nor touch the testicle, nor anything else, as I have taught you in the treatment of intestinal hernia, then you treat it with the treatment of wounds. So when the threads are cut, you clean them and dress the wound until it heals, for the peritoneum contracts and the protrusion of the hernia does not increase.	Then take out the probe. On no account make the incision into the fascia nor touch the testis nor anything else, as I taught you on the subject of treating the intestinal hernia. Then dress the wound, and when the stitches come apart remove them and bandage the wound again until it is healed over. For the membrane will draw together and the rupture will not come out again.	0.8549439
Cauterization is better in this place because it is closer to safety.	But the cautery is better at this spot, for it is safer.	0.75839496

chapter-2-subchapter-68.txt
Chapter sixty-eight on the relaxation of the scrotum's skin.	CHAPTER SIXTY-EIGHT. On the loosening of the skin of the scrotum.	0.8614896
Often the skin of the testicles relaxes in some people without the flesh inside them relaxing, and their appearance becomes ugly.	In some men there often occurs a loosening of the skin of the scrotum without any loosening of the organs within. This has a horrible appearance.	0.75063753
So it is appropriate for whoever wishes to treat it to put the patient on his back and cut all the skin that has relaxed on the thick skin, then bring the two edges together.	He who desires to treat this condition should make the patient lie on his back; and he should cut away all the loose skin that is over and above the normal. Then he should bring together the two edges of the incision with a suture.	0.74339104
And if you wish, first sew the excess relaxed skin with three or four stitches, and make sure of the stitching, then cut between the stitches, then treat it with the treatment of other wounds until it heals and the threads fall out.	Or, if you prefer, first suture the excess of loose skin together, with three or four stitches, and make the suture firm. Then cut away what is taken up between the stitches. Then dress the wound with the usual dressings till it heals and the stitches come away.	0.87378395

chapter-2-subchapter-69.txt
Chapter sixty-nine on castration.	CHAPTER SIXTY-NINE. On castration.	0.8386811
Castration is forbidden in our religion, and therefore I should not have mentioned it in this book, but I have mentioned it for two reasons: one is that it should be in the physician's knowledge if he is asked about it, and that he should know the treatment of whoever is afflicted by it.	Castration is forbidden in our law and I ought therefore to make no mention of it in my book. But I must speak of it for two reasons. One reason is that it should be part of the doctor's medical knowledge when asked about it, and that he should know how to treat anyone whom it befalls.	0.9053154
And the other reason is that we often need to castrate some animals for our benefit, such as lambs, goats, cats, and the like.	Another reason is that often we need to castrate certain animals for the sake of the benefits that accrue from them, such as rams, he-goats and cats, and such animals.	0.904457
So I say that castration is of two types, either by crushing or by incision and cutting.	So I say that castration can be performed in two ways: either by contusion; or by opening up and cutting away.	0.85876775
The one that is done by crushing, the way to do it is that we sit the animal in hot water until its testicles relax, soften and hang down, then you crush them with your hand until they dissolve and are not discernible to the touch.	The method by contusion is that we make the animal sit in warm water until his testes are relaxed and become soft and pendent; then rub them with your hand until they are so loosened that they are no longer palpable.	0.8618287
As for castration by incision and cutting, it is necessary that you hold the animal and squeeze the skin of its testicles with the left hand, then tie the spermatic cords and make one incision on each testicle so that when the two testicles emerge, you cut them after skinning them and leave nothing of the membranes on them except the thin membrane that is on the vessels.	As to castration by open operation and excision, the animal should be held and pressure put upon the scrotum with the left hand. Then tie the spermatic cord and with one incision cut down upon both testicles so that both are brought up out of the scrotum. After dissecting them away cut them off; do not leave any of the coverings upon them except the thin membrane covering the vessels.	0.8576635
And this type of castration is better than the one that is by crushing because crushing may leave something of the testicles, so the animal desires intercourse.	This manner of castration is better than the contusion method, for contusion often leaves something of the testicles, and the animal desires to couple.	0.79242206
Then treat the wound until it heals.	Then dress the wound until healed.	0.90541637

chapter-2-subchapter-70.txt
Chapter seventy on the treatment of the hermaphrodite.	CHAPTER SEVENTY. On the treatment of the hermaphrodite.	0.9147923
The hermaphrodite occurs in men in two types. One of them is that it appears below the perineum or in the scrotum skin between the testicles, a shape as if it were a woman's vulva with hair.	There are two kinds of male hermaphrodite: one has the appearance as of female pudenda with hair in the region of the perineum; the other has the same in the skin of the scrotum between the testes.	0.8614279
And urine may flow from the one that is in the scrotum skin.	Sometimes also urine is excreted through that which is in the skin of the scrotum.	0.7071662
As for in women, it is of one type. And it is above the vulva on the pubis like the male testicles, absolutely small, protruding outwards, one of them as if it were the male penis, and the two are like the testicles.	There is also one kind among women, in which there is, above the female pudenda, on the pubes, what resembles the male organs. These are small indeed, but protuberant, one being like the penis and the two others like testicles.	0.8279431
And the treatment of the three types, the two types of men and the one type of women, it is necessary to cut off those excess flesh until its trace disappears. Then you treat it with the treatment of all other wounds until it heals.	This is the treatment of all three kinds, that is, two male and one female: the superfluous growths must be cut away so that every trace is destroyed; then the usual treatment for wounds should be applied until they are healed.	0.7799126
As for the second type of men, from which urine comes out, which is in the scrotum skin, there is no action in it, nor any healing from it at all.	As to the second kind, in man, where the opening is in the scrotum and the urine runs out of it, there is no operation for this, and no cure.	0.84912205

chapter-2-subchapter-71.txt
Chapter seventy-one on the excision of the clitoris and the flesh that grows from women's vulvas	CHAPTER SEVENTY-ONE. On cutting the clitoris and fleshy growths in the female genitalia.	0.824823
The clitoris may sometimes grow beyond its natural size until it becomes ugly and unpleasant in appearance. And it may grow large in some women until it spreads like that of men and becomes suitable for intercourse.	The clitoris may grow in size above the order of nature so that it gets a horrible deformed appearance; in some women it becomes erect like the male organ and attains to coitus.	0.8357302
Therefore, you should hold the excess of the clitoris with your hand or with a hook and cut it.	You must grasp the growth with your hand or a hook and cut it off.	0.6881603
And do not cut deeply, especially at the root, lest bleeding occur.	Do not cut too deeply, especially at the root of the growth, lest haemorrhage occur.	0.8627087
Then treat it with the treatment of wounds until it heals.	Then apply the usual dressing for wounds until it is healed.	0.7464535
As for the excess flesh, it is flesh that grows in the opening of the womb until it fills it. And it may protrude outward like a tail, and therefore some of the ancients call this disease 'the tail disease'. Therefore, you should cut it as you cut the clitoris and treat it until it heals.	As to the fleshy growth, that is, flesh growing in the cervix and filling it, and also often protruding like a tail (on which account some of the Ancients called it 'caudate disease'); this too you should cut away as you do for the clitoris, and dress until healed.	0.80057573

chapter-2-subchapter-72.txt
Chapter seventy-two on the treatment of atresia.	CHAPTER SEVENTY-TWO. On the treatment of unperforated female pudenda.	0.65809655
Atresia is when a woman's vulva is not perforated, or the opening is small, and it is either congenital, in which she is born with it, or acquired.	This condition is when a woman's pudenda have no opening or have only a tiny opening; it may be either congenital or acquired.	0.724913
So, the acquired type results from a preceding ailment, and it is either from excess protruding flesh, or a thin or thick membrane, and it is either in the depth of the uterus, or on its sides, or in its upper or lower part, and it prevents intercourse, pregnancy, and childbirth, and sometimes menstruation.	The acquired sort is due to some preceding disease; either to a fleshy growth or to a membrane, thick or thin. It may be in the fundus of the uterus or in its walls or in the upper part or in the lower part; and it prevents intercourse, conception, and delivery; it often also hinders the menses.	0.82198536
Knowing this is by the midwife's inspection, if the blockage is apparent and close, but if it is not apparent, she examines it with her fingers or a probe.	This is recognized by inspection by the midwife, if the obstruction be obvious and low. But if it be not visible she should palpate with her fingers or with a probe.	0.8787779
So, if the blockage is from a thin membrane and it is close to the labia, then immediately perforate it, which is that you place something like padding on the labia, then put both your thumbs from both hands, and the woman is on her back with her legs spread apart, then stretch the labia with force until you perforate the thin membrane and the blockage opens.	And when the obstruction is due to a thin membrane near the labia you should lose no time in breaking it down. This is done by applying some sort of pad to the labia; then put both thumbs upon it. The woman should be upon her back with her legs spread wide apart; then the labia are to be stretched strongly till the thin membrane is ruptured and the obstruction is laid open.	0.7772645
Then take wool, soak it in oil, and place it on the area, and have intercourse with the woman every day so that the area does not rejoin again.	Then take wool soaked in oil and apply to the place, and let the woman engage in coitus every day lest the place close over.	0.84463996
But if the membrane is thick and dense, it should be incised with a wide scalpel, resembling a myrtle leaf.	If the membrane be thick and strong you should incise it with a broad myrtle-leaf scalpel.	0.81951535
And if the obstruction is from protruding flesh, hang it with hooks and cut it, and have with you medications that stop bleeding without stinging, such as acacia, chebulic myrobalan, and frankincense, mixed with egg white.	But if the obstruction be due to a growth you should catch hold of it with two hooks and cut it away. And have at hand remedies for allaying haemorrhage without pain, such as acacia and dragon's blood and olibanum, all mixed with egg-white.	0.6929744
Then use a wide lead tube so that the wound does not heal quickly.	Then use a cannula of lead to prevent the wound healing up too quickly.	0.84573215
Keep it for some days, and use a wick of dry linen, then treat it with the rest of the healing treatment until it is cured.	She should keep it in position for some days and employ a bandage of dry linen. Then treat with the usual healing dressings until it heals.	0.836836
And other fleshy growths may occur in the uterus, so they should be cut in this manner, unless it is a cancerous tumor, for a cancerous tumor that is in the uterus should not be touched with iron at all.	Sometimes other growths of flesh arise in the uterus itself; you should cut away in this manner all except cancerous tumours; for a cancerous tumour arising in the uterus is under no circumstance to be treated with the knife.	0.82437277

chapter-2-subchapter-73.txt
Chapter seventy-three on the treatment of hemorrhoids, warts, and red pimples that appear on women's genitals.	CHAPTER SEVENTY-THREE. On the treatment of haemorrhoids and warts and red pustules arising in the female pudenda.	0.8472214
As for hemorrhoids, it is a swelling of the mouths of the veins until much blood flows from it constantly.	Haemorrhoids are an inflation of the heads of the blood-vessels leading to abundant and constant bleeding.	0.67932224
So when hemorrhoids become chronic, they become warts, and I have mentioned in the classification their types and signs, and we mention here what accepts treatment from them and what does not accept treatment.	When haemorrhoids are chronic they turn into warts. I have already mentioned in their place the kinds of wart and their symptoms. Now here I shall say which kinds permit of treatment and which do not.	0.86647224
So I say that if the hemorrhoids and warts are in the depth of the uterus and have not appeared to the senses, then there is no treatment for them with iron.	I begin by stating that haemorrhoids and warts in the depths of the uterus that are not palpable are not able to be treated operatively.	0.69842654
So it is necessary that the woman enter a cold room then stretch the warts with tweezers or with a rough cloth and cut them from their roots.	So you should get the woman into a cool place and then draw on the warts with forceps or catch hold with pieces of rough cloth, and cut them away from the roots.	0.84841734
Then sprinkle on it, when the blood flows, one of the styptics that stop the blood without cauterization, such as acacia, dragon's blood, frankincense, and the like.	Then if that cause a flow of blood sprinkle with one or other of the powders that stop bleeding but are not corrosive, such as acacia or dragon's blood or olibanum or the like.	0.748683
Then raise her legs to the wall for an hour then hang them in cold water.	Then raise her legs up against the wall for a while and then bring them down into cold water.	0.8957302
Then if the bleeding continues, make her sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate peels, gallnuts, and the like.	And if the haemorrhage persist for a long time make her sit in an infusion of sumac and pomegranate rind and oak-galls and the like.	0.8257201
Then take barley flour and knead it with honey and vinegar and apply a bandage with it on her back.	Then take barley flour and beat it up with honey and vinegar, and apply to the back a plaster made of this.	0.9320259
Then if the bleeding stops, and if not, then adhere to cupping the back and the breasts without scarification.	And if the bleeding cease, good; but if not, apply to the loins and breasts cupping-vessels without scarifying.	0.7607411
Then take wool and immerse it in purslane juice or plantain juice or blackberry branch juice with gallnut drink and apply it to the area.	Then take wool and dip it in the juice of red cynomorium or plantain or wild eglantine, together with syrup of oak galls, and apply to the place.	0.784783
Then when the swelling subsides, treat the area with ointment until it heals.	And when the swelling has subsided treat the place with ointment until it heals.	0.8967183
As for the red pustule, it resembles the heads of snakes, rough in appearance.	Now red pustules resemble the heads of thyme, and are of rough appearance.	0.7407974
So it is necessary to cut what appears of it according to what I mentioned about the warts exactly and treat it until it heals.	All that appears on the surface should be cut away in the manner mentioned for treating warts; and dress the wounds until healed.	0.6901966

chapter-2-subchapter-74.txt
Chapter seventy-four on slow ripening of the abscess that occurs in the uterus	CHAPTER SEVENTY-FOUR. On the perforation of eruptions occurring in the uterus.	0.76887614
Many types of tumors may occur in the uterus, such as cancer, petrified tumors, ulcers, abscesses, corroding sores, fistulas, hemorrhoids, fissures, warts, and hot tumors, and all these diseases, their types, and their signs have been mentioned in the classification, so it is appropriate that we mention in this article the hot tumor that occurs in the uterus, if it is among the tumors that collect matter, how its opening with iron instruments should be.	From time to time there occur in the womb various kinds of tumour, such as cancer and the stony tumour and ulcer and abscess and gangrene and fistulae and varicosities and cracks and warts and inflamed tumours; all these diseases I have mentioned, with their varieties and their symptoms, in the appropriate section. But now in this treatise we must mention an inflamed tumour of the kind where there is a collection of pus, and the manner of its opening with the knife.	0.79132605
It is appropriate, if you want to use this instrument, that you estimate the depth of the woman's uterus with a probe, lest what enters from the instrument be more than the depth of the uterus and harm the patient, and if the instrument is longer than the depth, it is appropriate that supports be placed on the lip of the cervix to prevent the entire instrument from entering the depth of the uterus, and it is appropriate that the screw that runs in the instrument be on the upper side while you hold the instrument and the servant turns the screw until the cervix opens.	When you are going to use this instrument, you should measure with a probe the depth of the womb so that the instrument be not introduced beyond this measure lest the patient be harmed; if the instrument be longer, pads should be put over the rim of the cervix to prevent the passage of its whole length. You must put the screw that runs in the instrument, in from the top and hold the instrument while your assistant turns the screw until the entrance of the uterus is opened.	0.88268787
The uterus and the wound may also be washed by injecting with water and honey, then with water in which licorice root or long birthwort has been boiled, then return to the ointment.	Sometimes also both the wound and the uterus are washed out with a douche of honey and water, then of a decoction of liquorice root or long aristolochy; then go back to the ointment.	0.7855319
If the abscess is hidden inside the uterus, it is appropriate to refrain from treating it with iron, rather it should be treated with what we mentioned in the classification.	But if the lesion be hidden in the depths of the womb then you will have to abstain from operative treatment but carry out treatment as spoken of in its place.	0.6704464

chapter-2-subchapter-75.txt
Chapter seventy-fifth in teaching midwives how to treat living fetuses if they come out in an unnatural form.	CHAPTER SEVENTY-FIVE. On the training of midwives in how to treat living foetuses when not brought forth in the natural manner.	0.8561455
The midwife should first know the form of a natural birth, and its signs are: if you see the woman pushing downwards and longing to smell the air, and her labor pains become easier for her, and the exit of the fetus is quick, then know that this birth will be in the natural form, and its exit will be headfirst, and the placenta with it or hanging from its umbilical cord.	To begin with, the midwife must know the manner of normal labour. Among the signs of it are these. If you see the woman strain her abdomen and desire to breathe more air, and the pangs come easily to her and she hastens to deliver the child, by this you may know that the labour will follow a natural course and that the presentation will be vertex with the afterbirth, either together with the child or hanging by the umbilical cord.	0.8465899
So if you see these signs, it is appropriate to press her abdomen so that the fetus comes out quickly, because if it descends headfirst, the placenta descends with it and she cleanses well from those excesses.	And when you observe these signs it will be necessary to put pressure upon the abdomen to bring forth the foetus quickly. For when it presents the vertex the afterbirth comes down with it and she is thoroughly cleansed of those superfluities.	0.7923167
And other than this birth, it is unnatural and undesirable because the fetus may come out on its feet, or its hands may come out before its head and feet, or one hand or one foot may come out, or its head and hand may come out, or it may come out folded, and perhaps it turns on its back, and similar undesirable forms.	But a delivery that is contrary to this is unnatural and wrong. Sometimes the infant is delivered by its feet; or by its hands before either head or feet; or a single hand or foot; or the head comes out together with a foot. Or it comes out all twisted, often with the nape of the neck first; or in other wrong positions.	0.7783786
So it is appropriate for the midwife to be skillful and gentle in all these things and to beware of slips and errors, and I am explaining each form of them and the proper technique for it so that you may be guided by that and understand it.	So the midwife must have wisdom and dexterity and be skilled in all these cases and beware of failures and mistakes. I shall explain the technique in these modes of delivery so that she may be instructed and may be acquainted with them all.	0.8570323
If the fetus comes out headfirst, the natural exit, and that is difficult for the woman, and labor is difficult for her, and you see that her strength has weakened, then sit her on a chair and order women to hold her, and apply a poultice to her uterus with cooked fenugreek and moist ointments.	When the foetus comes out by the vertex in the normal manner and yet the delivery is with great difficulty for the woman and you see that her strength is getting exhausted, then make her sit on a seat and have her held firmly, and foment her womb in a decoction of fenugreek and in bland oils.	0.82400286
Then the midwife inserts a small lancet between her fingers and cuts the placenta with it or cuts it with her fingernail until the moisture in it flows out, and presses the woman's abdomen until the fetus descends.	Then the midwife should take between two fingers a little scalpel and make an incision in the foetal membrane or open it with the finger nail, to allow the contained waters to flow out; and put pressure upon the woman's abdomen until the foetus comes down.	0.8177771
If it does not descend, then it is appropriate to inject the woman with fenugreek mucilage with oil of euphorbia, then after the injection, order her to push and make her sneeze with hellebore and hold her mouth and nose, for the fetus will come out immediately.	But if it will not come down then the woman should have an enema of mucilage of fenugreek with oil of sesame. Then bid her bear down after the enema, and with ptarmica stimulate her to sneeze; and close her mouth and nose for a while and the foetus will quickly come out.	0.765216
If the fetus's hand comes out first, it is appropriate to push them back gently little by little, if they do not go in, then place the woman on a platform and raise her legs upwards, then shake the platform on the ground and the woman holds on so that she does not fall when shaking, if the hands do not go in and the fetus dies, then cut them off and pull the rest of the fetus or tie its hands with a cloth and pull them moderately, for it will come out. Exit of the fetus on its feet.	If the hands of the foetus present, you should slowly and gently push them back; and if they will not go back then place the woman upon a seat, have her feet raised and meanwhile shake the seat; but the woman should be held lest the shaking cause her to fall off. But if the two hands will not go back and the foetus is dead cut them off and draw out the remains. Or tie tapes to the hands and pull on them evenly and it will come out.	0.84090567
Exit of the fetus on its feet. If the fetus comes out on its feet, it is appropriate to push them upwards, then turn the fetus little by little until you straighten it, then take one of its legs and extend it little by little, and if they come out to the thighs, then order her to push and make her sneeze with hellebore, for it will come out.	Foot presentation: when the foetus presents feet first you should raise them both; then you should very gently turn the foetus so as to straighten it. Then take one of its feet and stretch it gently. When they come down as far as the hips, bid her bear down, make her sneeze with ptarmica, and it will come out.	0.8137466
If it does not come out as we described, then return the fetus little by little until you put it in the natural form, then it will come out smoothly.	But if it will not come out with these means we have described, you should return the foetus gently until you have placed it in the natural position; then it will come out easily.	0.78154355
If it resists with all that we described, then take marshmallow mucilage, fenugreek mucilage, oil of euphorbia, and dissolved gum, and grind all of them in a mortar well, then anoint with it the woman's vulva and lower abdomen, then sit her in lukewarm water until it reaches the thighs.	But if it defies all that we have described, take mucilage of marsh mallow and fenugreek and oil of sesame and dissolved gum, and pound them all well together in the mortar and anoint the woman's pudenda and lower abdomen; then make her sit down in warm water reaching to the costal margin.	0.8596871
So if you see that her lower part has softened, then make for her a suppository of myrrh and let her bear it, and if she holds the suppository for an hour, then sit her on the chair, then make her sneeze and close her mouth and nose, and gently press her lower abdomen, for the fetus will come out immediately. Exit of the fetus on its knees and hands.	And when you see the lower parts are softened, make a suppository of myrrh and let her introduce it; and when she has had the suppository in for a while make her sneeze, stopping her nose and mouth; and press gently upon the abdomen; then will the foetus immediately emerge.	0.81822205
Exit of the fetus on its knees and hands. If it comes out in this manner, strive to insert its hands little by little, then the woman lies on her back and hangs her hips downwards while lying on a bed and clasps her hands, then press above her abdomen little by little, then remove what is under her legs from the pillows until her lower part is elevated, if the fetus does not come out, then take both of her legs and move them vigorously, then press above the thighs little by little until the fetus ascends upwards, then the midwife inserts her hand and straightens the fetus little by little and orders the woman to push until the fetus comes out. Exit of the fetus transversely, hanging one of its hands. Strive to return its hand, if you are unable to return it, then make the woman stand and make her walk, if she is unable to walk, then let her lie on her bed and shake her legs vigorously, then use the poultice that I described from the mucilages, if labor pains take her, then sit her on a chair, then work on returning the hand and straightening the fetus to the natural form, and make the woman sneeze and order her to push until it comes out.	Presentation of the foetus by knees and hands : when it comes out after this manner you should seek to introduce the hands slowly; then let the woman lie back on her shoulders with her feet hanging down, reclining on a couch with her hands clasped together; then very gently put pressure upon the abdomen; then take away the pillows from under her feet until her lower parts are vertical ; and if the foetus does not come out then, take both her feet and shake them violently ; then press upon her costal margin until the foetus ascends ; then let the midwife insert her hand and put the foetus in the right position, very gently, and bid the woman bear down, until the infant is born. Presentation by the side with one hand hanging down: attempt to manuvre the hand back again; but if you cannot reduce it then make the woman stand up and walk. But if she cannot walk then have her lie on a couch, and agitate her feet violently. Then employ the ointment which I described among the mucilages.	0.921725
Exit of the fetus on its back, extending its hands, and its face is towards its mother's back.	Presentation on the back, with hands outstretched and face towards the mother's back: the midwife should take the infant's hand and then turn him very slowly, and gently rectify his position.	0.5643801
It is appropriate for the midwife to hold the fetus's hand, then turn it little by little and straighten it gently, and when it is straightened, apply to her vulva what we described of ointment and mucilages, then order her to move little by little, and if she does that, then sit her on the chair and order her to lean to the right side, then order her to push and make her sneeze with hellebore, for it will come out. Exit of the fetus upright on its side.	Then when he is in the correct position apply to the maternal passage the oil and mucilage prescribed. Then bid the woman move gently and when she has done so make her sit down upon a seat and bid her lean over to her right side; then bid her bear down, and with ptarmica make her sneeze ; then the foetus will come forth. The foetus presenting laterally, doubled up : when it presents at the os in this manner together with the membrane, open the membrane with your finger nail and let out the waters.	0.80275095
Exit of the fetus upright on its side. If it descends to the cervix in this manner with the placenta, then cut the placenta with your fingernail until it is emptied of moisture, and if it is attached to the fetus's face and neck, cut it from the umbilical cord so that it does not choke and die, then push the fetus inwards until you put it as it should be, and order the woman to push several times, for it will come out easily.	The foetus presenting laterally, doubled up : when it presents at the os in this manner together with the membrane, open the membrane with your finger nail and let out the waters. And if it adhere over the infant's face and neck, cut it away from the umbilicus lest he be strangled and die. Then push the foetus back till it is in the proper position, and bid the woman bear down a few times until the foetus comes forth.	0.84585357
Exit of twins or many fetuses. Know that twins are often born, and three or four may be born and live, except that is rare, as for five, it is something outside of nature, they do not live at all.	The birth of twin or multiple foetuses: you should know that it is a common occurrence for twins to be born alive, and sometimes three or four infants, but this is a rarity; while five after this manner is altogether unnatural and they never live.	0.8330817
And one placenta surrounds them, even if they are many, and they are separated by a dividing membrane between them connected to the umbilical cord of each one of them.	Although they may be more than one, they are enveloped in a single membrane but separated one from the other by a dividing membrane joined to the umbilicus of each one.	0.7541411
And they may come out as a single fetus comes out, a natural, easy exit, and they may come out in an undesirable exit as we described, so if some of them have difficulty at birth and become in what we mentioned of unnatural forms, then treat it as we described.	And when they are born they may come in the natural easy manner of a single foetus; or by any abnormal presentation such as we have described. And if one of them be born with difficulty, presenting in some unnatural manner as described, the treatment is also as described.	0.87137306
And let the midwife be gentle and do what she does with gentleness and patience, and use strategies for each form with what is available to her of techniques leading to safety.	Let the midwife be delicate and do whatever she does gently and calmly, adopting in each case whatever technique it demands that will conduce to a safe result.	0.7677903
Mention of what is conceived in the uterus of fetuses and then they are miscarried.	A note on the foetuses that may be formed in the womb and abort.	0.6844804
One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten may be conceived in the uterus, and it has been confirmed to me that a woman miscarried seven and another fifteen, all of them conceived, that is by the decree of the Mighty, the Knowing.	Sometimes in the womb there may form one or two or three or four or five or six or seven or more than ten. And I can vouch that one woman had an abortion of seven foetuses and another woman of fifteen, all of them formed. This is by the decree of the Almighty, the Wise.	0.8522726
So all of this should be in the knowledge of the midwife, perhaps something like that will happen to her one day, so she addresses it as appropriate.	And all this should be part of the midwife's knowledge, for one day she may meet such a case and she must deal with it in the proper way.	0.79066813

chapter-2-subchapter-76.txt
Chapter seventy-six on the extraction of the dead fetus.	CHAPTER SEVENTY-SIX. On the extraction of the dead foetus.	0.8757469
If you have treated the dead fetus with the treatment I mentioned in the division, and it did not come out, and you are forced to work by hand, then you should look. If the woman is of sound strength and has none of the symptoms that are feared to cause her harm, then the woman should lie down on a bed on her back, with her head tilted downwards and her legs raised, and a servant should hold her from both sides, or she should be tied to the bed so that her body is not pulled when the fetus is extended.	When you have dealt with a dead foetus by those methods mentioned in their chapter, and it does not come out, and you are compelled to operate, you should examine to see if the woman be in a healthy state and not having any disease on account of which you might entertain a fear for her life. The woman should lie on her back on a couch, her head tilted back and her legs raised. An assistant on either side should hold her down firmly or she should be bound down to the couch, lest the body be drawn out of position in extracting the foetus.	0.87297285
Then moisten the opening of her womb with moist oils, along with the saliva of marshmallow, fenugreek, and flaxseed. Then the midwife should anoint her hand with these oils and salivas, then insert it gently into the womb, then search for a place to insert the hooks into the fetus.	Then the opening should be anointed with moistening oils and with mucilage of marsh mallow and fenugreek and with linseed. Then the midwife should anoint her hand with these oils and mucilages and gently introduce it into the vagina and with it locate a place in the foetus to fix hooks in.	0.8893129
And the appropriate places for that, look, if the fetus is coming down head first, then insert the hooks into its eyes, or in the back of its head, or in its mouth, or in its jaw, or under its chin, or its collarbone, or in the places near the ribs, or under the cartilage.	The suitable places for that: consider, and if the foetus present the vertex then she should fix the hooks in its eyes or in the neck or in the mouth or palate or beneath the chin, or the collarbone, or about the ribs, or beneath the false ribs.	0.85075974
But if it is coming down feet first, then in the pubis and middle ribs.	But if it present the feet let the hooks be fixed in the pubic region or middle ribs.	0.7177307
If a hand comes out before anything else and cannot be pushed back because of its compression, then you should wrap a cloth around it and then pull it until, when it all comes out, you cut it either at the wrist joint or at the elbow, and so you should do with the other hand and with the legs.	If the hand should come out before any other part and it is impossible to reduce it on account of the pressure, then a tape should be wound round it and she should pull on it until it is all out; then it should be cut off at either the carpal or the elbow joint. In the same manner should the other hand be dealt with, and the feet.	0.8918502
If the head of the fetus is large and there is pressure on it during exit, or if there is fluid accumulated in its head, then you should insert a pointed scalpel between your fingers and incise the head so that the fluid comes out, or perforate it with the instrument called the perforator, whose image comes with the images of all the instruments in the chapter after this. And so you do if the fetus is naturally large-headed, then you should incise the skull or crush it with the perforator as we said, then remove the bones with forceps.	If the foetal head be large and it is tightly squeezed in exit, or if there be a collection of fluid in the head, you should introduce between your fingers a spike-shaped scalpel and split the head to let the water out; or you should smash it with the instrument called cephalotribe which will be illustrated, together with figures of the other instruments, in the chapter following. In the same manner you act if the foetus have a naturally large head: either you should cut the skull open or smash it with the cephalotribe as we said; then you should draw out the bones with forceps.	0.8786489
If the head comes out and is compressed at the collarbone, then incise it until the moisture in the chest pours out, for then the chest will contract. If the chest does not contract and it is not possible to exit, then cut it in pieces as much as you can.	If the head comes out and the foetus is held up at the collar bones, an incision should be made to let out the humidity in the thorax, for the thorax will then shrink. But if the thorax does not shrink and is not disposed to emerge then you should cut off pieces in any manner possible.	0.8376535
If the lower abdomen is swollen or has a swelling, then you should puncture it so that the moisture drains from it.	If the lower belly be swollen or dropsical then you should make an opening to draw out all the fluid.	0.82147855
If the fetus is on its feet, then pulling it is easy and aligning it to the opening of the womb is simple.	If the foetus present the feet then the extraction will be easy and it will be a simple matter to guide it to the maternal opening.	0.804785
If it is compressed at the abdomen or chest, then you should pull it with a cloth that you have wrapped around your hand and incise the abdomen or chest until what is in them drains.	If it be stuck about the abdomen or thorax then pull on it with a cloth wound around your hand and cut an opening in the abdomen or thorax to allow the contents to flow out.	0.83251405
If all the other limbs have been extracted and the head has receded and is stuck, then the midwife should insert her left hand. If the opening of the womb is open, then she should insert her hand into the cervix and search for the head and pull it with her fingers to the opening of the womb, then insert a hook or two hooks into it and pull it with them.	If all the limbs are removed but the head is turned backwards and is jammed, the midwife should introduce her left hand and, if the mouth of the womb is open, should put the hand into the cervix of the womb and investigate the head and, with her fingers, draw it down toward the opening and fix a hook or two in it, and extract it with these.	0.8983419
If the opening of the womb has closed due to a hot swelling that has occurred, then it should not be forced, but rather the pouring of moist, fatty things should be used, and bandages should be applied, and she should sit in water that softens and moistens.	If it should be that the mouth of the womb is closed on account of an abscess, then one must not be rough with it but should use in this case instillations of moistening greasy substances; plasters also should be applied; and the woman should sit in a bath of softening and moistening waters.	0.7668487
But if the fetus is on its side, then if it can be aligned, use what we mentioned for the live fetus. If this is not possible, then cut it into pieces and remove it.	If the foetus present laterally and it is possible to reposition it, there should be applied the things mentioned for a living child. But if this be not possible then it should be cut away piecemeal and extracted.	0.8193174
And you should not leave any of the placenta inside at all.	It is necessary that not a scrap of the afterbirth be left behind in the womb.	0.616472
When you have finished your treatment, use the treatment we mentioned for hot swellings that occur in the wombs.	When you have completed your treatment then also apply those treatments we have mentioned for abscesses occurring in the uterus.	0.84365255
If bleeding occurs, then she should descend into astringent water and use the rest of the treatment.	If haemorrhage occurs, the woman should be put into styptic fluids and the usual treatment applied.	0.6900527

chapter-2-subchapter-77.txt
Chapter seventy-seven: images of the instruments needed to extract the fetus.	CHAPTER SEVENTY-SEVEN. On the forms of instruments necessary for extracting the foetus.	0.8136218
Image of a spiral used to open the mouth of the uterus:	Speculum for opening the entrance of the womb.	0.5776957
This binder, which is used to straighten books, similarly has two screws at the ends of the two pieces of wood, except that this screw should be finer than the binder, and should be made of either ebony or boxwood.	This is the type of instrument with which books are pressed. It has two screws at either end of two pieces of wood; but this instrument should be more slender than a book press, and should be made of ebony or boxwood.	0.8851616
And the width of each piece of wood should be the thickness of two fingers, and their edge about a finger, and their length a span and a half. And in the middle of the two pieces of wood are two projections of the same type of wood that have been fastened in them, their length being half a span or a little more, and their width about two fingers or a little more.	The width of each piece of wood should be about two fingers' breadth and the thickness about one, and the length a span and a half; and in the middle of both pieces of wood, firmly attached, should be two projections made of the same kind of wood, each half a span long or a little more, and two fingers wide or a little more.	0.93345284
And these two projections are the ones that enter the cervix to open it when you turn the two screws; a picture of another instrument for the same purpose, finer and lighter:	It is these two projections that are to be introduced into the vagina so that it is thereby opened when you turn the screws. Another instrument, for the same purpose, but smaller and lighter.	0.7980455
It is made of ebony or boxwood in the shape of hooks, except that it has two projections at its end, as you see. The length of each projection is about a span, and their width is two fingers.	It is made of ebony or boxwood in the shape of forceps, but at the end it has two projections as you can see; and the length of each is about a span and the breadth two fingers.	0.9486482
If you want to open the cervix with it, sit the woman on a bed with her legs dangling and spread apart. Then insert these two projections folded together into the opening of the cervix while you hold the end of the instrument below between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument as you do with hooks, equally according to how much you want to open the cervix, until the midwife does what she wants.	When you wish to open the womb with this, make the woman sit on a couch with her legs hanging down, parted; then introduce the two projections pressed together into the orifice of the womb while you hold the end of the instrument lower down between her thighs; then open your hand in the same way as you would do with forceps, to the extent to which you wish to open the womb, so as to allow the midwife to do what she desires.	0.94737995
Image of another spiral mentioned by the ancients:	Another type of screw speculum mentioned by the Ancients.	0.66792065
Picture of the instrument with which the fetus is pushed:	Figure of the thruster for thrusting the foetus.	0.60746735
Picture of the perforator with which the head of the fetus is perforated:	Figure of the cephalotribe for crushing the foetal head.	0.6147735
It resembles scissors, it has teeth at the end as you see.	It resembles scissors with toothed jaws, as you see.	0.82064366
And it may be made rectangular like hooks in this form as you see, it has teeth like the teeth of a saw, you cut and file with it.	Sometimes it is made long like forceps, as you see in this illustration, with teeth like the teeth of a saw; and you may either cut or crush with it.	0.6849579
Picture of a cannon also:	Figure of another thruster.	0.48419905
Picture of a fishing hook:	Figure of a hook.	0.5960706
This hook should have some thickness so that it does not break when the fetus is pulled with it.	This is a hook which should be rather thick so as not to break when extracting the foetus.	0.8376976
Picture of a hook with two barbs:	Figure of a doubleheaded hook.	0.7391366
Picture of two wide scalpels for cutting the fetus:	Figure of two broad scalpels for cutting up the foetus.	0.86358047
All these instruments, the more numerous their types and the more prepared they are by the craftsman, the faster his work and the higher his status among people.	The more types of these instruments the practitioner has ready by him, the more rapidly he operates, and the greater his reputation among men.	0.8341519
So do not disdain to have any instrument prepared. For there will inevitably be a need for it.	So do not neglect to have ready by you a single one of these instruments, for you will certainly need it.	0.82923496

chapter-2-subchapter-78.txt
Chapter seventy-eight on expelling the placenta	CHAPTER SEVENTY-EIGHT. On extracting the afterbirth.	0.7389714
If it remains after this treatment and does not come out, instruct the midwife to dip her left hand in rose oil or marshmallow extract, then insert it into the vagina and search for the placenta. If she finds it, she should grasp it and pull it gently, little by little, until it comes out.	But if, after this treatment, it still remains and does not come out, then tell the midwife to dip her hand in oil of sesame or mucilage of marshmallow and introduce it into the vulva and search for the afterbirth, and when she has found it, to take hold of it and very gently draw it until she bring it out.	0.8580401
If it is adhered deep in the uterus, insert the hand as we described until you find the placenta. Then pull it gently, little by little, taking care lest the uterus prolapses with strong pulling. Rather, it should be moved gently to the sides, right and left, then increase the pulling force; it will then respond and detach from the adhesion.	But if it be adherent to the depths of the uterus, then let her pass her hand in as we described until she find the afterbirth; then let her draw very slowly and gently lest by violent pulling she cause a prolapse; and she should slowly move it from side to side, left and right; then let her increase the traction, for then it gives way to the pull and is freed from its adhesions.	0.8365841
If the cervix is closed, we have described the treatment with sneezing and the treatment with the pot and herbs.	If the uterine opening be narrowed, we have earlier mentioned the treatment by induced sneezing and that of the pot and herbs.	0.84211135
Picture of the instrument with which a woman is fumigated in case of retention of menses, placenta, and the like:	The form of instrument for suffumigating a woman for retention of the menses and of the afterbirth and the like.	0.7126874
It is made of lead, resembling a funnel. Or it is made of copper.	It is made of lead, resembling a funnel, or it may be made of bronze.	0.9253061
The thin end is placed in the vagina. And the wide end over the fire. And the incense is placed on the coals.	Its narrow extremity is introduced into the pudenda and the wide end is put over the fire, and the suffumigation is produced on the hot coals.	0.6844772
You hold it until that incense is gone. And you replace it with another.	Keep it there until all the fumes are gone, and repeat once.	0.61049473

chapter-2-subchapter-79.txt
Chapter seventy-nine on the treatment of unperforated hemorrhoids.	CHAPTER SEVENTY-NINE. On imperforate anus.	0.6385561
Many boys may be born with their anuses not perforated, having been blocked by a thin membrane. It is necessary for the midwife to perforate that membrane with her finger. Otherwise, she should open it with a sharp scalpel, being careful not to touch the muscle.	Infants are quite often born with the anus imperforate, closed by a fine membrane; then the midwife should perforate the membrane with her finger or pierce it with a sharp scalpel, being careful not to touch the muscle.	0.8474369
Then she should put on it cotton dipped in wine and oil. Then she should treat it with ointments until it heals.	Then wool dipped in oil and wine should be applied, and treat it with ointments until healed.	0.8896871
If you fear that it will close up, place a lead tube in the opening for many days and remove it when the child needs to defecate.	If you are afraid it may close up, put into the opening a leaden tube for many days, which will be removed when the child wants to evacuate the bowel.	0.9167473
Blockage of the anus may also occur from the healing of a wound or a swelling. It is necessary to incise that healed area then treat it with what we mentioned of treatment and lead.	Sometimes also the anus is closed by the scarring of a wound or an abscess; then the scarring should be incised, and then dressed by those methods we have mentioned, including the leaden tube.	0.71190774

chapter-2-subchapter-80.txt
Chapter eighty on the treatment of fistulas that occur in the lower part (of the body).	CHAPTER EIGHTY. On the treatment of fistulae occurring in the lower parts.	0.82622683
Fistulas that occur in the lower part of the body are a thickening and hardening that occurs near the anus from the outside or in the perineum from one of the sides, and the fistula may be single or multiple.	Fistulae in the lower parts are a knotting and thickening of the tissues occurring externally near the anus or in the perineum to one side. A fistula may be single or multiple.	0.9139601
If this thickening becomes chronic, it opens and a watery white fluid or thin pus flows from it, and some of these fistulas may penetrate to the anus and to the intestine, and some may not be penetrating.	When a thickening of this kind has become chronic it opens and there flows out a white watery humidity or thin pus. These fistulae may be perforating into the rectum or bowel, or non-perforating.	0.8464661
The penetrating ones can be recognized by the feces and gas that come out of them when the patient defecates, and sometimes worms come out of them.	The former may be known by faeces or flatus coming out of them when the patient opens the bowel. Often also worms come out of them.	0.70789117
And some of these fistulas, if they are in the perineum, may penetrate to the bladder and to the urethra, and some of them may penetrate to the hip joint and to the coccyx.	Sometimes also there are fistulae occurring in the perineum which penetrate to the urinary bladder and to the urethra; and some also penetrate to the hip-joint and to the coccyx.	0.8009487
And what distinguishes a fistula penetrating to the anus from a non-penetrating one is that you insert your index finger into the anus and insert a thin probe into the fistula, made of copper or iron if the fistula is not curved. If it is curved, then insert a thin lead probe or a horsehair into it until you feel the probe or the hair in your finger.	A fistula penetrating to the anus may also be distinguished from one not so penetrating by introducing the finger into the anus and a fine probe into the fistula, made of either bronze or iron, if there be no bend in the course of the fistula. But if the course of the fistula be tortuous, then introduce a thin leaden probe or a horse-hair, until you feel the probe or horse-hair come on to your finger.	0.9133791
If you do not feel it at all, and nothing of feces, gas, or worms comes out of the hole, as we have said, then know that it is not penetrating, so proceed with the treatment.	But if you do not feel it at all and if no faeces nor flatus nor worm come out of the opening, as we said, you may know it is not perforating; so hurry on with treatment.	0.8248577
And if the fistula penetrates to the bladder or to the urethra, the evidence for this is the exit of urine from it and its resistance to healing with medicines.	When the fistula penetrates to the bladder or the urinary passages it is signified by the passage of urine and by the fact that medical remedies cannot cure it.	0.74534535
And if it penetrates to the hip joint or to the coccyx, the sign of this is the arrival of the probe there, if there is no curvature to the bone, and the presence of pain in that area, and the constant discharge of pus from it, and that no treatment is effective on it, and it does not heal with ointment.	But if it penetrate to the hip-joint or coccyx, this will be signified by the probe's passing right through to there if it be a straight passage to the bone; and by the pain felt in that part; and by the chronic purulent discharge; and the fact that medical treatment does no good and ointment does not heal it.	0.8073528
All these penetrating fistulas are incurable, and their treatment is a futile effort for those ignorant doctors who attempt to treat them.	There is in these perforating sinuses no cure whatever; and their treatment is labour in vain for all the ignorant doctors who pretend that they understand them.	0.83224714
As for those that are not penetrating and not chronic, there is hope for their healing with iron, as I will describe and as I have experienced.	But there is hope in operative treatment for those that are not perforating and chronic, as I know from experience and shall now describe.	0.6891061
And they have said that it heals in some people rarely.	Yet some have said that it may be cured in certain cases, but rarely.	0.62263715
And among the treatments that are hoped to be beneficial is that you heat a thin cautery iron according to the width of the fistula, as mentioned before, and insert it hot into the fistula until it reaches near the anus, then repeat it two or three times until you know that all the excess thickened flesh that resembles the tube of a bird's feather has been burned. Then treat it with wicks soaked in fat until the burned flesh comes out, then treat it with healing ointments. If it heals, then good, otherwise it will never heal with any other treatment.	The treatment from which some relief may be hoped is to heat a fine cautery corresponding to the width of the fistula, as we have said before, and pass this, hot, through the fistula to the anus; then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those compact tags of superfluous flesh, which resemble quills, are burnt away. Then dress with a pad soaked in oil until the burnt tissue comes away. Then treat with healing ointments and, if it heals, well and good. If not, it will never heal with any other treatment.	0.91038704
But if you insert the probe and it does not penetrate to your finger that is in the anus, and there is a thick barrier of flesh or peritoneum between it and the probe, and you see the fistula next to the surface of the skin, then incise the skin from the beginning of the fistula while you pass through the incision with the probe while it is in the fistula until you reach the incision where the tip of the probe ends, and the probe is released and falls out.	If you introduce the probe and it does not come through to your finger in the anus, and there be between your finger and the probe something firm interposing, either tissue or lining, and you see the fistula to be close under the skin, then cut open the skin at the origin of the fistula and continue your incision, with the probe in the fistula, until you come to the place where the tip of the probe has reached and the probe is freed and falls out.	0.8804645
Then clean out the thickened flesh that resembles the tube of a bird's feather, leaving nothing of it, then treat it with healing ointments until it heals.	Then clean out all the solid quill-like pieces of tissue and let none remain. Then treat with healing salve until healed.	0.78554684
If the bleeding overcomes you and prevents you from cutting that flesh, then the best thing you can do and the quickest benefit is to cauterize it with fire or with a strong medicine, because cauterization with fire combines two good things: burning that excess flesh, stopping the bleeding, and drying the moisture. Then treat it with wicks soaked in fat or powdered sulfur with oil until the area suppurates and the burned flesh comes out in the pus.	If the haemorrhage be too much for you and interferes with your operating when cutting away the tissues, then the best and most speedily efficacious thing you can do is to cauterize, either with fire or with caustics. For cauterizing with fire unites two good characteristics, the burning away of those superfluous tissues, and the stanching of the bleeding, as well as the drying-up of humidity. Then treat with a dressing soaked in butter, or sulphur pounded with oil, until the place putrefies and the burnt tissue comes away in the pus.	0.8791611
Then treat the wound with healing ointments that generate solid flesh, which are medicines that have astringency and dryness. For if it heals, it is cured, and do not fear recurrence.	Then treat the wound with salves to encourage healing and the growth of firm flesh, these remedies having also a styptic and drying quality. Then when the wound is healed over it is cured for good and there is no fear of a recurrence.	0.81759924
If the fistula has reached the depth of the anus and is far from the surface of the body, insert your finger into the anus and search with it. If you feel the probe and there is a barrier of peritoneum or flesh between you and it, and it is close to penetrating, then the action in it is only by way of hope and expectation, and that is to use one of three methods in it:	If the fistula reaches deep into the anus and is far from the surface of the body, then put your finger into the anus and palpate. If you feel a barrier of flesh or membrane interposed between the probe and your finger, and it be nearly through, then there is nothing to be done except to try a remote hope. There are three methods that you may employ.	0.915894
Either cauterize it as we have said,	The first is to cauterize it, as we have said.	0.6623374
or incise it until you reach its bottom to be able to insert the wicks and treatment closely, and do not go too far with the incision so as not to cut the muscle surrounding the anus, causing the patient to have involuntary defecation. Then treat it with what we have mentioned, and perhaps it will heal, as we have said,	Or you may cut it open until you reach the termination so as to be able to insert a dressing and bring the medicament into contact with it, but do not extend your incision too far lest you cut into the sphincter muscle and the patient become incontinent of faeces; then dress in the manner we have said and perhaps it may heal.	0.8326279
or penetrate that barrier and pierce it after incising it near the anus, as we have said, either with the probe or with another sharp-tipped instrument. Then clean all the thickened flesh in the incision as far as you can thoroughly. Then close the entire wound with the incision and the upper opening until it seals, and leave the fistula open inside the anus, so it will be easier for the patient.	Or you may perforate the barrier and pierce it through, after incising to the vicinity of the anus, as we have said, either with the probe or with some other sharp-pointed instrument; then clear away the fleshy granulations in the incision as far as you are able; then attempt the repair of the whole wound with the incision and the upper opening, until it heals. Let the inner end of the fistula remain open, for this will ease the patient.	0.9444629
And the fistula may be perforated in this manner: if you insert the probe into the fistula and it is on the side of the anus towards the surface of the body with the skin and the rim of the anus, then take a probe with a perforated tip like a cobbler's needle in this way: And insert into it a twisted thread of five threads or so. Then insert the probe with the thread into the fistula until it reaches its bottom.	Sometimes also a fistula is cut out in this way: namely, you pass a probe into the fistula; it should be near the circle of the junction of the outer skin with the anal mucosa; then take a probe with an eyed point like a shoemaker's needle; put into it a thread twisted of about five threads, and insert into the fistula until it reaches the end.	0.7966071
If it is perforated in the edge of the anus from inside nearby, then bring the thread out of that hole by inserting your finger into the anus and bring out the end of the thread and gather both ends together and tighten them and leave it for a day or two.	If it has perforated through at the anal margin within, nearby, draw the thread out of that perforation by introducing your finger into the anus. Draw out the end of the thread and tie the two ends together and leave for one or two days.	0.94121075
Whenever the thread cuts into the flesh, tighten it well until the flesh between the ends of the threads is cut and falls off.	As the thread cuts into the tissues, tighten it up well until those tissues enclosed in the thread are cut through and fall away.	0.8410182
Then treat the wound until it heals and recovers.	Then dress the wound until it be healed and sound.	0.85450494
If the opening of the fistula is not perforated, then perforate it however you can, unless it is very deep, then you should not do that because of the muscle, lest you cut it.	If the mouth of the fistula is not perforated, perforate it as best you can, unless the depth is too great; in which case you must not do so lest you cut the muscle.	0.90744615
Then do with it as we mentioned until it heals.	Then treat as we have said until it heals.	0.9418263
The image of the hooked scalpel with which fistulas are incised, its curvature is very sharp and the other side is not sharp so that you do not cut with it what is not needed, as you see.	Figure of the sharp-pointed scalpel for cutting open fistulae; the curved edge should be exceedingly sharp and the other blunt, lest you cut what should not be cut, as you see.	0.8081215

chapter-2-subchapter-81.txt
Chapter eighty-one on the perforation of hemorrhoids from which blood flows, their excision, and the treatment of fissures.	CHAPTER EIGHTY-ONE. On cutting and incising piles that are bleeding, and the treatment of fissures.	0.813889
Hemorrhoids are of two types: either they are inside the anus, resembling red blisters, or like grapes, and they are small and large, and blood flows from them constantly, and they are single and multiple, and they are outside the anus and on its edges, except that those that are outside the anus are mostly dry, with yellow water or a little blood flowing constantly from them, and they are the color of the skin.	Haemorrhoids are of two kinds: either internal, resembling red bubbles or grape-seeds, small or large, with blood perpetually flowing, and they may be single or multiple; or they may be external, round about the anus. External ones are for the most part fairly dry; a little yellowish fluid or blood constantly oozes from them, and they are of the colour of the body.	0.90921265
And the treatment of what is inside the anus is that you order the patient to defecate and strain until the anus comes out and the warts appear to you, then you quickly hook them with hooks or hold them with your fingernail, then cut them at their roots.	The treatment of internal piles: bid the patient open his bowel and bear down until the anus opens out and the swellings are disclosed to you; then quickly take hold of them with hooks or with your finger-nail and cut them off near the roots.	0.75405324
If the hooks do not hold in them because of their moisture and looseness, then scrape them with a rough cloth or a piece of rough bread or pull them with your fingers, then cut them, then sprinkle on them after cutting some sharp powders so that it takes the place of cauterization or cauterize them as mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, then treat them with the rest of the treatment until they heal.	If the hook does not retain its hold on them because of their humidity and softness, then cut them with a piece of rough material or a rag of goat-hair, or draw them out with your fingers and cut them off; and after excision sprinkle some caustic powder on to act instead of the cautery; or cauterize them as previously described in the book on cauterization; then dress in the usual way until healed.	0.89214504
If the anus does not respond to coming out, then inject the patient with an enema that has a little sting to wash what is in the anus and it will come out quickly when the patient strains.	But if the anus will not open out for you then give a slightly corrosive enema so as to wash out what is within, and then, the anus will open out quickly when the patient bears down.	0.820264
As for the warts outside the anus, their matter is easy and simple, which is that you take them with your fingernail or hook them with a hook and cut them, then treat them with what we mentioned until they heal.	Now the treatment of external piles is easy and simple: take hold of them with your finger-nails or catch them up with a hook and cut them away; and treat as before mentioned until cured.	0.7326223
And whoever dislikes cutting with iron, it is appropriate to use piercing them in this way: take a twisted thread and insert it into a needle, then pull the wart up and pierce it with the needle at its root from the other side, and wrap the ends of the thread under the needle while it is crossed, and tighten the wart tightly, then tie the thread and remove the needle.	But with the patient who refuses excision with the knife, this manner of removal should be practised: thread a twisted thread into a needle, then draw the piles upward and run the needle through the root of each, from one side to the other, and wind the ends of the thread round beneath the needle as it lies crosswise, and bind the pile firmly; then knot the thread and remove the needle.	0.8318585
Do this with all the warts and leave one of them unpierced so that the excess blood flows from it.	Do this with each pile, but leave one not destroyed so that the superfluous blood may flow from it.	0.8417375
Then put on the anus a cloth dipped in rose oil or cerotti and put it on the anus and order the patient to rest, then leave it until they fall, and if the warts fall, treat them with ointments and the rest of the treatment until they heal.	Then apply to the anus a piece of material soaked in oil of roses or wax; apply it and bid the patient lie quiet; then leave him until the piles fall away. When they fall away, dress with ointments and the usual dressings until healed.	0.7956164
As for the treatment of fissures, it often occurs from dryness of the stool and constipation, so if it becomes chronic and no medicine works on it, it is appropriate to scrape it with a scalpel blade or your fingernail until it becomes moist and the upper crust that prevents it from healing is removed, then treat it until it heals as it should.	The treatment of fissures: these often arise from dryness of the faeces and from constipation. If they become chronic, and medical treatment is unavailing, you should scrape them with the edge of a scalpel or with your finger-nail until they become soft and the upper layer, that prevents healing, is removed; then dress until they mend as they should.	0.8109714
If it does not heal, then repeat scraping it more severely than the first time until it bleeds well and peels, then treat it, and it will heal.	But if they do not heal, repeat the scraping more strongly than at first until they bleed freely and become raw; then apply dressings and they will heal.	0.74223876

chapter-2-subchapter-82.txt
Chapter eighty-two on the treatment of ingrown and non-ingrown nails, dry warts, and corns.	CHAPTER EIGHTY-TWO. On the treatment of corns, inverted and otherwise, and dry warts and pimples.	0.82035744
A corn is a round knot, the color of the body, resembling the head of a nail, that forms throughout the body, especially on the soles of the feet and the toes, and causes pain when walking.	A corn is a round knob, the same colour as the body and resembling the head of a nail. It occurs in all parts of the body but particularly in the soles of the feet and the toes, whence arises pain in walking.	0.9220028
It should be incised around the corn and grasped with tweezers or a hook and removed from its root, then treated.	You should cut away what is round the corn and take it with forceps or a hook and tear it out by the root; then dress it.	0.8055736
And if you wish, cauterize it as described previously in its chapter.	If you wish you may cauterize it in the manner already described in the book on cauterization.	0.67966557
As for dry warts, each one is a small, rough, dense, round protuberance on the surface of the body, and frequently occurs on the hands of children.	Then concerning dry warts: a wart is a little round rough compact eminence on the surface of the body; it occurs often on the hands of boys.	0.74908316
Its treatment is to stretch the wart and cut it off, or pierce it with a silk thread or a hair until it falls off. And if you wish, cauterize it as described previously with fire or a sharp medicine.	Now the treatment is to draw out the wart and cut if off; or tie it off with a silken thread or a hair until it falls out; or if you wish, cauterize as said before, either with the actual cautery or with caustic.	0.8585065
Inverted and non-inverted warts can be removed with the instrument that I mentioned in the treatment of moles.	Sometimes warts, inverted or otherwise, are uprooted with the instrument I shall describe under the treatment of pimples.	0.5024632
As for a mole, it is also a small, dense, thick protuberance on the surface of the body, going very deep, and if cold affects it, one feels in it something similar to the sting of ants, and it occurs throughout the body, mostly on the hands.	A pimple is also a little compact thick prominence on the skin surface, going deep; when it gets cold there is a feeling as of an ant's sting in it. It is found all over the body but mostly on the hands.	0.7675024
Its treatment is to take a tube from a goose feather or a strong eagle feather, and place that tube on the mole until the circle of the tube surrounds it from all sides, then rotate your hand with the tube until you incise around the mole and make it go deep into the flesh, and the mole will be removed from its root.	The treatment is to take the quill of a strong feather of the goose or the vulture, and place the quill over the pimple so as to encircle it with the circumference of the tube; then revolve the quill with your hand so as to cut all round the pimple, and go deep into the flesh, and then the pimple may be drawn out by the roots.	0.88585
And if you wish, you can do that with a copper or iron tube in this manner.	If you wish you may extract it with a tube of bronze or of iron, of this form.	0.8298163
The top of the tube to the thin part should be solid and twisted to make it easy for the fingers to hold and twist it.	The upper closed part of the tube should be fine, solid, and twisted, to give easy purchase for the fingers in holding and revolving it.	0.84551215
And if you wish, cauterize the fistula as described previously in the cauterization of warts in the chapter on cauterization.	If you wish you may cauterize the pimple as described earlier on the cauterization of warts in the book on the cautery.	0.7900616

chapter-2-subchapter-83.txt
Chapter eighty-three on images of the instruments that use cupping glasses in diseases of the anus, diarrhea, and colic.	CHAPTER EIGHTY-THREE. On the kinds of instrument for administering enemata in diseases of the rectum, and in diarrhoea and colic.	0.75375605
The syringe may be made of silver, or of Chinese porcelain, or of cast or hammered copper.	A clyster may be made of silver or of Chinese alloy or of cast or hammered bronze.	0.89061207
And this instrument can be made small and large, according to those who use it. So those used in the treatment of young boys are small.	Large and small varieties of this instrument are made, to suit those on whom they are to be used; those for the treatment of children will be small.	0.72536665
And those whose anuses are narrow or painful, their syringes should be very gentle.	Patients with stricture of the anus, or pain, will have very slender clysters.	0.6524302
Picture of a large syringe:	Figure of a large clyster.	0.6750139
Its upper funnel, where the wineskin is attached, should be wide in this manner. It has a barrier where the wineskin is attached, as you see.	The upper end of the funnel to which the membrane is bound should be broad like this; it should have a rim where the membrane may be bound down, as you see.	0.8117333
And its lower end, which enters the anus, should be solid, very smooth, and thin; on one of its sides are two holes and on the other side is one hole. The width of the hole should be the thickness of a probe or a little thicker.	The lower extremity, which is introduced into the anus, should be closed and smooth, and on one side of it should be two holes, and on the other, one; the width of the holes should be about that of a probe or a little wider.	0.8696036
And the wineskin, in which you put the medications, should be made from an animal bladder or from thin sheepskin, made in the shape of a small round tablecloth, its diameter a span, pierced with many holes all around.	The membrane to hold the medicament is made out of an animal's bladder or of parchment, made up in the form of a small bag, a span in diameter.	0.61006105
And the distance between each hole should be the width of a finger, then you insert into those holes a strong thread of two-ply yarn of ten strands or so. And you gather the wineskin with it like the tablecloth, so when the medication is placed in it, tighten the top of the syringe between two stones tightly, then inject with it.	It should be pierced with a number of holes in a circle a finger's breadth apart; and into these holes pass a strong thread of yarn, twisted of ten or so threads, and with this gather up the skin like a bag; and when the medicament is placed in it tie it down firmly between the two rims on the upper end of the clyster; and then give the enema.	0.8021939
And this is a picture of the circle of the wineskin and the hole:	This is the figure of the circle of skin with the holes.	0.519099
The method of enema is to fill the leather or bladder with the medication, warmed to a degree the patient can tolerate. And beware that it be too hot or too cold.	Now the way to give an enema with this instrument is for the parchment or bladder to be filled with the medicament, which should be warmed so as to be tolerable for the patient; but beware lest it be too hot or too cold.	0.81431204
Then the patient lies on his back and raises his legs up, and a mat or blanket is placed under him.	Then let the patient lie back and raise his legs; and put under them a leather mat or a blanket.	0.8663742
Then the tip of the enema syringe is lubricated with oil, or egg white, or fenugreek mucilage, or similar. Then it is inserted into the anus gently. Then the attendant takes the syringe with both hands and squeezes it firmly until all of its contents are emptied into the intestine.	Then anoint the tip of the clyster with oil or egg-white or mucilage of fenugreek or the like; then gently pass it into the anus; then let an assistant take the membrane in both hands and together firmly squeeze it until all the contents are squirted into the bowel.	0.91463894
Then the syringe is removed, and the patient raises his legs against the wall. If the medication stimulates him to defecate, he should hold it as long as he can. And if he sleeps with it the whole night, it is most effective in benefit. If it is administered for diarrhea and its expulsion is hastened, the enema should be repeated until he recovers.	Then the clyster should be removed and the patient should raise his legs against the wall. If the enema stimulates him to evacuate, let him hold it as long as he can; if he delay all night long, it will be all the more efficacious. If the enema be given in a case of diarrhoea and he has to evacuate hastily, then the use of the enema should be repeated until he is cured.	0.9067541
If there are hemorrhoids or painful swellings in the anus, the syringe should be very smooth, smoother than the syringes used for children. This is a picture of a smooth syringe with its leather tightly stretched:	If there be haemorrhoids or painful tumours in the anus, the clyster should be exceedingly slender and smooth, of the sort employed for children. Here is a figure of a fine clyster with its skin tied on.	0.7643083

chapter-2-subchapter-84.txt
Chapter eighty-four on the treatment of wounds/injuries/surgeries.	CHAPTER EIGHTY-FOUR. On the cure of wounds.	0.7464801
I have mentioned in the division of the treatment of what resembles cauterizations, and I mention here their treatment by hand and with medicines to perfection, so I say that wounds vary according to the thing that causes the wound and according to the place where the wound occurs, so the things that cause wounds are many, such as a blow from a stone or a cut from a sword or a knife, or a stab from a spear, a stick, or an arrow, and so on from many things.	I have already mentioned in the appropriate section the treatment of such wounds as are suitable for cauterization. Here I shall describe the operative and medical treatment in full. So I begin by saying that wounds differ according to that which causes them and according to the site. Those things that cause wounds are many: a knock from a stone, a cut from a sword or a knife, a blow by a spear, stick, or arrow; and many such things.	0.87559474
As for the wounds according to the places of the body, they are like the wound that occurs on the head, neck, chest, abdomen, liver, and other organs.	To consider wounds according to their site on the body, they are such as a wound occurring in the head, or neck, or chest, or belly, or liver, and so on.	0.8649378
And I am describing the treatment of some wounds to make them a measurement and a law for all other wounds, and I begin with simple head wounds, especially because the complex ones will be mentioned at the beginning of the third chapter of this book.	Now I am going to describe the treatment of certain wounds, so that you may take them as a standard and a guide for other wounds. I shall begin particularly with the simple wounds of the head; for mention of the compound wounds will be made at the beginning of the third book.	0.8724122
If there is an impediment to bleeding him, let him reduce his food, and not approach meat or drinks.	But if from any cause venesection is prevented, he should be on a light diet and avoid meat and wines.	0.66428155
And apply to the wound, if a hot swelling occurs in it, cotton dipped in rose oil alone or with the drink that has astringency.	And apply to the wound, if there be any inflammation, cotton wool soaked in oil of roses, either alone or with a somewhat astringent wine.	0.8964221
And if you are safe from the hot swelling, apply to the wound, if it is fresh with its blood and the air has not changed it, the powder that I will describe to you shortly.	And if you are sure there is no inflammatory swelling, then apply directly to the wound, if its blood is fresh and it is unaltered by the air, the powder that I shall describe to you a little later.	0.892971
But if the air has changed it, apply some ointments to it until it draws pus, then treat it until it heals.	But if the air has already changed the wound, apply to it one of the ointments to cause it to discharge the pus; then dress until healed.	0.85221255
If the wound is large and is from a sword cut or the like, and its edges do not meet with the bandages, then join it with sutures as I describe in suturing abdominal wounds.	Now if it be a great wound, being caused by a sword-cut or the like, and dressings will not bring the edges of the wound together, you should suture them together in the manner I shall describe in dealing with the suture of abdominal wounds.	0.8266448
If the skin has exposed the bone and is hanging, and its hold is only in a small attachment, cut it off, then treat the wound with medicines that repair solid flesh in it instead of the skin, and order the patient to eat foods that have firmness, such as heads, porridges, and the like.	But if the skin has actually disclosed the bone, and is attached by a small strip only, then cut it away and dress the wound with medicaments that will produce firm flesh to replace the skin, and bid the patient go on a diet of solid food such as brawn and gruels and the like.	0.800784
If putrefaction occurs in the skin and it does not stick to the bone, cut off all the putrefied part and discard it, then treat it.	And if decomposition arise in the skin and it will not adhere to the bone, then excise all the diseased part and discard it and then dress.	0.77741563
If in these wounds there is an artery or a vein bleeding from it, and the blood has not stopped with the medicines, then search for the artery, and if you find it and it is not severed, then sever it with the scalpel and tie it, and if necessary, if what we mentioned does not help, cauterize it until the blood stops, and if these wounds are small and simple, then their matter is easy and simple, it is sufficient to treat them by sprinkling this powder on them while they are still bleeding before the air changes them.	If in these wounds there be an artery or vein shedding blood, and medicinal applications do not stanch it, then examine the artery, and if you find it not quite severed then cut it through with a scalpel and ligature it; and if you are compelled, our directions being unavailing, then cauterize until the haemorrhage stops. If these be small and simple wounds their treatment will be a light and easy matter; it is sufficient to sprinkle some of this powder on while they are still bleeding, before the atmosphere causes a change.	0.89686453
The recipe for the powder is that one part of frankincense is taken, two parts of mastic, and three parts of slaked or unslaked lime, all are crushed and sifted, and the wound is packed with it, and it is tied tightly until it adheres to it well and clots with the blood, then you tie it from above with bandages and leave it, do not loosen it as long as it does not swell, for the medicine will not come off it until it heals.	Description of the powder: let one part of olibanum and two parts of dragon's blood be taken, and three parts of quick or slaked lime, all beaten up together and passed through the sieve; and let the wound be packed with this and bound up tightly so that the powder sticks in position and coagulates with the blood. Then bind pads above and let it be, not undoing it so long as it remains without swelling; for the dressing will not come away of itself until it is healed.	0.79687434
And that lime alone may do it if you do not have frankincense and mastic, and it may also do this action by itself in many large wounds if its placement on it and its tightening are mastered, and the wounds are fresh with their blood as long as the air has not changed them.	Lime alone can do this if you have no olibanum and dragon's blood at hand. It has exactly the same effect too on most large wounds, when the application and bandaging are properly done, and when the haemorrhage is recent, so long as the air has not changed them.	0.7099706
But if the air has changed it somewhat, especially if it is in the summer time, then there is no meaning in putting this powder, so treat it as we mentioned, by applying some ripening ointments to it, or applying a porridge of barley flour made with water and honey until it draws pus, then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.	If, however, the air has brought about some change, especially if it be in the summer season, then there is no point in the application of this powder. Treat it then as we have said, by applying one or other of the suppurative ointments; or by applying a gruel of barleymeal with water and honey, so that the pus flows; then treat by all the usual methods until cured.	0.88516873
But if a bone fracture occurs with the wound, and it is slight, then pull it with the forceps.	If, with the wound, there be also fracture of a bone, if it be slight, you should extract it with forceps.	0.77731204
I have mentioned the treatment of head fractures in what is to be resumed.	I mention the treatment of fractures of the head later on.	0.77740926
In neck surgery,	On wounds in the neck:	0.6001872
But if the wound is large, use sutures or join its edges with bandages, then treat it until it heals.	If the wound be large, use stitches or draw the edges of the wound together with pads; then dress until cured.	0.8485079
If the wound has depth and a pocket has occurred in its bottom where pus has collected, then drain it in the lowest place in it.	But if there be depth to the wound and a sinus appears at the bottom of it, in which pus has collected, then make an opening at the site of greatest depth.	0.8071183
If an artery has been cut in the wound and you find its blood bleeding, then sever it or tie it or cauterize it if necessary.	Now if an artery has been cut in the wound and you are in time to find it still bleeding, divide it or ligature it; or cauterize it if you are compelled to.	0.8643113
If the wound has cut some or all of the cartilage of the larynx, and the jugular veins are safe, then join the edges of the skin with sutures over the trachea, and do not touch the larynx, but straighten it and return it to its natural shape, then tighten it tightly and leave it for days, then treat it with ointments that have astringency and drying until it heals.	If it be such a wound that some of the cartilages of the trachea are laid open, or the whole trachea, the jugular veins being safe and sound, then join the skin edges together with a suture over the windpipe, and do not touch the windpipe, but straighten it and restore to its natural form; then tie firmly and leave for some days; then treat with salves having some styptic and astringent quality, until healed.	0.8873507
If the wound has affected the bone, then examine it, and if there are bone fragments in it, then extract them all or what is possible of them, and what you cannot, leave it until the wound putrefies and heals and its removal becomes easy.	If the wound has affected bone, examine it, and if there be fragments of bone in it get them all out, or all you can. Those you cannot get hold of, leave until the wound suppurates and heals, and it will be easy to extract them.	0.93724227
If the wound is fresh, then sprinkle on it the powder that we described, and if bone putrefies in the wound and becomes a fistula, then treat it as will be mentioned in its chapter.	If it be a fresh wound, sprinkle on the powder I have described ; and if any bone corrupt in the wound and it becomes a fistula, treat it by those means we shall mention in their place.	0.8498074
In surgery of the chest and between the shoulders,	On wounds in the chest and between the shoulders:	0.7707267
And if three days or more have passed for the wound, and the patient has not experienced any convulsions, bad palpitations, or shortness of breath, and you see that all his other conditions are good, then know that the wound is safe, so treat it with bandaging and the rest of the treatment until it heals.	And if three or four days pass by after the wound, and the patient have no spasm or harmful palpitation of the heart nor obstruction to drawing breath, and you see that in other respects he is doing well, you may know that the wound is not dangerous; so treat it with pads and the usual dressings until it heals.	0.87122005
If its healing is difficult and it constantly suppurates, then know that it has become a fistula, so treat it according to its chapter.	But if it will not heal and it permanently discharges pus, you may know that it has become a fistula; look for the treatment of this in the proper place.	0.6917447
And if time has passed for the wound of the chest or back, treat it with what has been mentioned of suturing if it is large, or with the powder if it is small.	If the wound be from a cut with a sword or knife, a straightforward surface wound in the breast or back, then treat it as described before; that is, by suture if it be a great wound or by powder if it be a small one.	0.7106484
If it has affected the bone and cut off fragments from it, then examine the wound and hasten to remove those fragments if they are free, and if they are not free, then leave them until the wound putrefies, for it will make their removal easier.	But if there has also been injury to the bone, cutting out fragments from it, you should explore the wound and hasten to draw out the fragments if they are detached from the bone; but if they are not detached then let be until the wound suppurates, when the removal of the fragments will be easy.	0.81197083
As for the rest of the wounds occurring in the rest of the organs, their rule in treatment is the rule of what we have mentioned.	Then with regard to other wounds occurring in other parts of the body, the same class of treatment should be used for them as for those already mentioned.	0.6382432

chapter-2-subchapter-85.txt
Chapter eighty-five on wounds of the abdomen, protrusion of the intestines, and their suturing.	CHAPTER EIGHTY-FIVE. On wounds of the abdomen, and protrusion of the intestine; and on suturing them.	0.8775609
The hernia that occurs in the abdomen can be large, small, or medium. From a large one, an intestine or several intestines may protrude, making their insertion and suturing more difficult and laborious.	The tear that occurs in the abdomen may be great or small or it may be middle-sized. From a large tear one or more segments of gut may protrude. The reduction of this and the suture of the wound is an exceedingly hard and difficult matter.	0.82562006
The small hernia can also be difficult in another way, so its reduction is necessarily more difficult, and if the intestine is not immediately returned to its place, it swells and thickens, making its insertion difficult. For this reason, the medium hernia is the best, because the reduction of the intestine is not as difficult as in these two types.	Small openings may also be difficult in another way, for they are bound to be harder to reduce, and if you do not hurry to return the gut to its place at once it will swell up and enlarge, thus rendering reduction difficult. So the best tear is the medium-sized, for in this case the reduction of the intestine will not be as difficult as in the two other cases.	0.85853684
Know that the suturing of the abdomen is of four types: two common sutures are suitable for suturing the abdomen and for suturing all other wounds of the body, and the other two are specific sutures that apply to all other wounds, except that they are more specific to suturing the abdomen, and I will describe them to you one by one with explanation and clarification.	Then you should know that suturing the abdomen may be carried out in four ways. Two of them are general; suitable both for suture of the abdomen and for other wounds of the body. The other two sutures are special; they may be used for other wounds, but are more suitable for abdominal wounds. I shall describe each one to you separately, with comments and explanation.	0.89933157
When you see that the swelling has subsided, wet the intestine with water in which marsh mallow or hollyhock has been cooked, for this will facilitate its entry with the easiest effort.	When you see that the swelling has come down, bathe the gut with water in which have been infused althea and mallows; for with this the reduction of the bowel becomes easy, using the lightest effort.	0.7910595
If its return is difficult after this treatment, then make a small incision in the hernia with the instrument used to incise fistulas. The first treatment, if possible, is better than the incision, and one is only compelled to make the incision after necessity and the failure of other means.	But if after this treatment the reduction is still difficult, open up the wound a little with the instrument for opening up haemorrhoids. The first method, if possible, is better than incision, but one may be compelled to incise when other means have failed.	0.71232074
This is a picture of the instrument:	This is the form of the instrument.	0.6390418
Its one curved side is limited, its other side is unlimited, and the thin end is not as thin as a scalpel but rather slightly blunt, and it is a tool that resembles a small probe, as you see.	The curved side should be sharpened, but not the other; the slender extremity should not be as slender as a scalpel, but rather blunt; it is an instrument like a small polo-stick, as you see.	0.7718073
So, if the wound widens and the intestine enters, it should be returned to its natural shape and proper place if you are able to do so, for that is best.	When the wound is opened up a little with the instrument and the bowel is reduced, it is important to return it to its natural shape and proper position, if you can, for that is better.	0.740654
However, if the rupture is wide and is in the lower abdomen, the patient should lie on his back and place his legs higher than his head.	When the wound is large and in the lower abdomen the patient should lie on his back and have his legs higher than his head; but if it be in the upper abdomen his head and chest should be placed higher than his lower parts.	0.7789579
And if it is in the upper abdomen, he should place his head and chest higher than his lower body, and likewise, if the rupture is in one of the two sides of the abdomen, always make your intention and purpose to have the side where the surgery is higher than the other side.	And in the same way if the opening be on one side of the abdomen you should always make it your object to put the wounded side higher than the other.	0.71266407
And thus, it should be used in major surgeries and in medium surgeries.	So must you proceed in large or middling wounds.	0.6800693
But in small surgeries, you place it according to what is possible for you.	But in small wounds put the patient in a position convenient to yourself.	0.7185582
Then you bring before you a gentle servant who holds the entire rupture with his hands and brings its edges together, then reveals it to the one in charge of stitching bit by bit.	Then have an assistant under your direction to enclose within his hands the whole of the wound and bring the edges together, and then uncover it bit by bit for the one who is putting in the stitches.	0.7667717
And this is the description of the single common stitch, which is that you take a needle or several needles according to the size of the wound, then leave from the edge of the rupture a space the thickness of the little finger, and insert a single needle without threading it into the edges of the skin along with the edges of the peritoneum that is under the skin from the inside until you pass it through from that side, having brought together the edges of the skin and the edges of the peritoneum, making four layers.	Now this is the description of one general suture, namely: one or more needles are taken, depending on the size of the wound; then, leaving about the width of the little finger from the end of the opening, pass an unthreaded needle from within through both edges of the skin together with both edges of the peritoneum which lies beneath the skin, piercing from one side to the other; thus you will have brought together both skin edges and both peritoneal edges, making four layers.	0.8801081
Then you tighten with a doubled thread around the needle several times from both sides until the edges of the wound are brought together tightly.	Then wind a double thread several times round the needle, and tighten up from both sides so as to bring the two edges of the wound perfectly together.	0.8743839
Then you also leave a space the thickness of a finger and insert another needle, then attach it to the thread as you did with the first needle, and continue doing this with the needles you need until you finish stitching the entire wound.	Then again leave about a finger's breadth and put in another needle and fasten it with thread as you did in the first instance; and go on doing this with as many needles as you need until you have finished mending the whole wound.	0.9063071
And let the needles be medium between thick and thin, because very thin needles quickly cut the flesh, and thick ones are also difficult to insert into the skin, therefore, they should be medium in thinness and thickness.	The needles should be of medium fineness; for the very fine needles soon cut into the flesh; while thick needles, on the other hand, are difficult to pass through the skin; so they should be medium between fineness and thickness.	0.85623926
And it is not appropriate to insert the needle into the edge of the skin too close, lest the flesh quickly tear and the wound open before it heals, nor should you stitch too far apart, lest the wound be prevented from healing.	You should not introduce the needle too near the edge of the skin lest the tissues be soon cut through and the wound gape before it has joined. Nor should there be too great an interval between the stitches, lest the wound be prevented from scarring up.	0.85301846
Then you cut the ends of the needles so that they do not harm the patient while he sleeps, and you make for him supports from pieces of linen on all sides, which hold the ends of the needles, and you leave them until you know that the wound has healed.	Then cut off the ends of the needles lest they hurt the patient during sleep; and make for him pads of linen scraps to cover the needle ends on both sides; and let them be until you know the wound is healed up.	0.89094794
This type of stitching with needles is thus more suitable in small surgeries, because it may be sufficient to stitch them with one needle or two or so.	This method of suture with needles is most suitable in small wounds, for one or two needles or thereabouts will probably be enough for such.	0.8667562
As for the description of the second common stitch, it is that you gather with the stitching the four edges, I mean the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the peritoneum, at once with a needle containing a twisted thread, moderate in thinness and thickness.	Now the second kind of general suture is to bring together all four edges, the two skin edges and the two peritoneal edges, at one and the same time, with a needle furnished with a twisted thread of medium thickness.	0.7601242
Then, when you have passed the needle through these four edges, you return the needle from the side from which you began, so that the thread lies intertwined from the top of the wound, so that the stitching is like the stitching of the small sacks with which goods are tied, and you make between each stitch and stitch a distance the thickness of the little finger, and this stitching is known by all people.	Then when the needle has pierced these four edges bring it back precisely to where you began, so that the thread may lie knitted over the wound to make a stitch in the manner of sewing up the bags in which goods are packed. The distance between stitches should be a little finger's breadth. Everybody is familiar with this stitch.	0.8719102
And it is surprising that I did not treat him with an ointment, because I was in a place where there was nothing of the medicines, so I would put worn cotton on the wound twice a day and I would wash it with honey water until it healed.	The remarkable thing is that I did not treat him with any ointment, for I was in a place where there was no sort of medicine; so twice a day I applied teased-out cotton wool to the wound, and carefully washed it with honey-water until he was healed.	0.90737593
The summary of the description of this stitching is that you stitch like furriers stitch furs, by stitching the peritoneum once from one side with the edge of the skin, and leaving it once from the other side until you finish.	In short, this way of suturing is to sew with the stitch used by furriers in sewing skins; thus you stitch the peritoneum once one way with the skin edge and leave it once the other way, until you have done.	0.83747286
As for the second type of special stitching that Galen also mentioned, these are his words verbatim, which is that you stitch it like some of the healers stitch it, by bringing together each part to its similar counterpart naturally, so they join the edge of the peritoneum to its other edge and the edge of the peritoneum to its other edge, and that is as I describe to you.	Now the manner of the second type of special stitch which Galen mentioned is this (these are his own words): that you suture it in the same way as many practitioners. That is, they suture each part to the part that corresponds naturally to it; so they join one peritoneal margin to the other and one skin margin to the other, in the manner I shall describe.	0.84867847
It is appropriate that you insert the needle into the edge of the peritoneum closest to you from the outside and pass it through to the inside in it alone and leave the two edges of the peritoneum, then return the needle and pass it from outside to inside in both edges of the peritoneum, then return it again and pass it from inside to outside in the other edge of the peritoneum that is on the opposite side.	You should put the needle from without inwards, in that edge of the abdominal wall that is nearest to you, and make it pass inward through that alone, leaving out the peritoneal edges; then turn the needle round and run it from without inwards through both peritoneal edges. Then turn it round again and make it pierce, from within outwards, the other edge of the abdominal wall, on the opposite side.	0.85390604
And this type of stitching is better than the easy common stitching, which is the stitching that was mentioned previously.	This type of suture is better than the easy general suture that has been mentioned.	0.8269789
These are Galen's words verbatim.	These are Galen's very words.	0.92732185
And some have said that stitching the abdomen may be straightened with two needles, which is that you insert a single thread in them, and you begin by inserting the needle from your side and passing it through to the other side, and you insert the other needle from the opposite side, so you pass it through from your side, like the stitching of bishops, alike.	Some have said that the suture of the abdomen may be performed with two needles, thus: you thread one thread into both and begin by introducing the needle into that part near you and carrying it through to the other side. Then you insert the other needle on the far side and bring it through to the near side, after the manner of the shoemaker's stitch.	0.84217477
And know that if the rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, its stitching is more difficult than other places of the abdomen.	You must understand that when the fissure is in the middle of the abdomen the sewing of it is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.	0.8538803
As for the treatment of the wound, its rule in its treatment is the rule of all other surgeries, which is that if you find the wound fresh with its blood before the air changes it, and you have returned the intestine and stitched it and tightened it, then apply to it the healing powders. But if the air has changed the wound, then apply to it some of the ointments that you have prepared until it suppurates and the threads fall out and the peritoneum heals, then treat it as you treat all other surgeries until it heals.	But the medical treatment of the wound comes under just the same heading as that of other wounds. When you find a wound with its blood quite fresh, before the atmosphere has altered it, and you have reduced the intestine and have sewn it up and closed it firmly, apply to it powder to encourage fresh growth. But if the air has altered it, then apply to it some of the available ointments until it suppurates and the threads come away and the peritoneum and abdominal wall heal; then dress it as you would any other wound, until it is better.	0.88365746
But if you do not have medicines, apply worn cotton to it from the time it begins to suppurate and change it twice a day, as I have informed you, until it heals, for you will not need another treatment in most cases if the surgeries are simple.	If you have no medicaments to hand, apply cotton wool as soon as suppuration begins, and change it twice daily, as I have taught you, until it heals. You will need no other treatment in the majority of cases when the wounds are simple.	0.86663383
If you fear that the major organs will share in the pain of the wound, it is appropriate that you dip soft wool in moderately warm oil or in rose oil and place it around the areas between the groin and the armpit.	But if you fear that the important organs may share the hurt of the wound, then you should dip some soft wool in moderately warm olive-oil or oil of roses and bind it round the various sites between the groin and the axillae.	0.8748416
If he feels pain or putrefaction in his intestines, which often occurs, then inject him with a lukewarm black astringent syrup, especially if the putrefaction has reached the intestine and has become a wound penetrating its cavity.	If pain or gangrene be felt in the bowelsand that frequently happensthen clyster him with tepid astringent black wine, particularly if the gangrene has already set in in the bowel and has become a wound penetrating to the abdominal cavity.	0.8381239
And know that whatever of the intestines is thick is easier to heal, and whatever of them is thin is more difficult to heal.	You should know that if the injured bowel be the large intestine it will heal the more easily, while if it be the small its healing is more difficult.	0.7231165
As for the intestine known as the jejunum, it does not accept healing from any surgery that occurs in it at all, because of the abundance of veins in it and their size, and the thinness of its substance and its proximity to the nature of the nerve.	But the part of the bowel called the jejunum is not likely to recover from an injury to it at all; and that is due to the number and size of arteries in it and to the thinness of its structure and to its nearly approaching a nerve in its character.	0.8086417
But if what protruded from the wound is the omentum, and you find it fresh, then return it just as you returned the intestine.	If what protrudes from the wound be omentum, and you find it freshly protruding, then reduce it as you do intestine.	0.79844695
But if some time has passed and it has become green or black, it is appropriate that you tie it with a thread above the place where it has blackened, lest bleeding occur, for there are veins and arteries in the omentum.	But if some time has lapsed and it has turned green or black, you should ligate it above the site where it has gone black lest there be a haemorrhage; for the omentum contains veins and arteries.	0.9383038
Then you cut what is below that ligature and make the ends of the thread hanging from below the surgery, outside of it, so that it is easy for you to pull it and remove it when the omentum falls off and the wound suppurates.	Then cut off what is below the ligature and leave the ends of the thread hanging out from the lower part of the wound, so that it will be easy for you to draw upon it and extract it as the omentum falls away and the wound suppurates.	0.9281358
Mention of the wound that occurs in the intestine.	A note on the wound occurring in the intestine.	0.90391284
But if a small rupture occurs in the intestine, it may be repaired in some people, because I saw a man who had been wounded in his abdomen by a spear thrust, and the wound was to the right of the stomach, and the wound became chronic and became a fistula from which feces and wind came out, so I began to treat him although I did not hope for his recovery, but I continued to treat him gently until he recovered and the place healed.	When a break occurs in the intestine and it is a small one, it is possible, in some men, that it may mend. For I myself saw a man who had been wounded by a spear-thrust in the abdomen. The wound was to the right of the stomach, and, being chronic, became a fistula whence issued faeces and flatus. I set about treating him, though I had no hope of his recovery, and I continued to attend him, and eventually he recovered and the place healed over.	0.8893714
When I saw that the place had healed, I feared that something bad would happen to the patient in his abdomen, but nothing bad happened to him at all, and he remained in the best of his conditions, healthy, eating, drinking, having intercourse, entering the bath, and exercising in his service.	And when I saw that the place had healed over I was afraid for the patient lest some harm should occur in the abdominal cavity; but absolutely no harm arose from it, and he remained perfectly well and healthy, eating and drinking and engaging in coitus and going to the bath and carrying out the duties of his office.	0.86717904
And some of the experienced have mentioned that whenever a small wound occurs in the intestine, it should be stitched in this manner, which is that large-headed ants are taken, then the edges of the wound are brought together, then an ant with its mouth open is placed on the edges of the wound, and when it grips it and tightens its mouth, its head is cut off, for it will stick and not come undone.	Some men of experience have said that when a wound occurs in the intestine and it is small, it should be sutured in this manner, namely: ants with large heads are taken; then the edges of the wound are brought together and one of these ants is applied by its open jaws to the two edges of the wound, and when it seizes it and closes its jaws then the head is cut off, and it will stick and will not loosen.	0.88356423
Then another ant is placed near the first, and you continue doing this with several ants according to the size of the wound, then you return it and stitch the wound, for those heads will remain stuck in the intestine until the intestine heals and recovers, and no harm will occur to the patient at all.	Then another ant is applied near the first; and you proceed after this manner with a number of ants according to the size of the wound. Then reduce the intestine and sew up the wound; for the heads will remain sticking to the intestine until it is healed up; and no harm will come to the patient.	0.9115995
It may also be possible to stitch the intestine with the thin thread that is pulled from the intestine of the animal attached to it after it is inserted into a needle, which is that the end of this thread is taken from the intestine and pulled gently, then a thin twisted linen thread is tied to its end, then that thread is inserted into the needle with the intestine's thread in it, and the intestine is stitched with it, then returned to the cavity.	The intestine may also be sewn up with the fine suture which is extracted from an animal's gut and sticks to it after being threaded in a needle. The method is that the end is taken of this suture made of gut, well scraped; and to this end is fixed a fine linen thread, twisted, and then that thread is passed through the needle affixed to the suture of animal's gut, with which the intestine is sewn and then replaced in the abdominal cavity.	0.89638454
And this type of stitching with ants and intestine is only by way of hope and expectation.	These kinds of suture, with the ants and with the gut, are by way of a remote hope.	0.6534066
But if the rupture is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, there is no remedy for it and no healing from it at all.	But if the opening be great and wide, and especially if it be in one of the small intestines, there is no technique to deal with it, nor any cure.	0.8871784

chapter-2-subchapter-86.txt
Chapter eighty-six on the treatment of colds and fistulas.	CHAPTER EIGHTY-SIX. On the treatment of defluxions and fistulae.	0.8264874
Know that every wound or swelling, if it becomes chronic and old, and becomes an ulcer, and does not heal, and constantly suppurates without ceasing, is called in general, in any organ it may be, a fistula, and we call it zakam.	You should know that any wound or tumour, when it becomes old and chronic, and turns into an ulcer, and does not heal over, but discharges pus chronically and constantly, is generally called a fistula, in whatever part of the body it may be; but we call it a defluxion.	0.86544836
And the fistula is in reality a hard, white, solidified knot without pain, having a cavity like the cavity of a bird's feather, and therefore some have called it a feather.	The fistula proper is a compact hard white painless induration with a central hollow like a bird's quill; on which account some call it a quill.	0.7701525
And it is sometimes moist, constantly suppurating, and perhaps the moisture ceases at times, and this moisture may be abundant or little, thick or thin.	At certain times it may be moist, constantly discharging pus; and again at certain times the moisture may cease; and the discharge may be greater or less; and it may be thick or thin.	0.85597897
And I have explained all these causes, their signs, and their treatments with medicines in the section, and it is necessary for me here to acquaint you with the treatment of fistula and zakam, which is by way of manual work.	I have indeed already, in their proper place, explained all these causes and their symptoms and their medical treatments. Now here I must explain to you the operative treatment of fistula and defluxion.	0.80067444
Know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body, and among them are fistulas that end in large veins and arteries, or in a nerve, or in the peritoneum, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or in a rib, or in a vertebra of the back, or in a joint of the complex joints, such as the hand and foot, and among them are those that lead to the vicinity of a vital organ, and so on.	You should know that a fistula may happen in any part of the body; and some fistulae reach as far as some great vein or artery or nerve or membrane or intestine or the urinary bladder, or one of the ribs or dorsal vertebrae, or some highly complex joint such as the hand or foot, while some terminate quite near some major organ, and so on.	0.8673173
So whatever of these fistulas are of this description, they are among the diseases that are difficult to heal, which do not accept treatment, and working on them is hardship and ignorance.	Fistulae of this kind are among the diseases from which recovery is difficult; they are not amenable to treatment and to occupy oneself with them is labour in vain.	0.76110727
So if there are fistulas that do not reach these places that I have mentioned, and you hope and desire to treat them, and you want to arrive at the knowledge of that, then take a probe of copper or iron if the fistula passes straight, and explore it with it.	But if there are any fistulae which do not reach in depth the places we have mentioned, and you have some hope and expectation of curing them, and you wish to attain to recognizing these, then you take a probe of bronze or iron, if the fistula run in a straight line, and investigate it with that.	0.87463737
But if there is a curvature in the fistula, then explore it with a probe of thin lead, because the lead softens its body, so it slips in easily and bends towards the curvature.	But if the fistula be tortuous then investigate it with a thin leaden probe; for lead is soft, so as to flex on entry and follow the curves of the fistula.	0.8381158
So if you have ascertained all of that with certainty, then proceed to the treatment with confidence, which is that you look, and if the fistula is apparent and near, or in a healthy place far from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places that I have mentioned to you, then incise the fistula according to what I have previously described, and extract what is in it of solidified matter, corrupted flesh, excess flesh, and what grows in its opening of flesh, or wart, and so on, and treat it until it heals.	When you have made quite certain of all these points, then proceed confidently with the treatment, namely: see if the fstula be obvious and accessible, or in a harmless situation far removed from a joint or vein or artery or tendon or any of the other places I have mentioned to you. Then lay open the fstula by the method I have described and fetch out of it all the granulations and diseased and superfluous tissue and whatever tissue or growth be arising in its opening, and dress until healed.	0.8576774
But if the fistula is deep-bottomed and straight, then you should incise it in depth as much as you can, then cleanse it of all its corrupted flesh, then use threads soaked in sharp medicines and insert them into the bottom of the fistula that you reach with the iron.	If the termination of the fistula lies deep and its course be straight, you should cut it open as far in as you can and then clean out of it all diseased tissue; then use swabs soaked in corrosive, and push them to the bottom of the fistula, which is as far as you can reach with the probe.	0.79943144
Do that to it several times until that sharp medicine eats away all that remains in the bottom of the fistula of corruption, then treat it with ointments that grow healthy flesh until it heals. If it does not heal with that, then cauterize it according to what has been previously described.	Do this repeatedly until the caustic has destroyed all the superfluous matter remaining at the bottom of the fistula. Then dress it with ointments that make the flesh grow sound, until it heals. But if it does not heal thus, then cauterize it in the prescribed way.	0.8687537
And if the cause of the fistula is a bone, and that is confirmed to you, then examine it and incise it as I have told you, unless you are prevented by an obstacle of a vein or nerve or vital organ, as we have said.	If a bone be the cause of the fistula, and you are sure of that, then examine the fistula and open it up in the way I have told you, if there be nothing in the way like a blood-vessel or nerve or important organ, as we said.	0.86647075
And if the bone is exposed to you, and there is some corruption and blackness in it, then scrape it until its corruption is gone, then treat it with what will heal it until it heals.	And if the bone is laid bare to you and there be in it some corruption and blackening, then scrape it until all the corruption be removed; then put on dressings that will encourage granulation, until it be healed.	0.8648617
And if it does not heal and suppurates as it used to do, then know that you have not reached all of the eradication of the corruption, so expose all of it again, and complete its scraping and cleansing with your utmost effort, then dress it.	If it does not heal but discharges pus in the way it did before, then you may know that you have not yet managed to extirpate the corruption completely. Therefore you must expose it again and with the utmost diligence carry out the scraping and cleaning of it.	0.7973516
If you can't extract the bones at your time, then apply to the wound what putrefies it, and leave it for days until what is around those bones of flesh and ligaments putrefies. Keep the wound from healing, the incision that you made during your work. Rather, put on it, if you fear that, cotton dipped in powdered sulfur with oil or cotton dipped in the Egyptian ointment or one of the green ointments. For when those ligaments putrefy and the bones become bare, it will be easy to extract and pull them.	If it is not possible for you to extract the bone immediately, apply over the wound something to induce suppuration, and leave it for some days until suppuration has set in in the tissues and ligaments around the bones. Keep an eye on the wound lest the incision that you made during your operation close up; if you fear this, apply to it cotton wool soaked in sulphur beaten with olive-oil, or cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment or in one of the green ointments. Then, when those ligaments have been softened by putrefaction and the bones crumble, it will be easy to shift them and take them out.	0.94302213
And if it is one large bone, such as the tibia or femur bone and the like, and what is corrupted of it is only its surface, then scrape it thoroughly until that blackness and corruption are gone, then dress the wound.	If it be one large bone such as the tibia or the femur or the like, and the diseased part be only the surface, then scrape it thoroughly until all the blackness and corruption is gone, then close the wound.	0.9250257
But if what is corrupted of it is a large part, and the corruption has reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to saw it and cut it all to where the corruption ends, then treat it until it heals.	If the corrupt portion be very extensive and reach to the marrow of the bone, you will not be able to avoid sawing it off and cutting it all away to the point where the corruption ends; then dress until healed.	0.75500214
And I will tell you about a zakam that occurred to a man in his leg, so that you may take it as an example and an aid in your treatment.	Now I shall tell you of a defluxion that once occurred in a man's leg, as an example and a help to you in your treatment.	0.8527067
And this repetition in his operation and incision was necessary because of the patient's weakness and his low tolerance, and my fear of death for him, because he used to have at all times, from excessive vomiting, a bad faint. So he recovered completely, and hard flesh grew in the place of the bone, and his condition in his body improved, and his strength returned, and he managed his affairs, and he was not afflicted in walking with any harm that would harm him at all.	But it would not have been necessary to repeat the operation and the incision thus, were it not for the patient's weakness and inability to tolerate much at a time, and because of my fears for his life, since an evil faint was constantly seizing him on account of the heavy drain. But he was completely cured, and in place of the bone there grew up firm tissue; his bodily state was sound and his strength was restored. He went about his business, and no hurt whatsoever came to him from walking.	0.86556417
And the sawing should be a little above the place of the corruption, so that there is no corruption in the cavity of the bone, so it does not appear on its surface to the senses, and you are forced to saw it again.	The saw-cut should be made a little above the site of the disease in case there should be disease in the cavity of the bone that is not apparent on the surface, which might compel you to carry out the sawing a second time.	0.66819715
And if the bone is corrupted and not protruding, but connected to each other, and the corruption is in its middle or in some of it, then expose the flesh from all its sides, then place the wood from below, then saw it from the first side where the corruption is, and when you have finished sawing it, saw it from the other side, and let the sawing be a little away from the corruption, as we have said.	If the bone be diseased without any swelling, but it all seems the same from one part to another, and the disease be in the middle or in one segment of it, then expose it on all sides; put the block beneath, and saw it from the first side, where the disease is. When you have finished this, saw it from the other side. The saw-cut should be at a little distance from the diseased part, as we have already said.	0.80526567
And if the corruption is in a joint, you cut the corrupted joint itself and saw the bone where it connects from the other side.	If the disease be in one of the phalanges, amputate the diseased phalanx and saw through the bone where it is continuous on the other (healthy) side.	0.58277726
And if the corruption is in the connection of two joints, then there is no solution but scraping.	If the disease be in the joint between two members, then there is nothing to be done but scraping.	0.686933
And if the corruption is in the metacarpus of the hand or the metatarsus of the foot, then the matter of its treatment is very difficult, but you should peel the corruption however it appears to you, and scrape it and cleanse it in any way you can, and by any trick that is right for you, as long as you are not obstructed by a vein or nerve.	If the disease be in the carpus or tarsus it is a very difficult matter treating them; you must peel off the disease in whatever way seems possible, and scrape it away and clean up the part in whatever way you can and by whatever technique is convenient for you, so long as there is no vein or nerve in your way.	0.7652556
And know that the cutters and saws for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bones, their erection, their thickness and thinness, their largeness and smallness, their hardness and porosity, therefore, it is necessary to prepare for each type of work a tool similar to that work.	Now you should know that there are a great number of cutting instruments and saws for cutting these bones, varying according to the different sites and arrangements of the bones; their thickness or thinness; their greatness or smallness; their hardness or sponginess; so you should have ready for every sort of operation an instrument suitable for that operation.	0.84388983
And know that the works themselves may guide you to the type of tool that you need if you have long practice and knowledge of the arts of this craft, because whoever is skilled in the craft and has witnessed various types of diseases may deduce for himself similar tools for each disease. And I have illustrated for you at the end of this chapter several tools that you may take as examples to follow and as a measure to compare with others, God willing. Image of a saw:	You should know too that when you have long experience and knowledge of the branches of this art the operations themselves may well indicate the kind of instrument needed; for the man who is skilled in the art and has seen various kinds of disease may think out for himself which instrument is suitable for each disease. At the end of this chapter I give you illustrations of a number of instruments as types for you to copy and as a pattern upon which you can base others, God willing: Saw.	0.926967
Picture of another saw:	Another saw.	0.5978061
Picture of a small saw:	A small saw.	0.58976346
Picture of a large saw:	A large saw.	0.6013843
The head of this probe is shaped like the head of a nail, rounded. And its engraving is like the engraving of the scalpel.	Scraper; the head of this scraper should resemble the head of a nail, stellate, engraved like a file.	0.7224401
It is only suitable for scraping the heads of joints if they are corrupted or a large, wide bone.	What it is suitable for is to scrape the diseased heads of joints, or big broad bones.	0.8397208
Image of another small probe:	Another scraper, small.	0.5795585
Its upper bow and blade are made of iron, and its shaft is made of a tightly conical boxwood shaft, a simple image with a hollow in it:	The upper bow and the blade are made of iron, the handle of box-wood, turned and firmly fixed. Scraper with concavity.	0.6956333
Another nice abstract image:	Another scraper, fine.	0.47161
Another simple image with a curved end:	Another scraper, with bent extremity.	0.54973966
A small abstract image resembling a probe:	Small scraper resembling a probe.	0.7191943
Picture of another small section:	Another osteotome, small.	0.4999129
And its tip is like a file, used in many places of bone scraping.	Its extremity is like a probe, and it is handy in many places for scraping bone.	0.81422234
A picture of a scraper suitable for scraping what was pierced of the bones:	A scraper suitable for perforated bone.	0.6375191
Its tip is triangular, sharp-edged, made of Indian iron. And similarly, all that we have mentioned of scalpels and lancets should be made.	Its extremity is triangular, with sharp edges. It is made of Indian iron, as should be all the scrapers and cutting instruments we have mentioned.	0.8741725

chapter-2-subchapter-87.txt
Chapter eighty-seven on the amputation of limbs and sawing of bones	CHAPTER EIGHTY-SEVEN. On the amputation of limbs and the sawing-off of bones.	0.8556694
The extremities may rot, either from an external cause or from an internal cause.	Sometimes the extremities become gangrenous, either from an external or an internal cause.	0.7212476
If you treat this corruption with medical treatment and the treatment does not succeed, and you see the corruption spreading in the limb, nothing stopping it, then it is necessary to amputate that limb to the point where the corruption has reached, so that the patient may be saved thereby from death or from a great affliction that is greater than the loss of the limb.	Now when you have treated this disease by medical means, ineffectively, and you see that the disease is spreading over the limb and nothing will stop it, you must cut off that limb as far as the disease has spread, so that the patient may escape death or great affliction, greater than the loss of the limb.	0.8270786
And the sign of whoever is afflicted with this is that the limb blackens until you think that fire has burned it, or it rots after blackening until that rot spreads to what is next to that limb and takes over the whole body, so hasten to amputate it.	Now the sign of the victim of this state is that the limb goes black, so that you might think it were burnt with fire, or, after the blackening, it putrefies, and the putrefaction spreads to parts adjacent to that limb and begins to attack the whole body; cut it away as soon as you can.	0.8202781
And likewise, if the cause of the corruption is from the sting of some vermin, such as a sea scorpion, a viper, a tarantula, and the like.	So must you do if the disease is caused by the bite of some dangerous reptile such as the marine scorpion, viper, or venomous spider, and so on.	0.6937472
If the corruption or the sting is at the tip of the finger, then amputate the finger and do not allow the corruption to spread to the hand.	If the disease or bite be at the tip of the finger, cut off the finger, giving the disease no opportunity to spread to the rest of the hand.	0.8180751
And likewise, if it has taken hold in the hand, then amputate it from the base of the forearm, and do not allow the corruption to spread until it takes hold in both bones of the forearm.	Similarly, if it attacks the hand, cut if off at the wrist, giving the disease no opportunity to spread and attack the two bones of the forearm.	0.74976265
And likewise, if it has taken hold in the forearm, then amputate the forearm at the elbow in the joint itself.	Similarly, if it attacks the forearm, cut it off at the elbow through the joint itself.	0.79598397
If the corruption has passed and you see that it has taken hold towards the shoulder, then do not amputate the shoulder at all, for in that is the death of the patient, and use other treatment according to the ability.	If the disease passes onward and you perceive that it has reached the region of the shoulder, by no means cut the shoulder, for that will be the death of the patient; use any treatment but that, as best you may.	0.80325115
And likewise you do with the foot if the corruption has taken hold in the toe, then amputate the toe at one of the phalanges.	In the same manner act in regard to the foot when the disease attacks a toe; namely, amputate the toe through one of the interphalangeal joints.	0.73530483
And if it has taken hold in the metatarsal of the foot, then amputate the entire foot. If it has ascended to the knee, then amputate the leg at the knee joint.	If the disease attacks the tarsus then amputate the whole foot; and if it ascends toward the knee, amputate the leg at the knee-joint.	0.77314836
And if the corruption has reached above the knee, then there is no recourse but to leave it and surrender the patient to death.	If it be that the disease has passed on above the knee, there is nothing of any avail in this case but to leave it, and for the patient to resign himself to death.	0.7798702
The method of amputating or dissecting the limb is to tie a bandage at the bottom of the place you want to amputate and tie another bandage above the place, and an assistant stretches one bandage downwards and another assistant stretches the upper bandage upwards, and you strip the flesh between the two bandages with a wide scalpel until all the flesh is exposed, then it is cut or dissected.	Now the way to amputate or saw off a limb is to bind a ligature round below the site and another above; an assistant draws the one downward and another assistant draws the upper ligature upward; while you dissect away the tissues between the two ligatures with a broad scalpel until it is laid bare of flesh; then it should be cut or sawn.	0.87773716
And it is necessary to place linen rags on all sides so that the saw does not touch the healthy area, causing the patient additional pain and a hot swelling.	You must place linen dressings on every side lest the saw touch a part that is sound and thus cause the patient additional pain and inflammation.	0.8446846
If bleeding occurs during your work, cauterize the area quickly or apply some blood-stopping powders, then return to your treatment until you are finished, then bandage the wounded limb with a suitable bandage and treat it until it heals.	If a haemorrhage occurs while you are operating, cauterize the place as quickly as possible, or apply to it one or other of the styptic powders; then continue until finished. Then bind up the mutilated limb with a suitable bandage and dress until healed.	0.8187152
And I will tell you an example of a man who suffered in his leg this very same condition that I am describing to you, and that is that blackness occurred in his leg with a burning sensation resembling fire, and that corruption first occurred in his toe until it took over the entire foot, so the man, on his own initiative, when he saw the corruption spreading in the limb, with the intensity of the pain and burning he was experiencing, amputated it at the joint and recovered.	Now I shall relate to you an example; what I am going to tell you is exactly what happened to a certain man's foot. He had a blackening of the foot, with a burning like that of fire. The disease, to begin with, was in one toe, but it went on to involve the whole foot. When the man saw the disease spreading in the limb and felt the violent pain and burning, he hastened of his own accord to amputate it at the joint, and he got better.	0.865506
Then, after a long time had passed, this same corruption appeared in the index finger of his hand, so he came to me and I tried to stop that excess with the medicines I applied to the hand after cleaning his body, but the excess was not deterred and it began to spread to the other finger until the corruption took hold in the hand, so he called on me to amputate his hand, but I refused him, hoping to stop that excess and also fearing death for him if his hand were amputated, because the man's strength was failing.	After a long time had passed the very same kind of disease arose in the forefinger of his hand. He came to me, and I attempted to suppress the superfluity with remedies that I applied to the hand, after purging his body; but the superfluity was not to be suppressed and began to spread to the second finger, and eventually the whole hand was involved in the disease. He urged me to cut off his hand, but I did not wish to do this, hoping I should be able to overcome the superfluity, and also fearing he would die at the amputation of his hand, for the man's strength was on the decline.	0.8800075
So when he despaired of me, he returned to his town, and I heard about him that he, on his own initiative, amputated his entire hand and recovered.	When he despaired of me he went back to his own country, and I then heard that he had gone and cut off his whole hand, and got well.	0.8248848
I have only told this story to be a help in what occurs of this type of disease and to be a guide to be followed and acted upon.	I narrate this story as help against this kind of malady when it occurs; and as guidance for you to take and act upon.	0.8118061

chapter-2-subchapter-88.txt
Chapter eighty-eight on the treatment of fistulas and how to inject them with medications.	CHAPTER EIGHTY-EIGHT. On the treatment of sinuses and the way to irrigate them.	0.7545644
If a swelling occurs in some fleshy member and the duration of the swelling is prolonged until it gathers pus, then bursts or is lanced and all the pus within it comes out and the place remains empty like a vessel, and the skin on it, like a rag, has thinned, and its corruption has not reached the point of affecting bone, nerve, or ligament, for this reason it deserves to be called a 'hidden' (mukhaba'), and it is not called a fistula unless its duration lengthens until the corruption affects something from these members, then at that time it is called a fistula or zakama.	When an abscess occurs in any of the fleshy parts and becomes chronic and eventually collects pus, and then it breaks open or is perforated, and all the contained matter comes out and the site is left hollow, like a vessel, and the overlying skin thinned like a rag, but the suppuration has not gone so far as to involve bone or tendon or ligamentand hence it merits the name of 'sinus' and is not called a fistula. But if it goes on until the disease involves any of these parts it is then called a fistula or defluxion.	0.87889165
And its treatment is to cut that whole skin as it goes around, especially if it has thinned and become like a rag, and you are certain that it will not adhere to the place because of its corruption. But if you hope that the skin will adhere, and the corruption in it has not reached that extent, and there is thickness of flesh in the skin, then treat it with an injection.	The treatment of it will be to cut away all that skin with a circular incision; specially if it be thinned and has become like a rag, and you are sure that it will not adhere to the place, because of its corruption. But if you are in hope of its adhering, and the corruption has not reached that point, and there is in the skin some thickness of flesh, then treat it by irrigation.	0.910995
And that is, you look at the hidden (mukhaba'), and if it is large and the pus that flows from it has a foul odor, inject it with the Egyptian medicine which is vinegar, oil, honey and verdigris, equal parts, gathered in a vessel, and cooked on the fire until the medicine thickens and comes to the thickness of honey.	The procedure is that you examine the sinus, and if it be large and the purulent discharge from it smell bad, then irrigate it with Egyptian medicine, which is vinegar, oil, honey and verdigris, equal parts of each, mixed in a vessel and heated on the fire until the compound thickens and assumes the consistency of honey.	0.73599595
Then take your need of it, and thin it with water and honey, and inject it into the hidden (mukhaba') and bind its mouth and leave the medicine in it for about two hours, then remove it by squeezing, do this for days until the hidden (mukhaba') is cleansed and the foul odor goes away.	Then take as much as you need and dilute it with water and honey, and with this irrigate the sinus and bind up the opening, leaving the compound inside for two hours. Then get it out by pressure. Do this for several days until the sinus is clean and the smell disappears.	0.7857883
It may be injected with ash water if you don't have this medicine available.	It may be irrigated with water of ashes if the medicine is not at hand.	0.8874079
And that is, you take the ash of vine wood or the ash of oak wood and pour water on it, then filter it and inject it with it until you are certain that the hidden (mukhaba') has been washed.	For that, you take ashes of vine or of oak, and put water upon them; then clarify the liquor and with it irrigate the sinus until you are sure it is thoroughly clean.	0.70947194
If the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine nor the ash water, then inject him with water and honey in which some powdered verdigris has been mixed, or inject him with honey and wine mixed, because it is the nature of honey to cleanse and wash, and wine adheres to the hidden (mukhaba'), especially if the wine has extra astringency and dryness.	But if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then irrigate him with water and honey with which a little pounded verdigris has been mixed; or irrigate with honey and wine mingled; the value of the honey lies in its cleansing and washing, while the wine closes up the sinus, specially if it be a wine which has some dryness and astringency.	0.886614
So if you do that several times, and you are certain that the corruption of the hidden (mukhaba') has gone, inject it with something that grows flesh in it, such as taking some of the palm ointment and dissolving it with rose oil and astringent wine, or injecting it with some of the other medicines and ointments whose properties we established in the article on ointments.	When you have done this several times and you are sure that the sinus is clean of diseased matter, then irrigate it with those compounds that will encourage granulation in it. For example, you may take a little Palm ointment and dissolve it in oil of roses and some astringent wine; or irrigate it with some of the other ointments and medicines whose prescriptions we have recorded in the treatise on ointments.	0.778285
As for the one on the mouth of the hidden (mukhaba'), it is the one that you remove every time, so that the pus gathered in it comes out, and so you know what flows from it of pus, whether it is much or little, or mature or immature.	But the dressing over the sinus opening you may constantly remove, so that the pus collected behind it may come out and so that you may know whether there be much or little ichor, and whether digested or not.	0.6076382
And with this also, inspect the site of the hidden (mukhaba') itself, whether its owner feels pain in it or there is no pain in it, and whether there is swelling in it or there is no swelling in it.	And at the same time investigate the site of the sinus itself to see whether the patient feels any pain in it or no pain, and whether there be any swelling in it or not.	0.69292927
So if your treatment proceeds in this way, and you see that the substance that comes out is slight on the mouth of the hidden (mukhaba'), then know that the hidden (mukhaba') has adhered or is close to adhering, so then loosen it tomorrow or on the third day, and when you loosen the wound, replace the cloths with others and renew the ointment.	Then when your treatment has reached such a point that you see that there is only a little superficial matter coming out round the mouth of the sinus, you may know that the sinus has closed up or is near to closing up. Then you may unbandage it the next day or the third day, and when the wound is unbandaged make a change of dressing and ointment.	0.7500368
If thin pus comes out of the hidden (mukhaba') after a long time, do not despair of its adherence, for its healing is near, because among people some have slow flesh growth in their wounds and some the opposite of that.	But if, after a long while, the sinus discharges a thin ichor, do not despair of its closing up, for its healing is near. For there are some men whose wounds are slow in healing, and some are the opposite.	0.7235111
If immature pus comes out of the hidden (mukhaba') after many days, know that the hidden (mukhaba') has not adhered. If the adherence of the hidden (mukhaba') is slow and its matter prolonged, increase the drying of the medicines, and let the medicines be moist in their consistency and dry in their potency, such as the palm ointment if an extra amount of qalqatar has been added to it.	If, after many days, undigested pus is discharged you may know that the sinus has not closed. If the closing of the sinus be delayed and it be a long affair, make the medicines dryer; let them be medicines that have some humidity in their substance but dryness in their potency, such as Palm ointment with the addition of excess of rock-alum.	0.74426216
And among the most effective things that it is treated with is that the palm ointment is taken and dissolved with rose oil and the aged wine, moderate in its consistency, is sprinkled on it, then you knead it with it and use it.	A most efficacious treatment is to take Palm ointment and dissolve it in oil of roses and sprinkle over it old wine of even consistency. Then knead together, and use that.	0.8421972
And a similar action may be done, if the palm ointment is not available to you, with honey, if you cook it until it thickens and use it, or you take myrrh, aloe and frankincense, and grind all of it and sprinkle it on the honey while it is on the fire, then spread it on a cloth and bind it on the hidden (mukhaba'), or spread on it honey that you've cooked until it thickens, and sprinkle the drugs on it, and place the cloth on it and bind it.	The same sort of thing may be done with honey if you have no Palm ointment at hand; if you heat the honey to a thick consistency and use that; or take myrrh and aloes and incense of juniper and beat them all up together and sprinkle on the honey while it is heating on the fire, spread on lint and bind over the sinus; or spread on it honey heated to a thickness, and over that sprinkle powdered aromatic roots, and over these place a dressing that you bandage on.	0.83110535
And long ziravand, the root of the German iris, cress flour and centaury may be used in such a case, whether you use them singly or combined, you grind them, sift them, and sprinkle them on the honey I described and use it.	Sometimes also in a case of this sort long birthwort and the root of the blue iris and vetch flour and centaury are usable, either separately or mixed, beaten up together, sifted and scattered into honey as I described; use them thus.	0.77440083
If the matter of the hidden (mukhaba') is prolonged and it does not heal with this treatment, know that there is corruption in its depth and it has affected the bones or the rest of the hard nerves or ligaments, so treat it with the treatment of the fistula as described above.	But if the sinus be chronic, and it does not heal with this treatment, then you may know that there is corruption at the bottom of it, which has affected the bones or motor nerves or ligaments; the treatment then is that of fistula as already given.	0.6913799

chapter-2-subchapter-89.txt
Chapter eighty-nine on the treatment of felon, bruised nail, and amputation. The extra finger and the incision of the adhesion of the fingers	CHAPTER EIGHTY-NINE. On the treatment of paronychia and broken nails; and on the amputation of a superfluous finger; and the separation of webbed fingers.	0.8239194
But if the bone is healthy, and the nail is also healthy, and the containing corner of the nail has pressed the flesh inwards and made it sting and hurt it, then you should put a thin probe under the corner of the nail that stings the flesh and lift it up and cut that flesh gently and put on what remains of the flesh of the burning corrosive medicines until it all goes away, then treat it with ointments until it heals.	But if the bone be healthy and the nail also healthy, and the in-turned angle of the nail has pressed the flesh inwards and begun to stab it and injure it, you should pass a thin probe beneath the corner of the nail that presses into the flesh, and raise it up and carefully cut away that flesh and apply caustic to the remainder, until it is all gone; then dress with ointments until cured.	0.9408359
But if the corruption has affected the bone, then you should cut that bone and remove it, for it will not heal as long as there is corrupt bone in it at all.	But if it should be that the disease has already begun to involve bone, that bone should be excised and removed; for it will never heal while there remains any diseased bone.	0.82661
If you see the erosion and corruption running in the finger, then cut it in one of the phalanges as mentioned previously, then treat it until it heals.	And if you see the corrosion and corruption spreading in the finger, amputate it at one of the joints, as has been previously mentioned; then dress it until it is healed.	0.816857
If the nail is struck or bruised and there is severe pain in it, then it is necessary to phlebotomize the patient first, then incise the nail with a sharp scalpel, an oblique incision from top to bottom, and be careful not to reach the flesh under the nail with the incision, for you will cause severe pain to the patient and it will be a reason for the growth of excess flesh in the place, then treat the place with something that soothes the pains.	If a laceration or bruising happen to the nail, with violent pain, you should first bleed the patient and then cut away the nail with a sharp scalpel, a swerving cut from top to bottom. But be careful not to cut into the nail-bed, for you will give the patient violent pain and it will cause a growth of superfluous flesh at the place.	0.84382576
As for the one that grows in the finger at one of the phalanges, it should first be cut flesh, a circular cut to the bone, then saw the bone with one of those saws suitable for that, then treat it until it heals.	In the case of one growing from the finger at a phalangeal joint, you should first cut through the flesh down to the bone with a circular incision; then saw the bone through, with one of the saws that suit the purpose; then dress it until it heals.	0.8834449
As for the adhesion that occurs to the fingers with each other, this often happens, and this is something that a person is born with, and it happens when a wound heals, or a burn from fire, and so on. It is necessary to incise that adhesion until the fingers return to their natural form, then put between them wicks or rags soaked in rose oil so that they do not adhere quickly, and separate them, or put between them a thin sheet of lead until the place heals as it should.	As for webbing of the fingers one to another, that occurs very frequently. It may be either congenital or from the healing of a wound or burn or the like. You have to cut the web away until the fingers are brought back to their original form; then interpose between them a pad or piece of material soaked in oil of roses, to prevent them from rapidly joining together and to keep them apart; or you can put between them a thin sheet of lead until the healing takes place as it should.	0.8932843
Likewise, if the adhesion occurs to some of the fingers with the palm, then incise that adhesion according to what is feasible and what corrects the shape of the member.	Similarly, if one of the fingers becomes joined to the palm of the hand, cut through the adhesion according to the form it takes, and with proper regard for the shape of the member.	0.830356

chapter-2-subchapter-90.txt
Chapter ninety on severing varicose veins.	CHAPTER NINETY. On cutting for varices.	0.7455107
Varicose veins are twisted, thick veins filled with black residues that occur in most parts of the body, and most commonly in the legs, especially in porters, donkey drivers, and laborers.	Varices are thick twisted veins filled with melancholic superfluities. They occur in most parts of the body, but generally in the legs, particularly in the legs of couriers and ploughmen and porters.	0.7827497
First, one should use strong shaking of the body from black bile several times, then bleed the basilic vein.	First you must purge the body free from black bile, several times, strongly. Then venesect the patient in the basilic vein.	0.87492776
As for its treatment with iron, it is of two types: one is to incise and extract the black blood, and the other is to extract the vein entirely.	The treatment with the knife is of two kinds: one is to incise and bring out all the black blood, the other is to draw out the vein and extract it bodily.	0.8836627
As for extracting it, it is done in this way: the patient's leg is shaved if it has a lot of hair, then he enters the bath and his leg is bathed with hot water until it reddens and the vein swells, or he exercises vigorously if he does not have a bath until the limb warms up.	Extraction is carried out in this way: the patient's leg is shaved if it is very hairy; then bring him to the bath and foment the leg in hot water until it becomes red and the veins are filled. Or if there be no bath available let him take violent exercise until the limb gets hot.	0.89284897
Then the skin opposite the vein is incised lengthwise, either at its end near the knee or below it near the heel, then the skin is opened with hooks and the vein is skinned from all sides until it is exposed to the touch, and when it appears, you see it bright red, and when it is free from the skin, you see it also like a tendon.	Then make a longitudinal incision in the skin over the vein, either at the upper end of it near the knee or at the lower end near the ankle. Then with hooks open up the skin and dissect away round the vein on each side until it is laid open to view. When it is visible you will see it red almost to the point of blackness; and when it is freed from the skin you will see it look like a cord.	0.903913
Then a probe is inserted under it until it rises and emerges from the skin, then it is hung with a smooth, blunt hook.	Then pass beneath it a probe to lift it up, and when it is clear of the skin hold it with a blunt smooth hook.	0.8222922
Then another incision is made near that incision about three fingers wide, then the skin is peeled off the vein until it appears. Then lift it with the probe as you did and hang it with another hook as you did before.	Then make another incision near by, three fingers distant; then dissect away the overlying skin until it comes to view; then raise it with a probe as before and lift it with a second hook as you did at first.	0.9008784
Then make another incision or many incisions if you need to.	Then make yet another incision or several if need be; then draw out the vessel at the lowest incision near the ankle and cut it through.	0.6959771
Then pull it and cut it at the end of the incision near the heel, then pull it and extract it until it comes out of the second incision, then pull it to the incision above it, and do this until you pull it from the third incision, the highest of all the incisions, until when all of it comes out, cut it.	Then pull it and draw it out until it emerges from the second incision. Then draw it towards the incision above that and so on until you draw it out of the third incision (or) the uppermost, until it is all extracted; then cut it off.	0.8595154
If it does not respond to pulling and extraction, insert a needle with a strong, doubled thread and tie it and pull it, and insert the probe under it and twist it with your hand in every direction until it comes out, and be careful that it does not break, for if it breaks, it will be very difficult for you to extract it and it will cause harm to the patient.	But if it does not respond to your attempts to draw and extract it, pass in a needle with a strong double thread and ligate it and draw it up; and introduce a probe beneath it, and twist it all round until it comes out; but be careful lest it break; for if it break the total extraction of it will be very difficult for you and harm will thereby come to the patient.	0.8746451
When you have extracted all of it, put wool dipped in wine and rose oil or oil on the wounds and treat it until it heals.	When you have got it all out, apply to the incisions wool soaked in wine and oil of roses, or olive-oil, and dress it till it be healed.	0.91041315
If the varicose vein is convulsive, with curves and twists in different directions, and not straight as we have said, then it is necessary to incise it at each of its curves and twists, then hang it with hooks until you extract it entirely.	If the varix be contorted, with twists and turns from side to side and not in a straight line, as we said, then you should cut down along both sides of the twisted part and the places where it is tortuous, then catch it up with hooks and extract it whole.	0.8603476
Be careful when incising it not to cut or injure the vein, for it will make it difficult for you to extract it, so be very careful.	Be careful in incising over it that you do not cut into or injure the vein, for this will render the extraction difficult; therefore be most careful.	0.94260174
It should not have a curvature like other hooks. And it should not be sharp at the tip so that it does not injure the vein/vessel.	It is not bent like other hooks, and its extremity must be blunt so as to not injure the vein.	0.82707316
And it should be thick at the bend, smooth, because if it were thin, it would cut the vein/vessel with its thinness. Rather, it should have extra thickness, as we have said.	It should be of a broad curve and smooth, for if it is fine-pointed its fineness may cut the vein; rather it should be quite thick, as we said.	0.7927325

chapter-2-subchapter-91.txt
This vein is generated in the legs in hot countries like the Hijaz and the countries of the Arabs, and in hot, dry, and infertile countries.	This kind of vein occurs in the leg in hot countries such as the Hejaz and the lands of the Arabs and in hot arid infertile countries.	0.9051018
And perhaps it is generated in other places of the body other than the legs.	It also often occurs in other parts of the body beside the legs.	0.7329653
And its generation is from putrefaction that occurs under the skin, as it occurs inside living bodies, worms, bottle gourds, and the worms generated between the skin and the flesh.	The origin of it is a corruption taking place beneath the skin in the same way that round-worms and worms and gourd-worms arise in the inward parts of the body; also the worms that are generated between the skin and the flesh.	0.7496483
And the sign of the beginning of the occurrence of this vein is that severe inflammation occurs in the leg. Then the place blisters. Then the vein begins to come out from the place of that blister as if it were the root of a plant or an animal.	The sign of the beginning of the occurrence of this vein is a violent inflammation in the leg; then the place swells up and blisters; then the vein begins to extrude at the blistered place as if it were a plant-stem or an animal.	0.87598455
So when its tip appears, it should be wrapped around a small piece of lead, whose weight is from one dirham to two dirhams. And tie it and leave the lead hanging from the leg.	When its extremity has appeared it should be wound and tied round a little piece of lead, from one to two drachms in weight, which you leave hanging from the leg.	0.8257638
So whenever something comes out of it, wrap it in the lead and tie it. If it becomes very long, cut some of it and wrap the rest. And do not cut it from its origin before all of it comes out, because if you cut it, it will shrink and enter the flesh, so it will cause swelling and putrefaction in the place and a bad ulcer.	Then as fast as any of it issues from the leg, wrap it in the lead, and if there be plenty of it cut off part and tie the rest of it; do not cut it right down until it has all come out; for if you cut it right down it will contract and draw back into the flesh and produce at the place an abscess and suppuration and a bad ulcer.	0.85138476
Therefore, it should be handled gently and pulled little by little until it comes out completely and nothing of it remains in the body.	Therefore it should be treated gently, and drawn out slowly until the very extremity of it emerges and not the least bit of it remains in the body.	0.8892317
And from this vein, in some people, may come out what is five cubits and ten in length. And it has reached me that it came out for a man twenty cubits.	In some cases the vein comes out five or ten spans in length; indeed I have heard of one twenty spans long that came out from a certain man.	0.7747209
If it breaks for you while you are treating it, insert a probe into its hole. And push it slowly and for a long time with the body until all the matter in it is emptied. And try to disinfect the place with medicines for days. Then treat it with the treatment for swellings.	If it breaks during your treatment of it, then pass a probe into the hole and open it up with a long incision longitudinally, until all the contained matter is evacuated; and try to make the place suppurate with medicines for a few days, then treat as an abscess.	0.8726804
And this vein may have many branches, especially if it appears in the joint of the leg or in the leg itself. So it will have many mouths, and a branch comes out of each mouth.	Sometimes also this vein is found branching, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot itself; and in this case there are many openings and a branch comes out of each.	0.7801661
So treat it as we mentioned in the division and with what preceded.	The treatment is as mentioned above in the section.	0.49214035

chapter-2-subchapter-92.txt
Chapter ninety-two on the incision on the worms generated under the smallpox called the disease of cattle	CHAPTER NINETY-TWO. On incision for the worm arising beneath the skin, called 'the cattle disease'.	0.7985563
This disease is called in some of our countries the disease of cattle because it often happens to cattle.	This complaint is called by us in some regions 'the cattle disease' since it frequently happens to cattle.	0.87590635
It is a single small worm that is generated between the skin and the flesh and creeps in the whole body, ascending and descending, becoming apparent to the sense when it creeps from one organ to another until it pierces a place in the skin and comes out.	It is in fact a small solitary worm generated between the skin and the flesh, that creeps all over the body, both up and down; it can be felt as it creeps from one part to another until it breaks out at a place where it can break through the skin, and out it comes.	0.89496523
And its formation is from the putrefaction of some of the humors, as happens to worms, snakes, and   (probably a type of skin eruption or growth) in the belly.	It arises from the putrefaction of certain humours as do worms, round-worms and gourd-worms in the abdomen.	0.5659691
And what is expected of its harm is that if it creeps in the body and rises to the head and reaches the eye, it may open it and come out, thus destroying the eye, and this happens often.	Part of the harm that may be expected of it is that when it creeps about the body and goes up to the head and reaches the eye it may make an opening in the eye and come out and destroy the eye; this frequently happens.	0.8639691
So, if you want to treat it and remove it, it can only be done when it creeps and appears to the sense, so you should tie what is above it and below it with a good tight bandage, then cut over it and remove it.	If you wish to treat this and extract it, it must be done while it is creeping about and can be felt. You must tie a tight tourniquet above and below it, then cut down upon it and extract it.	0.7743968
If it sinks into the flesh and you do not find it, then apply cauterization with fire to the place until you burn it.	But if it burrows into the tissues and you cannot locate it, then apply the actual cautery to the place until you have burnt the worm.	0.78342265
And the greatest thing that is expected is its corruption of the eye, as we have said, so if you see that it has gone to the head near the eye, then tie tightly under it on the forehead, then cut over it and take it out.	The greatest damage to be feared from it is damage to the eye, as we have said. So if you see that it has entered the head and is near the eye, then bind a strong bandage over the forehead beneath it, then cut down upon it and draw it out.	0.85889375
And it is necessary that the sick person take care to purify his body with medicines that purge the putrid, bad humors and be cautious of foods that generate putrefaction.	It is important also for the patient to take care to cleanse his body with laxative medicines from all corrupt and evil humours. He should also avoid all foods giving rise to putrefaction.	0.7968692

chapter-2-subchapter-93.txt
Chapter ninety-three, on incising the illness that is known as an abscess.	CHAPTER NINETY-THREE. On incision for the disease known as 'flitting disease'.	0.764192
This disease, which is called "al-nafir" in our country, is a pain that occurs in some of the limbs, then moves from one limb to another, and I have seen it as I describe it to you.	The disease known in our region as 'the flitting disease' is a pain arising in a limb and then passing from limb to limb.	0.74177504
I was called to a sick woman in one of the rural areas, and she uncovered her arm and showed me a slight swelling in the vein of the forearm, and after an hour passed I saw that swelling crawling along the ulna as a worm crawls, ascending to her shoulder as quickly as could be, like mercury when it flows from place to place.	I have personally seen it as I shall describe to you: I was called to a woman patient in a country district, who uncovered her arm and showed me a small inflation of the cephalic vein. After I had waited a while I saw the swelling creep like a worm along the forearm, ascending towards her shoulder, with the greatest possible speed, as of quicksilver running from place to place.	0.83776534
So the pain went away from that place and settled in the shoulder.	Then the pain left that place and settled in the elbow.	0.9040914
Then I sat for an hour, and it ran throughout the body until it went into the other arm.	Then I waited a while and the pain ran through the whole body until it reached the other arm.	0.7868555
So if you want to treat it and its possessor feels the pain, if it appears to you visibly as we mentioned, then tie tightly above it and below it with haste and incise upon it until that trapped wind comes out and cauterize the place.	When you want to cure this, and the patient feels the pain of it, and if you observe the appearance we have described, then tie a bandage round above and beneath it as quickly as possible and cut down on it so that the vapour enclosed there may come out; and cauterize the place.	0.8163035
But if you do not see it with your eyes, then treat it by shaking the body and with that which expels the winds and disperses them, such as asafoetida seeds and sagapenum seeds and similar medications.	But if there is nothing visible to you then treat by purging of the body and by medicines dispelling and getting rid of flatus, such as foetid pills and pills of sagapenon and the like.	0.7503723

chapter-2-subchapter-94.txt
Chapter ninety-four on removing arrows.	CHAPTER NINETY-FOUR. On the extraction of arrows.	0.82128644
Arrows may differ according to their types and according to the places in which they are located in the body.	Arrows vary both as to types and as to the different parts of the body pierced by them.	0.7900866
As for their differences according to their types, there are large ones and small ones, and there are hollow glass ones and solid glass ones, and some have three corners and four corners, and some have tongues and some have splinters.	They differ thus as to type: some are big and some are small; some with hollow heads and some with solid; some of them have three angles and some four; some have tongues; some have spikes.	0.8519856
And of the signs of the brain, if an arrow hits it and penetrates the bone and wounds the peritoneum which is on the brain, then there results from that a severe headache, nausea, dizziness, redness in the eyes, redness of the tongue, convulsions, confusion of mind, vomiting, and sometimes blood comes out of the nostrils or ears, and sometimes speech is cut off and the voice is gone, and a white moisture resembling porridge comes out of the place of the wound and a liquid like the water of the flesh flows from it.	Now the signs when the arrow has struck the brain, and penetrated the bone and injured the meninges covering the brain, are these: there arise from that a violent headache and vertigo and giddiness and a redness in the eye, and a redness of the tongue, and convulsion and mental confusion and bilious vomit; perhaps also blood comes out of the nose or from the ears; often also the speech is affected and the voice is lost; also there comes out of the site of the wound a white fluid which resembles gruel, from which there flows something like the juice of meat.	0.87113214
If these signs appear to you, then refrain from treating the patient and removing the arrow if it has not come out.	If you observe these signs, avoid treating the patient and extraction of the arrow if it has not come out.	0.94820267
As for the signs of the arrow if it hits the heart and is close to the left breast and feels as if it has been driven into something solid and not into something empty, and perhaps the arrow has a movement resembling the movement of the pulse, and black blood flows from the wound, and this is followed by coldness of the extremities, cold sweat, and fainting, then know that death is certainly coming.	The signs of an arrow in the heart are: nearness to the left breast; the patient feels it as if it were fixed in something solid, not hollow; often also there will be imparted to the arrow a pulsating movement; and black blood will issue from the wound; and after this follow coldness of the extremities and a cold sweat and unconsciousness; then you may know that death is surely on its way.	0.82917166
And a sign of the arrow if it wounds the lung is the exit of frothy blood from the wound, and the vessels which are next to the neck swell, and the color of the patient changes, and he breathes heavily and asks to inhale cold air.	The sign of an arrow that has wounded the lung is the exit of frothy blood from the wound; also the vessels that lie along the neck swell up and the patient changes colour, breathes heavily, and seeks to inhale fresh air very strongly.	0.8678942
If the arrow hits the diaphragm which is in the chest, then it is close to the small ribs, and the breathing is great with severe pain and sighing, and all the members of the shoulders move.	But if the arrow strike the pleura then it will be close to the small ribs and he will breathe deeply with much pain and heaving of the chest, and all parts of his shoulders will be agitated.	0.7910448
And if the arrow hits the liver, severe pain follows, and blood comes out of the wound which resembles the liver in its redness.	If the arrow hits the liver, there ensues violent pain, and blood flows from the wound, resembling the liver in its redness.	0.91750884
And if the arrow hits the stomach, then perhaps something undigested from the food comes out of the wound, and the matter is clear.	If the arrow strikes the stomach, often undigested food comes out of the wound and renders the case obvious.	0.7891512
And if the arrow hits the abdomen and is stuck in it and something from the stool, or the fat, or an intestine which has been perforated comes out of the wound, then there is no hope in treating it or in removing the arrow.	If the arrow wounds the belly and is fixed in it, and from the wound there comes excrement or omentum or torn bowel, there is no hope in treatment nor in extracting the arrow.	0.8570765
If the arrow is in the bladder and the urine comes out and something protrudes from it to the outside and the pain intensifies on the patient, then know that he is doomed.	If the arrow has hit the urinary bladder, and urine comes out and some of the bladder protrudes and the patient has violent pain, then you may know that the wound is mortal.	0.83171386
As for the other organs, like the face, eye, throat, shoulder, arm, vertebrae of the back, collarbone, thigh, leg, and the like of the organs, they are usually saved when the arrow does not encounter an artery or nerve and the arrow is not poisoned.	But as for the other parts, such as the face, eye, throat, shoulder, arm, dorsal vertebrae, collar-bone, hip, leg, and the like, in most cases they will heal if the arrow does not happen to strike an artery or nerve, and if the arrow is not poisoned.	0.89524245
And I tell you some of what I have witnessed concerning these arrows so that you may deduce from that your treatment.	Now I will relate to you certain cases of arrow wounds that I have seen, so that you may be guided thereby to your own methods of treatment.	0.7865747
That is, an arrow had hit a man in the corner of his eye at the root of the nose, so I removed it for him from the other side under the lobe of the ear, and he healed and no harm occurred in his eye.	For example, once an arrow struck a man at the corner of his eye near the root of the nose, and I extracted it from him on the other side beneath the lobe of his ear, and he got well, and his eye was none the worse.	0.84647655
And I removed another arrow for a Jew that had struck him in the lobe of his eye under the lower eyelid, and the arrow had hidden, and I only reached the small end that adheres to the wood, and it was a large arrow from the arrows of the compound bow, square iron, smooth, and there were no barbs on it, so the Jew healed and no bad incident occurred in his eye.	Also I extracted from a Jew another arrow that had pierced the orbit beneath the lower eyelid; the arrow had sunk out of sight and I could take hold only of the tiny extremity of it which is secured to the shaft; but it was a big arrow from a compound bow, the iron tip four-sided, very smooth without barbs. The Jew recovered, nor did any ill befall his eye.	0.88947
And I removed another arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was an Arabian one, which is the one that has two barbs, so I made an incision on him between the jugular veins, and it had sunk into his throat, so I gently handled it until I removed it, and the Christian was saved and healed.	I also extracted another arrow from the throat of a Christian. It was an Arab arrow, one of those with two barbs; and I cut down upon it between the two jugulars (for it lay deep in the throat), and worked gently at it until I extracted it; and the Christian was saved and recovered.	0.9343496
And I removed another arrow from a man who had been hit in his abdomen, and we estimated that he would die from it, but when he remained for thirty days or so and nothing changed in his condition, I made an incision on the arrow and maneuvered it and removed it, and he healed and no bad incident occurred.	I also extracted another arrow from a man, that had struck him in the abdomen, and our opinion was that he would certainly die from it. But when it had remained in him for the space of thirty days or thereabouts, and his condition was unimpaired, I cut down upon the arrow and manoeuvred it out and extracted it; and he recovered, nor did any harm befall him.	0.9327704
And I saw a man who had been hit by an arrow in his back, and the wound healed over him, but when it was after seven years the arrow came out at the root of his thigh.	I also saw a man who had been struck in the back by an arrow and the wound had closed over it; and when the space of seven years had elapsed the arrow came out at the root of the hip.	0.9121218
And I saw a woman who had been hit by an arrow in her abdomen, and the wound healed and the arrow remained, and nothing changed in her condition, nor did she feel any harm from it in any of her natural actions.	And I saw a woman who had been struck in the abdomen by an arrow and the wound healed with the arrow remaining in it, and her condition was unimpaired; she felt no harm from it and her natural functions were not harmed.	0.93073905
And I saw another man who had been hit by an arrow in his face, and the wound healed and he felt little pain from it.	And I saw a man who had been struck by an arrow in the face, and it had healed over, and he did not feel much pain from it.	0.8805368
And many are like this.	And many such have I seen.	0.7752296
And I tell you how to remove some arrows so that you make that a measure and a guide to what I have not mentioned, because the parts of this craft and its details cannot be grasped by description nor can a book encompass them, but rather the skillful craftsman measures by the little on the much and by what is present on what is absent, and he infers a new work and a new instrument when strange incidents descend from this craft.	Now I shall tell you the method of extracting certain arrows so that you may take it as a guide and an analogy for others that I have not mentioned; since all parts and details of this art cannot be comprehended in any description, nor can any book include them. A skilful worker will form a judgement on much, from little; and on what is not present from what is before him; and he will think out a new method and a new instrument for an unaccustomed case when it occurs in the practice of this art.	0.8609511
So I say that arrows are removed from the organs in which they are stuck in two ways: either by pulling from the place from which it entered, or from the opposite direction.	So I would state that arrows come out from the parts of the body they have transfixed, in two ways: either by drawing out from the site of entry; or from the opposite side.	0.9066669
And those which come out from where they entered, either the arrow is protruding in a fleshy place, so it is pulled and removed. If it does not respond to coming out at the time it fell, then it is necessary for you to leave it for days until the flesh around it rots so that it is easy to pull and remove it.	An arrow that comes out by the track of its entry: the arrow may be visible, standing out from a fleshy part, in which case it may be extracted by pulling. If it does not respond to traction immediately it strikes, you must leave it for a few days until the surrounding tissues have suppurated, when the pulling and extraction of it will be made easy.	0.7701105
Similarly, if it is stuck in a bone and does not respond to coming out, then also leave it for days and return to pulling and moving it every day, then it will come out.	Similarly if it has stuck fast in a bone and will not come out, leave this also for a few days, repeatedly pulling on it and shifting it day by day, and then it will come out.	0.8986622
If it does not respond to coming out after days, then it is necessary to pierce around the arrow in the bone itself from every side with a fine drill until you widen it for the arrow, then pull it and remove it.	But if it will not come out after some days, you will have to drill away the bone from all round with a fine drill so as to make room for the arrow; then draw on it and pull it out.	0.8087398
If the arrow which is stuck in the bone of the head has gone deep into one of the ventricles of the brain and some of those symptoms which I mentioned to you appear from the patient, then refrain from pulling the arrow and leave it until its matter clears up after days, for if the arrow has reached the peritoneum, then death will not delay it.	If the arrow is buried in some part of the body and is quite lost to sight, explore for it with a probe, and if you can feel it then draw it out with any suitable instrument.	0.49157435
As for if the arrow has hidden in a place in the body and is hidden from feeling, then examine it with a probe. If you feel it, then pull it with some instruments that are suitable for pulling it. If you cannot do it because of the narrowness of the wound and the distance of the arrow in the depth and there is no bone, nerve, or vein there, then make an incision on it until the wound widens and you are able to reach the arrow until you remove it.	But if you cannot get at it on account of the narrowness of the wound and the depth at which the arrow is, and there be no bone nor nerve nor blood-vessel, then cut round it until the wound be sufficiently wide to enable you to take hold of it and extract it.	0.6868117
If it has two barbs, grasp them, then free the flesh stuck in them from every side with every trick you can do that, and endeavor, if you cannot free the flesh, to break the barbs and twist them until you are free.	And if it have two barbs by which it is held, free them from the adherent flesh all round, in any way you can; or, if you cannot free the tissues, try skilfully to break off the two barbs and twist them about until the arrow comes free.	0.8473126
And when you try to remove the arrow in whatever place it may be, then use the twisting of your hand with the forceps to all sides until you free it, and be extremely gentle lest the arrow break and it be difficult for you to pull and remove it.	Whenever you try to extract an arrow from any part, employ a twisting motion of your hand with the forceps in all directions until you free it; and use the utmost gentleness not to break the arrow and thus make it hard to draw it out and remove it.	0.91356945
If you cannot do it at your time, then leave it for days until those fleshes around it rot, then return to it, for it will be easy then. If bleeding obstructs you, then use what we mentioned of treatment in its chapter.	If you are unable to get it out at once then leave it for some days until the tissues that surround it putrefy, then return to it, for then the extraction will be easy; and if haemorrhage interfere use the remedies prescribed in the chapter dealing with that.	0.893575
And guard yourself from cutting a vein, nerve, or tendon, and use a trick in every way you can free the arrow, and let that be gently, slowly, and steadily as I described to you.	Exercise the utmost care not to cut a blood-vessel or nerve or tendon; and employ the greatest skill in freeing the arrow; it should be done gently and unhurriedly and with perseverance, as I have told you.	0.7931407
And it is necessary for you, when you pull the arrow, to put the patient in the shape he was in when the arrow struck, for that is more suitable. If you cannot do that, then use whatever shapes you can.	When extracting an arrow you should place the patient in the same position he was in when the arrow struck him, for that is more convenient; but if you cannot do this then let him be in whatever position is possible for you.	0.8192259
As for the arrow which comes out from the opposite direction, either something of it has protruded to the outside, or you find the end of the arrow by feeling from above the skin near and see it protruding, so make an incision on it, and let the incision be to the extent that the forceps can fit in it, then pull it, for it is easy to come out.	The arrow that is to be extracted from the opposite side either has some part protruding through or else the tip of the arrow gives rise to a palpable swelling just beneath the skin and you see it sticking out; then cut down upon it; the incision should be wide enough to admit the forceps. Then pull on it, for the extraction of it will be easy.	0.83129054
If it sticks in a bone, then twist your hand in a circle until the arrow affects the bone and widens for itself, then pull it. Otherwise, leave it for days, then return to it until it comes out.	If it is stuck in bone, twist it round with your hand until the arrow makes an impression in the bone and opens up a way for itself; then pull it. If it does not come out, let it alone for some days, and repeat until it does come out.	0.91415894
If the shaft of the arrow is in it, then push it with it. If the shaft has fallen and you want to use pushing, then insert the hollow instrument so that its cavity enters the tail of the arrow, then push it with it.	If the arrow-shaft be in the wound, then thrust the arrow out with that. But if the shaft has fallen out, and you wish to employ thrusting, introduce down to it the hollow instrument whose cavity will enter upon the ferrule of the arrow, then push it forward with that.	0.88471925
If the arrow is hollow, then push it with an instrument that enters that cavity, for the arrow is easily removed by that.	If the arrow be hollow, thrust it forward with an instrument that will enter into the cavity, for the exit of the arrow will thereby be made easy.	0.8785964
If the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary to cut away all the flesh that has become poisoned in it, if you can do that, then treat it with what is suitable for that.	If the arrow be poisoned you must, if you can, cut out in a circle all the flesh into which the poison has entered; then treat it with what is appropriate.	0.89912677
If the arrow is in the chest, or in the abdomen, or in the bladder, or in the side, and it is close to what can be felt with the probe and you can make an incision on it, then make an incision and guard yourself from cutting a vein or nerve and remove it, then stitch the wound if it needs stitching, then treat it until it heals.	If the arrow that has struck be in the chest or abdomen or in the urinary bladder or in the flank and it be close enough for you to explore it with the probe and you can cut down upon it, then do so, but beware of cutting into a blood-vessel or nerve. Then remove the arrow. Afterwards suture the wound, if suture be necessary, and dress it until it heals.	0.9068432
The image of the forceps with which arrows are pulled:	Forceps for extracting arrows.	0.5014291
Its ends are like the beak of a bird, made as if it were a file; if it grips an arrow or something, it will not let it go.	The extremities resemble the bill of a bird and are engraved like a file so as not to lose grip when you close them upon an arrow or some other object.	0.7179934
And various types of it are made, large, small, and medium, all according to the size of the arrow, its smallness, the width of the wound, and its narrowness.	They are made in several kinds, large, small, or medium, all according to the bigness or smallness of the arrow and the breadth or narrowness of the wound.	0.83656144
This is solid at the end, like the probe, to facilitate its entry into the hollow arrow and pushing it.	The extremity is solid like a probe, to facilitate entry into, and pushing, the hollow arrow.	0.8501911

chapter-2-subchapter-95.txt
Chapter Ninety-Five on Phlebotomy	CHAPTER NINETY-FIVE. On venesection.	0.6452136
The veins that are customarily phlebotomized in the body are thirty veins, of which sixteen are in the head.	The blood-vessels in the body which it is customary to open are thirty(two) in number.	0.5914211
And in the leg and foot are three veins: one of them is the one under the hollow of the knee from the lateral side; and the second is the Saphenous, and its place is at the ankle from the medial side; and the Sciatic vein, and its place is at the heel from the lateral side.	There are also three veins in the leg and foot; one of these is the sciatic vein on the outer aspect; the second is the saphena situated near the heel on the inner aspect; and there is the external saphena situated near the heel on the outer aspect.	0.8680199
And in the other leg are three veins like it.	And there are three veins, counterparts to these, in the other leg.	0.85491407
As for the two veins that are behind the ears, the benefit of their phlebotomy is for chronic colds, migraine, ringworm, and chronic malignant head ulcers.	Venesection of the two veins behind the ears. Bleeding from both of these will give relief in cases of chronic catarrh, migraine and chronic foul pustules, and scabs of the head.	0.6538463
And their cutting and cauterization have been mentioned at the beginning of the book.	The incision and cauterization of these two vessels has been discussed earlier in the book.	0.6845763
As for the two arteries that are in the temples, the benefit of their phlebotomy is for chronic migraine, severe headache, constant ophthalmia, and the flow of acute humors pouring into the eyes.	The section of the two arteries in the temples gives relief for chronic migraine and severe headache and constant ophthalmia and the flow of acrid superfluities into the eyes.	0.717705
And their mention, cutting, and scraping have been mentioned at the beginning of the book.	They and their incision and extraction have been mentioned earlier in the book.	0.7871235
As for the phlebotomy of the forehead vein, its benefit after the phlebotomy of the Cephalic is for chronic facial ailments such as ringworm, ulcers, and unsightly redness.	Venesection of the vein in the forehead is, after venesection of the cephalic, a relief to chronic diseases of the face such as pustules and scabs and erysipelas.	0.70637393
And the way to phlebotomize it is as I describe to you: the sick person strangles his neck with a turban until the vein appears, then you take the instrument called the Axe, and this is its picture:	Now I shall relate to you the method of cutting: you bind the patient's neck until the vessel stands out; then you take the instrument called the 'pickaxe'.	0.7404933
You place the projecting fork that is at the head of the axe on the vein itself and strike from above with a comb or something similar in its manner, and you let the blood flow to the extent that you desire, then you loosen the tourniquet of the sick person and tighten it until he recovers. And it may be opened with a wide lancet, except that it is not appropriate for the lancet to be sharp-tipped like other lancets, but rather be slightly wide-tipped, and you bleed it obliquely because the bone is near, so perhaps the lancet might break in it if it is thin.	The spike in the head of the instrument you place on the vessel itself and then strike with a comb or some similar thing; and let the blood flow to the extent you wish; then loosen the band round the neck and bandage the vein until healed. Sometimes it is opened with a broad scalpel; the scalpel, however, should not have a sharp point like other scalpels but should be a little broader at the tip, and the vein is cut obliquely, because the bone is close and the scalpel, if it is too fine, may be broken on it.	0.8940388
As for the two veins that are in the corners of the eyes, their benefit is for eye ailments like scabies, redness, eyelashes, and diseases of the face.	Venesection of the two lachrymal veins gives relief in diseases of the eyes such as granular conjunctiva and inflammation and pannus, and in diseases of the face.	0.61725676
And as for the way of bleeding them, it is that the sick person tightens his neck with a turban, then you bleed them while you are standing at his head, and let the bleeding be slightly obliquely lengthwise with a small, slightly wide lancet, for the place has no flesh, so if the lancet is thin-tipped, perhaps it might break.	Now this is the method of incising: the patient binds a sash round his throat, then you cut open both veins, standing in front of him. The incision should be oblique, slightly longitudinal, with a small, rather broad scalpel, for in this place there is no flesh; so if the knife have too narrow a point it may be broken on the bone.	0.6999348
Then you let out the blood you need and put cotton on them and tighten them for one night, then you loosen them.	Then let flow what blood you wish, put cotton wool on both, tie for one night, then loosen.	0.8202074
And as for bleeding the vein of the nose, it is beneficial for acute fever and severe headache and for diseases of the face like the red erysipelas that occurs in the nose, especially if it is chronic.	Venesection of the vein of the nose helps in acute fevers, in violent headache, and in diseases of the face such as the red pustules that arise on the nose, especially if they are chronic.	0.7598041
And the way to bleed it is that the sick person tightens his neck, then you hold his nose with your left hand and take a thin, long lancet and insert it in the middle of the tip of the nose itself between the partitions of the nose straight, because the vein does not appear to the senses there, so the blood will come out immediately.	This is how you make the incision: the patient binds his neck and then you hold his nose with your left hand and take a long fine scalpel and stick it in the middle of the very lobule of the nose, perpendicularly in the nasal septum (for the vein is not obvious at that spot) and blood will immediately flow out.	0.7676176
And it is appropriate that you deepen your hand with the lancet a little and let out the blood you need, then bandage it for a night, for it will heal quickly.	You should advance the scalpel a little and cause the blood to flow as required; then bandage for one night, for it will quickly heal.	0.7626804
As for the two external jugular veins, the benefit of bleeding them is for shortness of breath, the beginning of leprosy, and melancholic diseases that occur on the surface of the skin, such as black vitiligo, scabies, malignant ulcers, and eating sores.	Venesection of the jugular veins helps tightness of breath and the early stage of elephantiasis, and the melancholic diseases arising on the surface of the skin, such as the black vitiligo and impetigo and malignant ulcers and cancrum oris.	0.64225143
As for the veins of the jaw, the benefit of bleeding them after bleeding the cephalic vein is that it benefits from thrush in the mouth, corruption of the gums, malignant ulcers, chapped lips, and malignant ulcers that are in the nose and around it.	The four veins of the lips: venesection of them is effective, second to section of the cephalic vein, for pustules on the mouth and rotting of the gums and malignant ulcers and fissures of the lips and for malignant ulcer in the nose and round about.	0.7010235
And the way of bleeding them is that you sit the sick person in front of you and tighten his neck with a turban, then you turn his lips and look at the two veins that you see, one on the right of the lip and the other on its left, and you distinguish them by their blackness, and that is also because around them are thin black veins, so you cut them with a severed cut.	The way to venesect is to seat the patient in front of you and bind a sash round his neck, then roll back his lips and look for the two veins, one of which you will see to the left and the other to the right; their dark colour will show them up against the lip and also the fact that round them are fine dark veins; so cut down upon both, dividing them.	0.8621814
If it is difficult for you and you do not know which they are, then aim to cut the largest and clearest of them, and likewise do with the two veins that are in the lower lip.	But if you are in doubt about the matter and are not sure what they are, set about incising the largest and most obvious. Do the same with the two veins in the upper lip.	0.774
As for the two veins that are under the tongue, the benefit of bleeding them after bleeding the cephalic vein is for the ulcers that are in the throat from disease of the uvula and diseases of the mouth.	The two veins under the tongue: their venesection is, after section of the cephalic, of good effect in the quinsy arising in the throat from disease of the uvula, and diseases of the mouth.	0.8301705
And the way of bleeding them is that you sit the sick person between your hands facing the sun and lift his tongue and look under the tongue on one side for a vein and on the other side for a vein, and their color is blackish, so you bleed them and be careful not to go deep in cutting them, for beneath them are arteries, so perhaps bleeding might occur from those arteries.	The way to venesect them is to seat the patient before you in the sunlight and raise his tongue, and look, and you will see beneath the tongue one vein on each side, blackish in colour. Cut them; but be careful not to go too far in your incision, for beneath them lie arteries from which there may be haemorrhage.	0.8585823
As for the three veins that are bled in the elbow, they are the ones that are customarily bled in all people, and their bleeding is in two ways: either by piercing with a wide basil-shaped lancet or an olive-shaped one tending towards thinness, or by incising with a knife-shaped lancet, which is the scalpel [and this is its image].	The three veins that are opened in the elbow are the veins which universal custom has used for bloodletting. There are two ways of venesecting these: either by piercing with a broad myrtle-leaf scalpel or a rather fine olivary; or by cutting with a knife-edged scalpel, the lancet whose figure follows.	0.7791418
Image of the wide basil-shaped lancet:	The broad myrtle-leaf scalpel.	0.4194554
It should be wide, as you see, so that it is suitable for opening the hollow, full, prominent, visible, thick veins that contain thick, turbid blood.	As you see, it should be broad so as to serve for opening hollow, full, outstanding, obvious and thick veins, and those containing turbid blood.	0.92842126
And this lancet is less wide and thinner at the tip, suitable for phlebotomizing thin veins that contain thin, choleric blood. And this is the image of the lancet:	This scalpel is less broad and finer-pointed. It is suitable for venesecting fine veins that contain thin jaundiced blood. The lancet.	0.79797745
This is the lancet that is suitable for incision, and there are wide and thin types of it, depending on the width and narrowness of the veins, and this may be inferred from others, and it is well known among artisans.	This is the lancet for making a slit. There are broad and narrow varieties of it according to the breadth or narrowness of the vein. This one indicates what the others are like; it is well known to surgeons.	0.8229419
As for the basilic vein, which is one of these three veins, the benefit of its phlebotomy is that it draws blood from the ailments that are under the throat and neck, from what is next to the chest and abdomen.	The basilic vein, which is one of these three vessels, helps, when cut, by extracting blood from disorders below the throat and neck, in the parts neighbouring the chest and abdomen.	0.78328794
And the phlebotomist should be cautious when performing phlebotomy on it and be careful of it, for beneath it is an artery, and if he makes a mistake and increases the insertion of the lancet, he will cut that artery, causing bleeding, so therefore, its phlebotomy should not be with a piercing lancet, but rather by incision with the lancet.	When one venesects it one must be careful and wary of it, for beneath the vein is an artery, so that if one is inaccurate and sticks the scalpel in too far one will cut the artery and cause a haemorrhage; therefore venesection of it should not be done with a transfixing scalpel but should be an incision with the lancet.	0.800995
If the basilic vein does not appear clearly, then it should be avoided and another should be used, or some of its branches should be sought, or the arm's tendon should be phlebotomized in its place, for it is clear, and incise it with the lancet as we have said.	If the basilic vein is not clearly discernible, leave it and turn to another, or look for a branch of it; or venesect the brachial cord instead, for that is evident; incise it with the lancet as we have said.	0.83288944
If you want to phlebotomize it specifically, then it is necessary before tightening the arm to feel the place until you identify the location of the pulse, then mark it with ink, then tie the arm and incise the vein with an oblique incision with the lancet as we said, and make sure that the strike falls away from the location of the artery.	But if you wish to open the basilic vein itself you should, before you bandage the arm, palpate the place till the site of pulsation is found; then mark it with ink; then bind the arm and cut the vein obliquely with the lancet as we said, and take care that the stroke fall some way from the artery.	0.77666837
And when you see, when tightening the bandage, swelling in the place that you marked with ink, then that swelling is the swelling of the artery, so avoid it.	If, when tying the bandage, you see a swelling in the place that you have marked with ink, that swelling is the inflation of the artery, so avoid it.	0.87639904
If you see the blood, at the time of phlebotomy, jumping as the urine of a child jumps, and the blood is thin and red, then know that it is from the blood of the artery, so then immediately put your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger, and if the blood stops, as it often does, then tie the arm and leave it.	And if, on section, you see the blood spurt out like a child's urine, and it is clear and red, then you may know that it is arterial blood; so then be quick and put your finger upon it for a long while; then remove your finger and if the bleeding stops, as it often will, then bind up the arm and leave it.	0.78401154
And warn the patient against neglecting it, and let it be on his neck, and let him not move it for days until he recovers.	Caution the patient against neglecting it; let him be careful and not move it for some days, until it heals.	0.8127219
If the blood does not stop and overcomes you, and you do not have medicine at your disposal, then sever the artery if it appears to you, for its ends will contract and the blood will stop.	But if the bleeding is not stayed but resists your treatment and you have no medicament there at the time, then cut the vessel through if you can see it; for the two ends will contract and the haemorrhage will stop.	0.80752325
Or take a pistachio shell and split it, and take one half and tighten it on the location of the vein tightly with a bandage and padding until the next day.	Or else take a pistachio nut shell and split it and take one half and bind it over the site of the haemorrhage with a pad and bandage until next day.	0.9311032
Then if the blood stops, and if not, then treat it with what was mentioned previously regarding placing the styptic powders.	The bleeding may stop; if not, then treat by those means mentioned previously, namely the application of styptic powders.	0.7859602
And stopping its blood is not difficult in most cases because of the smallness of the wound and the effectiveness of the bandage on the arm, so know this.	It is not difficult in most cases to stop the bleeding, because the wound is small and it is easy to bandage the arm. So get to know it.	0.7983772
As for the Akhal vein, the benefit of its phlebotomy is that it draws blood from the top of the head and the lower part of the body because it is composed of a branch from the Basilic vein and a branch from the Cephalic vein, as we have said.	Venesection of the median vein results in drawing off blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; this being due to the fact, as we said, that it is composed of a branch of the cephalic and a branch of the basilic veins.	0.77556944
And the phlebotomist should be cautious when performing phlebotomy on it, because there is a nerve underneath it, and if he goes too deep with the lancet and hits the nerve, numbness will occur in it, which is difficult to heal, and it may not heal at all.	The venesector should be very careful in opening it because there is a nerve beneath; and if he takes the scalpel too deep and hits that nerve it will cause stupor, the healing of which will be difficult and perhaps even impossible.	0.7445258
This nerve is often perceptible to the touch. If it is hidden in some people and is thin and not apparent, then you should make your incision with the lancet lengthwise and avoid the nerve as much as possible. If the vein is between two nerves, then incise the vein lengthwise.	Generally this nerve can be felt, but if in some persons it lies hidden and is slender and not discernible, then you should make your venesection an incision with the lancet and diligently avoid the nerve. If the vein lies between two nerves you should cut it longitudinally.	0.8955779
As for the Cephalic vein, the benefit of its phlebotomy is that it draws blood from the head and is useful for eye diseases. It is recommended for this vein, especially, if you want to perform phlebotomy on it, to do it by puncturing with the olive-shaped lancet or the broad basil-shaped lancet because it is the safest of all veins, as there is no artery or nerve underneath it, except that you should avoid the head of the muscle with the lancet and look for the soft spot.	The cephalic vein: section of it is effective in drawing blood from the head and in diseases of the eyes. Particularly in this vein you ought, if you wish to incise it, to make your incision by puncturing with the olivary or the broad myrtle-leaf scalpel, for this is the safest of all veins as there is neither artery nor nerve beneath. When you are cutting it you have only to avoid with the scalpel the head of the muscle and to look for the soft place.	0.82589805
It does not harm it if it is not hit on the first try to repeat the phlebotomy several times, except that it may swell in some people if it is not bled on the first try, but that swelling does not harm it at all.	It will not injure it, if at the first cut you miss the vein, to repeat the incision several times; except that in some people it will sometimes swell up if the section is not made at the first stroke; nevertheless that swelling will do him no harm.	0.7299963
As for the method of phlebotomy, its complications, and what should precede it in its preparation, the first thing you should know is that phlebotomy is either used to maintain health only or used in diseases. The one used to maintain and sustain health and to prevent the occurrence of diseases should be performed on one of the three veins in the elbow, namely the Cephalic, the Akhal, and the Basilic, and the phlebotomy should be performed at the beginning of spring when signs of fullness appear, and it should be done on Sunday or Tuesday after three hours of daylight have passed.	The manner of venesection, the accidents that may supervene, and the necessary preliminaries for performing it properly. First you should know that venesection may be employed either for the preservation of health or in cases of disease. When used for the preservation and maintenance of health and for guarding against the occurrence of disease, the venesection should be in one of the three vessels at the elbow, cephalic, median, or basilic; and it must be performed at the beginning of spring when the signs of repletion appear. The venesection should be done on a Sunday or Tuesday, after three hours of the day have passed.	0.8250904
As for the phlebotomy used in diseases, it has no specific time, but whenever the need and necessity for it arises, whether at night or day, at any hour and at any time.	On the other hand, venesection administered for diseases has no fixed hour but when need and necessity arise, either by night or by day, at any hour, in any season.	0.70554006
Children should not be bled until they reach fourteen years of age, and the elderly who have passed sixty years of age should not be bled.	Children should not be venesected until their fourteenth year, nor should you venesect old men of over sixty years.	0.92291546
If someone intends to have phlebotomy for any reason, it is necessary to cleanse his intestines before phlebotomy with a mild enema if there is a lot of retained waste, so that excess putrid matter that harms the main organs is not drawn from the intestines to the veins during phlebotomy.	When anyone has decided to be bled, for whatever reason, first of all his bowels must be purged with a gentle enema if they contain much excrement, lest at the venesection putrid superfluities be drawn from the bowels into the veins, that might harm the chief parts of the body.	0.7983018
Do not bleed the bloated, the drunk, or the intoxicated until that condition has passed from them. Also, avoid phlebotomy immediately after fever, vomiting, diarrhea, excessive intercourse, fatigue, exercise, staying up late, fasting, and anything that weakens the strength, whether physical or mental.	No one suffering from indigestion or surfeit or drunkenness should be venesected until recovered from these; nor a dropsical patient. Beware also of venesection after stomach-trouble or vomiting or diarrhoea or much intercourse or fatigue or exercise or sleeplessness or fasting and anything else that diminishes the strength both bodily and spiritual.	0.7925639
Then consider thinning the humors before that if the blood is thick, with foods, drinks, and medicines, if possible.	Then, beforehand, see to the refining of the humours, if the blood be thick, by means of food and drink and medicines, if that is practicable for him.	0.835243
Then he should enter the bath if there is no impediment preventing him, or he should engage in some exercise so that the blood thins. And make his phlebotomy in the middle of the day, as we have said. He should aim to clear his mind that day of all bad psychological symptoms such as worries, anger, and fear, and of all physical symptoms such as excessive fatigue and exhaustion, intercourse, and so on.	Then, if there is no contra-indication, let him enter the bath; or let him take a little exercise to make the blood thin. Then perform the venesection in the early part of the day, as we have said. Let him endeavour on that day to have his mind free from all such evil spiritual affections as anxiety, anger, or fear; and from all bodily affections such as excessive fatigue and weariness and intercourse and the like.	0.8850455
And have present in his company things that people are accustomed to using, such as various perfumes, fragrant herbs, entertainment, and so on, each person according to what they can afford.	There should also be in the place where he is sitting such things as are customary for men to enjoy, such as various perfumes, aromatics, and music, and the like, as each one may.	0.7672674
Then the phlebotomist sits on a cushion that is higher than the cushion on which the person being bled sits.	Then the venesector should sit on a cushion raised above the cushion of him whose vein is to be opened.	0.64128596
Then he extends his arm, and the phlebotomist rubs it with his hand two or three times, then tightens the bandage with the cord and twists it two or three times. The tightening should be moderate because if the tightening is not moderate, either by excessive tightening, it will prevent the flow of blood, or if it is too loose, it will also prevent the flow of blood.	Then let him stretch out his arm, and let the venesector chafe it two or three times with his hand; then he should bind a bandage round it by means of thongs twisted two or three times. The ligature should be moderately tight, for any other sort of ligature, be it too tight or too loose, will hinder the flow of blood.	0.8260502
Therefore, the phlebotomist should be firm and take his time in all these matters.	Wherefore it behoves the venesector to be firm and deliberate in all these cases.	0.6774485
Then he lowers the lancet. If it opens the vein on that attempt, then fine, otherwise, he should try again a little below that spot or above it quickly if the area has not swollen.	Then he should apply the knife and if the vein is opened first time, good; but if not, let him repeat a little lower down or a little above, quickly, if the place does not swell.	0.8390945
If it swells or the patient becomes distressed, leave it for a day or two, and do not tighten the bandage, as it may cause a hot swelling. And he should not enter the bath.	If it does swell or the patient be anxious, then leave him for a day or two and do not bandage, for that might perhaps provoke an abscess; nor let him go to the bath.	0.9187374
Then he can resume phlebotomy if he wishes.	Then if he likes, let the venesection be repeated.	0.6523106
If a large swelling occurs at the site of phlebotomy, which often happens, especially for those who have only been bled that one time or if the opening of the vein was small, then quickly place a sponge dipped in slightly warmed water and salt on the swelling and tighten it for an hour, and it will dissolve.	If there occur a big tumour at the site of venesection, as often happens, especially with a man who has not previously undergone venesection or if the opening in the vein be small, then quickly apply to the place a sponge soaked in lukewarm salt and water and bandage it for a while, then it will go down.	0.74876434
You should do this after the blood has completely come out from the vein itself or from another vein.	You should do this after the blood has gone out altogether from the same vessel or from another one.	0.93339187
If something of blackness or greenness remains in the area after a few days, it does not harm. If you wish, apply something of dissolved aloe and myrrh, or some extract of fudenj and the like.	If there remain after some days some discoloration or greenness at the site it will not hurt; if you like, apply some solution of myrrh and aloes, or juice of penny-royal or something similar.	0.85770905
Swelling and a bump often occur during the phlebotomy of the basilic vein, so place your hand on it, and if you find it softens when you press it, then it is a bad bump, so be careful not to put anything on it that we have mentioned because it might bleed arterial blood. But bandage it with something astringent to make the area firm, then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.	Often in section of the basilic vein there occurs tumour and swelling. Put your hand upon it, and if you find that it sinks when pressed then it is a harmful swelling; be careful not to apply to it any of the things we have told you; for often arterial blood comes from it. But apply a poultice with some styptic qualities, to harden the place; then treat in the usual way until healed.	0.8353499
It is necessary to extract blood from every person according to his strength and what appears of the dominant color of the blood. For, if the blood is black, let it out until it turns red, and similarly, if you see it thick, let it out until it thins, and likewise, if it is sharp until its sharpness is gone.	Now in each case you should extract blood in proportion to the person's strength and to the prevailing colour of the blood. If the blood be black, let it flow until it becomes red; in the same way, if you see it is thick, let it run until it is thin; and again, if it be sharp, until its sharpness is gone.	0.90437925
It is necessary for whoever is full-bodied and strong and needs to remove blood all at once to widen the phlebotomy of the vein and let the lancet be wide. And whoever is weak, then the opposite of that. It is best to extract it in rounds and to have the hole narrow.	In the case that is plethoric, robust, and requiring venesection just the once, the incision should be wide and the knife should be broad. And on the contrary for the debilitated person, in whose case you should venesect several times and the opening should be small.	0.6645839
The best way to perform phlebotomy is obliquely, angled and with an incision, not a stab.	The best method in venesecting is if the incision be at an angle, oblique, cutting, not piercing.	0.6878405
This type of phlebotomy is safe from bleeding and from cutting a nerve, and it is better and safer than horizontal or vertical phlebotomy.	This manner of venesecting is safe from haemorrhage and from cutting the nerve; it is better and safer than cutting straight across or straight along.	0.79607594
Whoever usually faints during phlebotomy, it is necessary to feed him before the phlebotomy some bread soaked in sour pomegranate juice or oxymel if he is hot-tempered, and let his blood out in three or four rounds. If he has a cold temperament, he should take before the phlebotomy bread soaked in a drink of water-mint or in honey drink sweetened with spices or in basil-flavored drink.	To the patient who habitually faints during venesection you should give to eat beforehand a little bread macerated in the juice of unripe pomegranates or oxymel, if he be of a warm temperament; and draw off the blood in three or four instalments. And if he be of a cold temperament let him take beforehand bread macerated in syrup of quinces or in aromatic syrup of honey or in fragrant syrup of basil.	0.8793182
If fainting occurs during phlebotomy, and its cause is the loss of a large amount of blood, he should be given meat broth and a thin basil drink. He should use rose water perfume and have his chest gargled with it, and all other things we have mentioned in the section on fainting caused by bloodletting.	If the patient faints during venesection and the cause is great loss of blood, then be should be given to drink meat-juice and thin syrup of basil; and he should perfume himself with galia moschata and anoint his chest with it. And for the rest, use what we have spoken of in its place in the chapter dealing with fainting due to evacuation.	0.8140274
As for whoever wants to relax his arm and let his blood flow again, it is necessary for someone whose phlebotomy was for excessive bloodletting and whose strength is weak, to release blood little by little, according to his strength, on consecutive days.	As for him who wishes to ease his arm and draw off blood a second time, when he is undergoing the venesection on account of great evacuation and the lowness of his strength, you should let the blood slowly, in proportion to his strength, on successive days.	0.81940603
As for whoever wants to relax his arm and let his blood flow again, and whose body is strong, let him do so seven or nine hours after his first phlebotomy.	For him who wishes to ease his arm and draw off blood a second time, being of robust body, it must be done seven or nine hours from the first venesection.	0.84656173
As for whoever wants to draw blood from his body to the opposite side to which it has flowed, he should be treated on the second or third day.	He who wishes to draw blood from his body to the side opposite to that toward which it tends, should be eased on the second or third day.	0.93241346
As for whoever has a lot of blood in his body that has become hot and acute and has caused fever, it is necessary to remove the blood from him all at once and take out a large amount of it and widen the opening until fainting occurs, after having examined all the conditions of phlebotomy, and to place your hand on his pulse when the blood is flowing so that death does not occur instead of fainting. This happens often if the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.	He who has abundant blood that has become hot and sharp and has produced fever should be bled at one time, and a large amount should be taken with a wide opening, until he faints (all the rules of venesection having been observed by you); but you should keep your finger on the pulse while the blood flows lest death take the place of fainting, for that often happens when the venesector is ignorant and there is carelessness. If you wish to loosen the arm and let blood a second time and you find that the opening of the vein is now closed up and the outflow of blood is difficult, you should not press hard upon it nor twist the arm violently, for that is very harmful.	0.80714536
It is not necessary, if you want to loosen the arm and release the blood again, and the mouth of the vein has closed and the blood flow is difficult, to press on it hard or twist with force because that is very bad. Rather, either leave it until you perform phlebotomy again, or remove with the blade of the lancet what has clotted from the blood at the mouth of the vein, or apply to it some salt that has been dissolved in water, or apply some theriac or scammony, and press gently until the blood comes out.	If you wish to loosen the arm and let blood a second time and you find that the opening of the vein is now closed up and the outflow of blood is difficult, you should not press hard upon it nor twist the arm violently, for that is very harmful. Either you must leave him a while and then bleed him again; or the clot of blood can be removed from the opening of the vein by using the blade of the scalpel, or by applying some salt dissolved in water; or apply some of the great theriac or shakhzanaya; and put light pressure upon it until the blood comes out.	0.90465
If the vein is swollen, leave it alone and do not touch it until the swelling subsides.	But if the vein has begun to swell, leave it and do not touch it until the swelling has subsided.	0.8127216
If there is a need to release blood again, it is unavoidable; then either bleed him above that area, or bleed him in the other arm or in the other vein.	And if you are unavoidably called to let blood again, venesect either above the place or in the other arm or another vessel.	0.80719167
As for phlebotomy of the median cubital vein, it is phlebotomized as a substitute for the median and the basilic veins if they are not found or are hidden, for it is composed of the two.	Section of the cord of the arm: this is cut in place of the median and basilic veins when these are not to be found or are hidden; for this vein is composed of those two.	0.68493426
The method of its phlebotomy is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the forearm becomes red and the vein appears clearly, then you tie it above it with the bandage slightly, moderately tight, then you phlebotomize the vein obliquely, a little, not horizontally or vertically, and let the opening be wide and let your phlebotomy be a little above the wrist joint.	The way to venesect it is for the patient to dip his hand in hot water until the forearm is red from the warmth and the vessel stands out distinctly. Then bandage a little above it with a moderate pressure, and then cut the vein a little obliquely, neither transversely nor longitudinally. The incision should be broad, and you should make the cut a little above the wrist.	0.8099062
If blood flow is difficult, put the hand back into the container with hot water and let the blood flow into the water until your need is met. If you are in the summer days, you might not need to put the hand back into the water. Mostly, flowing of the blood into hot water is practiced during winter.	If the blood does not flow easily, have the hand again put into the vessel of hot water and let the blood flow into the water until you have extracted what is needed. If it be in the summer time you may be able to dispense with putting the hand back into the hot water; it is mainly in winter that you let the blood flow into hot water.	0.9251293
Phlebotomy of this vein is safer than all veins, because there is no pulsating vein or nerve beneath it.	Venesection of this vessel is safer than all others for beneath it there is neither artery nor nerve.	0.79977477
As for phlebotomy of the cephalic vein of the right hand, it is beneficial for liver ailments, and the method of its phlebotomy is to tie the wrist with a bandage or with your hand after putting it in hot water until the vein swells and becomes very clear to the touch, then you phlebotomize it slightly obliquely, and even if you cut it completely, it will not harm it at all. Be careful not to go deep with your lancet because the nerve of the fingers is beneath it and the area is devoid of flesh.	Section of the salvatella of the right hand is efficacious in case of diseases of the liver. The method of venesecting it is to tie a band round the wrist or grip it with your hand, after you have put it in hot water until the vein is swollen up and is plainly to be felt; then cut it somewhat obliquely; if you cut it right through that will not matter at all. But be careful not to go too far with the knife, for underneath there are the tendons of the fingers and the place is bare of flesh.	0.7763945
Then put the hand back into the hot water and let the blood flow in it. If you do not return it to the hot water, the blood will clot at the mouth of the vein and stop flowing. Once you have removed the required amount of blood, put some fat and salt on the vein so that it does not heal quickly. The same applies to every narrow branch.	Then put the hand again into hot water and let the blood flow; for if you do not put it into hot water again the blood will clot in the opening and will be prevented from flowing. When you have extracted the required quantity of blood, put oil and salt on the vein so that it does not heal too quickly. You should act thus with every narrow branch.	0.9111359
As for the benefit of phlebotomizing it from the left hand, it is beneficial for spleen ailments, and similarly you do in its phlebotomy as you did with the second one, the same way.	Incision of the salvatella of the left hand is of value in diseases of the spleen. Venesection of it should be carried out in the same manner as you did in the other.	0.63913584
As for the phlebotomy of the saphenous vein, its benefit is for diseases in the lower body such as uterine ailments, menstrual retention, kidney diseases, chronic ulcers of the thighs and legs, and similar diseases.	Venesection of the saphena is beneficial in diseases of the lower part of the body, such as afflictions of the uterus and retention of the menses, and for diseases of the kidneys, and for chronic ulcers of the hips and legs, and similar diseases.	0.7992901
The method of its phlebotomy is to put his leg in hot water and massage it until the veins flow, then tie it above the ankle joint. The vein is located at the heel, visible towards the big toe, and it branches out into many branches on the leg. So, phlebotomize it at its widest branch, or at the heel at its confluence. This is best and safest.	Now the manner of venesection is for the patient to put his foot in hot water, then friction should be applied to it until the veins fill up; then bind a thong over the joint of the foot; then the site of the vein at the ankle is shown up running toward the big toe and forming many branches on the surface of the foot. Then make your incision either in the broadest branch or at the ankle before it ramifies, for that is better and safer.	0.80963343
If you phlebotomize it on the surface of the leg, be careful of the nerves underneath on the surface of the leg, and make your phlebotomy oblique, as if you intend to cut it, and the lancet should be sharp.	If you venesect it on the surface of the foot, be careful of the tendons that are beneath on the surface of the foot. Make the incision obliquely as though you were cutting the vein through. The knife should be a lancet.	0.77800715
If the blood flow is difficult, let him put his leg back in the hot water and leave the blood to flow until it drains.	If the flow of blood be impeded, put the foot back again into hot water and let the blood flow out into it until it is evacuated.	0.9005084
If the phlebotomist misses the vein with the phlebotomy in the first round, let him repeat the phlebotomy slightly above it, for the area is safe and there is no fear of a problem if you are careful of the nerve as we said. And similarly you do with the saphenous vein of the other leg in the same way.	If the venesector makes a mistake the first time in the vein to be cut, let him repeat the section a little higher up, for the.place is safe; you need fear no mischief as long as you are careful of the tendons, as we said before. In the same way you may deal with the saphena of the other foot.	0.8061412
As for the sciatic vein, its place as we said is at the heel of the lateral side, and the benefit of its phlebotomy is for hip pain if it is due to hot blood. The method of its phlebotomy is to have the patient enter the bath quickly and tie his leg from the hip to four fingers above the heel with a thin, long bandage, because it does not appear otherwise.	Now the position of the sciatic vein is, as we said, on the outside near the heel. Section of it is effective in pain in the hip when it arises from hot blood. The way to venesect it is to make the patient get into the bath. Then hasten and bandage his leg from the hip to a distance of four fingers above the heel, with a long narrow bandage; for only this will cause it to appear.	0.7742788
When it appears, phlebotomize it in any case you can, either obliquely, which is better, or sever it completely or make an incision, because its place is safe.	When it has appeared then open it in whatever way you can; at an angle, which is best, or right through, or only cut it open, for it is a safe place.	0.7633833
It is very hidden in most people. If you do not find it and it does not appear to the touch at all, phlebotomize some of its branches, which are those that appear on the back of the foot towards the little and ring fingers. Beware of the nerves, and let out the amount of blood you want, then loosen the bandage and put cotton on the place of phlebotomy and bandage the area, for it heals quickly.	But in many people it is very hard to find; and if you do not find it or it is in no way palpable, then venesect one of its branches, which will be seen on the surface of the foot towards the fourth toe and the little toe. Be careful of the tendons, and let the amount of blood you require. Then loosen the bandage and apply cotton wool to the site of the section and bandage the place; it will heal quickly.	0.7735802

chapter-2-subchapter-96.txt
Chapter ninety-six on cupping and how to use it.	CHAPTER NINETY-SIX. On cupping and the manner of employing it.	0.86264384
Its mouth opening should be two open fingers, as we have illustrated, and its depth should be half a span. And on its side, around the middle, there should be a small hole the size of a needle's entry, made of Chinese copper or yellow copper, with a thick rim, smooth, even, and polished so that it does not harm the organ when placed on it.	Its mouth should be the width of two opened fingers, as we have illustrated; the depth should be half a span; and in the side about halfway down there should be a small hole of a size to admit a needle. It should be made of Chinese bronze or of brass. The edge should be thick, smooth, even, and polished, so as not to injure the part to which it is applied.	0.93003154
And in its center, there should be a transverse rod of copper or iron where the candle is placed with fire. This cupping glass can be made larger than what we described, and smaller, depending on the illnesses and age of the user, for the cupping glasses of children and thin people are different from the cupping glasses of men and bulky bodies.	And in the middle there should be a transverse rod of bronze or iron to carry the lighted lamp. You may make this kind of cupping-vessel in a large size, larger than we have described; and in a small size too, to suit various ailments and the age of the user. For the cupping-vessels for boys and thin persons differ from those for men and stout persons. Now this is the manner of applying this cupping-vessel with fire to a part of the body.	0.86361605
Then light the wick in the manner described and repeat it if needed.	Then light the wick as prescribed and repeat if necessary.	0.9579109
As for the cupping glass that is used for the illness of shuwsa (a swelling/inflammation) with water, it does not have a hardened rod nor a hole, but rather it is used by filling it with water and placing it on the organ only.	But the cupping-vessel that is used in pleurisy, with water, has no cross-piece nor hole; it is used by simply filling with water and applying to the part.	0.6329764
And this is its image:	This is the figure of it.	0.6509332
And this cupping glass, the larger it is to hold much water, the better it is,	Now the larger this cupping-vessel is, to hold much water, the better.	0.8166389

chapter-2-subchapter-97.txt
Chapter ninety-seven on the application of leeches.	CHAPTER NINETY-SEVEN. On the application of leeches.	0.8624683
Leeches are mostly used on organs where cupping glasses cannot be applied, either because they are too small, like the lip and gums, etc., or because the organ is devoid of flesh, like the finger and nose, etc.	Leeches are mostly used on those parts of the body to which application of cupping-vessels is impossible, either because of their smallness, such as the lips, the gums, and so on; or because the part is bare of flesh, like the finger, the nose, and so on.	0.8970414
The method of using them is to select leeches that are in fresh, pure water, free from putrefaction, then leave them for a day and a night in fresh water until they become hungry and nothing remains in their bellies, then the body is first evacuated by phlebotomy or cupping, then the affected organ is rubbed until it becomes red, then the leeches are placed on it, and when they are full, they fall off.	This is the way to use them: you seek some leeches that are in fresh water free of dirt. Then you leave them in fresh water for a day and a night until they are hungry and nothing is left in their bellies; then you purge the patient's body, either by venesection or by the application of cupping vessels; then you scrub the afflicted part until it is flushed; and then place the leeches on it. When they are full they will fall off.	0.7207581
And if it is possible to suck the place with a cupping glass, it is more effective in benefit, otherwise wash the area with vinegar, then with plenty of water, and massage and squeeze it. If the bleeding continues after the leeches fall off and it is oozing, then soak a linen cloth in cold water and place it on top until the oozing stops.	If it is possible to make suction with a cupping vessel, the effect will be greater. But if not, wash the part with vinegar followed by much water; then rub and put pressure on it. If the blood continues to run after the leeches have fallen off, and becomes an ooze, let linen dressings be wetted with cold water and apply them over the place until the oozing stops.	0.89802647
If the bleeding is profuse, sprinkle powdered alum or gallnut or similar astringents on it until the bleeding stops, or place peeled halves of green beans on the area and leave them until the beans stick to the area, then the bleeding will stop.	But if the bleeding be serious then sprinkle upon the place powdered vitriol or gall or similar styptics, until the haemorrhage is stopped. Or let split shelled beans be applied to the place and left until they stick there, and then the bleeding will stop.	0.8089576
And it is advisable, if there is a need to reapply leeches, not to use the same leeches if others are available. If the leeches refuse to attach, then wipe the area with fresh blood, or prick the area with a needle until some blood comes out, then place them; for if they sense some blood, they will stick to the spot. If you want them to fall off, sprinkle on them some aloe, salt, or ash, and they will fall off immediately.	If it is necessary to repeat the application, the same leech should not be applied but another one if you possibly can. If the leeches fail to stick on, the place should be wiped over with fresh blood or pricked with a needle to bring out a little blood; then apply them, for if they smell any blood they will immediately adhere. When you wish to remove them, sprinkle over them a little powdered aloes or salt or ashes, then they will at once fall away.	0.8964547

chapter-3.txt
The third chapter on bone-setting. This chapter is also one of the most important things needed in the practice of medicine, and it is the setting of fractures and dislocations that occur in the bones.	BOOK THREE ON BONE-SETTING This third part of the book, too, is an essential necessity in the practice of medicine; it concerns the setting of the fracture or dislocation occurring in bones.	0.88389874
Know, my sons, that this chapter is claimed by the ignorant among physicians and the common people, and by those who have never perused a book of the ancients on it, nor read a letter of it.	You should know, my sons, that ignorant practitioners and laymen and those who have never turned the pages of a single book of the Ancients about it, nor studied a single letter of it, arrogate this part of the art to themselves.	0.779168
And for this reason, this art of science has become extinct in our country. And I have never met anyone who is good at it at all. But I benefited from it what I benefited because of my long reading of the books of the ancients and my eagerness to understand them until I extracted the knowledge of it from them.	For this reason this section of the science has died out in our parts; I have myself found no one competent in it; and whatever skill I have, I have derived for myself by my long reading of the books of the Ancients and my thirst to understand them until I extracted the knowledge of it from them.	0.82627475
Then I adhered to experience and practice throughout my life.	Then through the whole of my life I have adhered to experience and practice.	0.95722026
And I have depicted for you in this chapter all that my knowledge encompassed and my experience has gone through, after I brought it closer to you and purified it from the branches of prolixity, and I summarized it to the utmost brevity and clarified it to the utmost clarity.	So now I have described for you in this book all that my knowledge has encompassed on the subject and that my experience has encountered; I have made it accessible for you and rescued it from the abyss of prolixity; I have reduced it to a brief outline; and have explained it most clearly.	0.86688644
And I have depicted for you in it many images of the instruments that are used in it, as it is an increase in clarity, as I did in the two preceding chapters.	I have made for you many drawings of the instruments that are used in it, which is an adjunct to explanation, as I did in the two previous books.	0.845447
And there is no power except in Allah, the Most High, the Great.	And there is no power save in God the High, the Great.	0.8896783

chapter-3-subchapter-1.txt
The first chapter, in it are sentences and summaries on the matter of bone fractures, which must be presented.	CHAPTER ONE. In which is given the necessary compendious preliminary information on fractures.	0.62614405
When the broken bone begins to heal, the patient should be nourished with foods that are very nourishing, thick, and firm, and contain stickiness, such as harees, rice, heads, trotters, cow tripe, eggs, soft fish, and thick drinks, and so on, for with this regimen the healing of the fracture will be faster and better.	When the broken bone has begun to mend, the patient should be nourished with very nourishing food, fat, strong, having some glutinous property, such as porridge, rice, heads, trotters, the tripe of cows, eggs, fresh fish, heavy wine, and the like; for on this diet the mending of the fracture will be quicker and better.	0.93299323
And know that broken bones, if they are in strong men and old men, can never connect and heal to their original nature, due to the dryness and hardness of their bones, and bones that are extremely soft, like the bones of young children, may connect and heal. However, nature grows on the broken bone from all its sides something like thick glue that adheres to it and strengthens it until it sticks together and binds together until it becomes extremely strong and firm as it was before, so that nothing hinders its actions.	You should know that fractures occurring in mature and old people cannot join and mend into the original condition, on account of the dryness and hardness of their bones; though any bones that are extremely soft, like those of infants, may make a union and heal. Yet nature produces around the bone on all sides something like glue, with a certain viscosity, with whose help it joins, and it binds so that one part adheres to the other and they are linked to one another until it be good and firm as it had been before; so that there is no impediment to any of its functions.	0.8833736
For this reason, it is necessary to make the patient's diet consist of foods that contain firmness, stickiness, and thickness, as we have said.	It is on this account that the patient's food should be the sort that has solidity and glueyness and thickness, as we have said.	0.8875673
And know that the types of fractures may vary according to the difference in limbs, because a fracture of the leg bone is different from a fracture of the skull, and a fracture of the sternum is different from a fracture of the back, and so on for all the other limbs, each different from the other.	You should know that there are as many different types of fracture as there are members. Thus a fracture of the leg bone differs from a fracture of the cranium; and a fracture of the breast bone differs from a fracture of the bone of the back; and similarly there are differences among the other parts.	0.84511673
And we will mention each type of fracture explained in its chapter, detailed separately from others.	We shall give an exposition of each kind of fracture, each in its own chapter and distinguished from the others.	0.83049875
And the type of bone fracture may also vary in itself, because it may be a fragmented fracture without splinters, or it may be a fracture along the length of the bone with splinters and protrusions, either loose or not loose, and the fracture may be accompanied by a wound and a tear in the skin, or the fracture may be a minor crack.	The fracture of each bone also has its own variations; for the fracture may be a clean break without splintering; or the fracture may be along the bone, with splinters and projections which may be sharp or may not; and the fracture may involve a wound and a laceration of the skin; and the fracture may be a crack.	0.8680142
And each type has a specific technique for its treatment, as will be mentioned in detail in its place.	Each kind has its own special technique of setting which will be mentioned in detail, each in its place.	0.8439059
And know that if the bone is broken into two without splinters, but each part has moved away from its counterpart, you should immediately proceed to straighten and align it before hot swelling occurs.	If the bone is parted and broken in two and there is no fragmentation but a simple separation of one part from its fellow, then you should lose no time in straightening and aligning it before an abscess sets in.	0.6906023
If hot swelling occurs, leave it for a few days until the hot swelling subsides, then align it in any way you can with gentleness and skill.	If an abscess does set in, then let a few days pass until it has subsided; then gently and skilfully straighten it in whatever way you can.	0.805446
And know that its treatment and alignment are easier than a bone that has splinters.	You should know that the setting or alignment of this is easier than that of a splintered bone.	0.7371986
Then tighten it as will be mentioned.	Then bandage as will be prescribed.	0.7815364
If the bone has splinters, it is necessary to extend the broken limb from both sides, whether it is a hand or a leg, either with your hands if the limb is small, or with two ropes, or with a rope and a hand.	But if the bone is splintered, extension from either side is necessary, whether it be hand or foot; with your own hands if it be a small member, or with two ropes or with one hand and a rope.	0.8895588
And let your placement of the limb be on a level surface, in its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken bone are extended, then quickly return those protrusions to their places in every way you can with skill and gentleness, and strive your best not to cause the patient any pain or suffering with your actions, and strive your best to join one bone to its counterpart in the best way.	You should place the part on a flat surface in its natural attitude so that when both parts of the broken bone have been extended you can try to restore the fragments to their proper place with all the skill and gentleness possible; and do your utmost to ensure that the patient experience no pain or distress as you operate. Try diligently to get one part of the bone fitted in the best form to the other.	0.87673855
And it is necessary at that time to touch and palpate them with your hand. If you see something wrong there, correct and align it as much as you can.	At the same time you should palpate and investigate both of them with your hand, and if you find anything wrong then mend it and straighten it to the best of your ability.	0.76836306
And beware of excessive extension and strong pressing, as many ignorant people do, and they often cause hot swelling or chronic pain in the limb with their actions, as I have witnessed their actions many times.	But avoid violent extension or compression which many ignorant people apply; for by doing so they often cause abscess or crippling in the limb, as I myself have many times seen.	0.7554722
Then, after alignment, perfection, and tightening, keep that limb still and at rest, and warn the patient not to move it during his waking and sleeping hours, and when he turns and moves, and when he defecates, and in all his movements to the best of his ability, and let him ensure that the position of the limb is a position in which he is safe from pain.	Then after you have exactly repositioned it and bandaged it, keep that limb still and quiet, and bid the patient beware of moving it while awake or asleep, and in his shifting and stirring, and in opening the bowel, and in every activity, to the utmost of his capacity; and that he should try to let the position of the limb be such that he is free from pain; when pain or distress is felt in any position in which he has disposed the limb, he should move it to a different position in which he feels no pain.	0.88695335
This is because whenever he feels pain or suffering when positioning the limb, he should move it to another position in which he does not feel pain, and he should ensure that this position is level and straight so that no curvature occurs in the limb when it heals.	At the same time he should try to make that position even and straight, so that when the limb is mended there be no curvature in it.	0.6995726
As for how to tighten the broken limb, it is as I am describing to you.	As to the way to bandage a broken limb, it is as I shall now describe to you.	0.90589535
Know that broken limbs differ in their smallness, largeness, and structure. So what is small among them, such as the arm, finger, ulna, and so on, the cloth bandages should be soft and thin, and what is thick among them, such as the thigh, back, and chest, the bandages should be wide and firm, because the wide bandage adheres to the large limb and tightens it from every side evenly, without any gaps.	You should know that limbs which may be fractured vary in their size and shape. The strips of bandage for those that are small, such as an arm or finger or forearm or the like, should be soft and fine, while those that are thick, such as the hip, back, or breast, should have broad and strong bandages. For a broad bandage holds fast to a big limb, binding it all round with an even pressure so that no defect may occur.	0.8994949
Then wrap another bandage around it, then immediately apply the firm splints over these wraps if there is no swelling or hot inflammation in the limb.	Then wind over it another bandage and at once lay over it strong splints, if the part be not swollen and effused.	0.8147203
If there is swelling or hot inflammation in it, apply to it what soothes that swelling and removes the swelling, and leave it for a few days, then tighten the splints on it at that time. And let the splints be made of wide, carved, and wisely prepared reed halves, or let the splints be made of sieve wood, which is made from pine, palm leaf stalks, heather, or alkali, and so on, of what is available.	But if there be swelling or effusion in the part, apply something to allay the swelling and disperse the effusion; leave it on for several days and then bind on the splints. The splints should be made of broad halves of cane, cut and shaped with skill; or the splints may be made of the wood used for sieves, which are made of pine; or of palm branches; or of brier or giant fennel or the like, whatever wood be at hand.	0.85302204
And let the width of each splint be exactly like this image and this shape, except that the splint that is placed on the fracture itself should be slightly thicker and wider than the other splints.	The size of each splint should be of this form and shape, except that the splint that is placed on the fracture itself should be a little thicker and broader than the others.	0.86898977
As for the length of the splint, it is made according to what is appropriate for the broken limb, in terms of its size.	As to the length of the splint, it should be greater or less as suits the fractured part.	0.77578366
Image of the splint:	Figure of a splint.	0.6734103
Then you tighten over the splints with another bandage, according to your first tightening exactly, then you tie from above with tight threads according to what we mentioned about the tightening, which is that your tightening on the site of the fracture be more, and the further away from the fracture, the less the tightening.	Then bind over the splints another bandage just as tightly as you did your first; then over that tie it up with cords arranged in the way we have said, that is, with the pressure greatest over the site of the fracture and lessened as you move away from it.	0.86454856
And the threads should be medium in thickness and thinness, and let them be of wet linen especially, because if the threads are thick, like what I have seen from the actions of the ignorant who make their threads from twisted linen strips, which is a grave mistake, because the tightening with them becomes excessive, and the thin threads are also not suitable because you will not achieve the tightening you desire with them.	The cords should be of medium thickness, of linen supple of quality. For if the cords are too thick, such as I have seen ignorant people use who made their cords of twisted bands of linen, that will be a grave error, for moderate tension with these is impossible. Nor are fine threads suitable either, for with these you cannot achieve sufficient tension.	0.847407
And there should not be less than a finger's width between the splint and the splint, and if the patient is harmed by the edges of the splints after tightening in the correct places, then put under them soft lint or fluffed wool so that it does not harm him in any way.	Nor are fine threads suitable either, for with these you cannot achieve sufficient tension. Between splints there should be a space of not less than a finger's breadth. If, after bandaging, the patient is hurt in the sound parts by the ends of the splints, then put a little soft tow or carded wool under them until they no longer hurt him thus.	0.79491436
And if the fracture is with a wound and a tear in the skin has occurred, we will mention it separately.	As for the case of a fracture accompanied by an open wound, it will be mentioned in a special section on its own.	0.7123575
And know that not every fractured limb should be tightened with splints from the first day, because if the limb is large, the splints should not be placed on it except after five days or seven or more, depending on your safety from the occurrence of a hot swelling.	You should know that not every fracture should be bound up with splints on the first day; that is, when the part is big you should not apply splints until five or seven days after, or more, depending on when you are satisfied that there is no effusion.	0.8537759
And this is the description of the bandages with which the ancients used to set fractures, which are placed on the fracture, the jaw, and the sprain.	This is a description of the plasters that the Ancients used for repair, applied to a fracture, dislocation, or sprain.	0.70941645
Description of a brief, common bandage that sets fractures and is suitable for most temperaments, especially children and women, because it is neither predominantly hot nor cold.	Description of a common simple plaster for the repair of fractures, suited to most constitutions, particularly for women and children, because in it there predominates neither hot nor cold.	0.8751823
And it is that you take from the dust of the millstone, which is the heart of the flour that clings to the walls of the millstone during the movement of the mill, then you knead it as it is, without sifting it, with egg white, and you make its kneading neither thick nor thin, then you use it.	Take mill-dust, that is, the fine flour that sticks to the walls of a mill as the grindstone moves. Pound it as it is without sieving, with egg-white, to a medium consistency; then use.	0.6893734
Description of another bandage that sets fractures, dislocations, and sprains. Take ten dirhams each of mastich, labdanum, acacia, frankincense, bark of the acacia tree, and sugar, five dirhams each of myrrh and aloe, twenty dirhams of tamarisk, and twenty dirhams of Armenian or Greek clay; pound all together and mix with tamarisk water or with egg white if the patient's temperament is hot, then use this bandage, for it is well-composed, quickly sets broken bones, and is suitable for most people due to its moderation.	Description of another plaster for the repair of a fracture, luxation, or dislocation: take ten drachms each of pulse, gum-mastic, acacia, elecampane, mughath, and sukk; five drachms each of myrrh and aloes; twenty drachms of tamarisk and twenty drachms of clay of Armenia or Asia Minor; all should be pounded fine and mixed with water of tamarisk, or with eggwhite if the patient be of a warm constitution; then use this plaster, which is excellent for uniting, quickly repairing broken bones, and suits most people because of its mildness.	0.9278445
Description of another bandage that is also useful for fractures and sprains. Take ten dirhams each of acacia bark, mastich, and white marshmallow, five dirhams each of myrrh and aloe, six dirhams of acacia, twenty dirhams of Armenian clay; pound all together finely, sift, and knead with water or egg white, and use.	Description of another plaster valuable for a fracture or sprain: let there be taken ten drachms each of mughath, pulse, and white marsh mallows, five drachms each of myrrh and aloes, six drachms of acacia, and twenty drachms of Armenian clay. Let them all be well beaten up and passed through a sieve and made into a paste with water or egg-white and used.	0.91780466
Description of a bandage for joints and bones displaced from their places, and it soothes the pain that occurs to them, and for bone fissures and fractures. Take clarified wool, dip it in vinegar and cooked oil, and place it on the affected area.	Description of a plaster for dislocated joints or bones, soothing the accompanying pain, and for a crack or fissure of bone: let unwashed wool be taken and soaked in a decoction of oil and vinegar and applied to the place.	0.82972175
This bandage does not have the strength to set bones, but it is excellent in soothing hot swelling and relieving pains in particular.	Now this plaster has no power of repair but it is outstanding for reducing effusion and dispersing pain.	0.7073392
Description of another bandage that sets broken bones. Take the leaves of the mute fig and the leaves of wild poppy, pound them together, and apply them moist.	Description of another plaster for the repair of a broken bone: let there be taken the leaves of the hard fig and of the wild poppy and both be beaten up together and a plaster made of them while still fresh and damp.	0.7428725
Description of another brief bandage used when the bone fracture is setting and you want to resolve the remaining swelling. Take one part each of marshmallow root, chamomile, violet flowers, and cress seed flour; pound all together and knead it with clay if the limb is not inflamed; if it is inflamed, knead it with coriander water or with water and use it.	Description of another simple plaster used when a fracture is mending and you wish to disperse residual swellings: take one part each of marsh mallow root, chamomile, violet flowers, and flour of vetch; pound it all and make a paste with decoction of wine, if the part be not inflamed. But if it be inflamed make it up with water of fresh coriander or plain water, and use.	0.897713
Description of another bandage, stronger in resolving than the first, used when a hard swelling occurs when the bone is setting. Take one part each of marshmallow root, flax seed, fenugreek, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, and chamomile; pound all together and knead with purslane water or fresh water or with clay, all depending on the heat of the limb and the calmness of its heat.	Description of another plaster stronger than the former for resolving, used if a hard swelling arises as the bone sets: let there be taken equal parts of each of marsh mallow roots, linseed, fenugreek, melilot, sweet marjoram, violet flowers, and chamomile; they should all be beaten up together and made into a paste with willow infusion or sweet water or wine, according to whether the part is inflamed or its heat has subsided.	0.88931733
As for Hippocrates, he did not mention in his book that anything be placed on the fractured limb when setting it except the cerate made from wax and oil, nothing else, and he described it as being medium between thick and thin.	Now Hippocrates in his book did not mention any application for the repair of a fractured part except a wax plaster made of wax and oil, nothing else. He prescribed that it be of a consistency midway between thick and thin.	0.8358078
As for Galen, he saw that things that have dryness with some heat, such as myrrh, aloe, frankincense, and similar to what we mentioned, should be placed on the fractured limb when setting it.	Galen, on the other hand, thought it good to apply to the broken limb, when it is mending, things which have a certain power of drying, with some heat, such as myrrh, aloes, olibanum, and the sort of thing we have mentioned.	0.82860637
Description of a bandage that is useful for weakness and pain. Take equal parts of acacia bark, chickpeas, cut human hair or bird feathers, marshmallow, and salt; pound, sift, knead, and apply as a bandage.	Description of a plaster valuable for debility and pain: let equal parts of each be taken of mughath, chickpease, minced human hair or birds' feathers, marsh mallows and salt; grind it up and pass through a sieve and make into a paste and use as a plaster.	0.88272643
As for the amount of time the bandage should remain then be loosened, it is that you observe, and if the patient does not experience pain, itching, or movement of the broken bone from its place, then do not loosen it for many days.  If severe itching, disturbing pain, or swelling occurs in the area, then hasten to loosen it immediately and do not delay that at all, and remove the bandage from it.	As to the length of time the bandages should remain on before being loosened: you should keep an eye on the patient and if he suffers no pain or itching or any shifting of the broken bone, then they should not be loosened for a number of days; but if he experiences at the place a violent itching or a disturbing pain or swelling, then hasten to loosen them and make no delay; and remove the plaster.	0.8909333
Then take a soft cloth or a moist sea sponge, dip it in lukewarm water, and wash the area with it until the itching and pain subside. Then leave the limb to rest for an hour, then apply to it clarified wool dipped in vinegar and oil or rose oil, and tie it on for a night until you are safe from hot swelling, the swelling of the limb subsides, and its pain goes away.  Then return it to gentle tightening and a light bandage, and do not tighten it as your first tightening, and be gentle with it until it heals.	Then you must take a soft cloth or a soft marine sponge and dip it in tepid water and bathe the place until the itching subsides and the pain settles; then let the limb rest for an hour; then apply to it raw wool soaked in oil and vinegar or oil of roses, and bandage it on for one night until you are sure there is no effusion and the swelling of the limb has subsided and the pain has gone. Then put the bandage on again gently, and a light plaster; do not bind it up as you did at the first but go gently with it until it heal.	0.95348555
If you see that the swelling, redness, pain, swelling, and all the symptoms have completely disappeared, and you need the bandage and tightening, then reapply it as you did initially, exactly.	If you see that the effusion, inflammation, pain, swelling, and other symptoms are totally gone, and you need to plaster and bandage it, then repeat just as you did at first.	0.9120413
If none of what we mentioned occurs in the limb, do not loosen it except after three days or four or five or seven, and it may be left for twenty days, all of that depending on what you observe of the condition of the limb, as we said, until the fracture sets and the flesh nearly coagulates on it, then increase the tightening more than your first tightening altogether, and also increase the thickening of the patient's food as mentioned previously.	But if none of these things that we have mentioned occur, then do not loosen it until after three, four, or five days or a week; sometimes it may be left up to twenty days, depending on how the limb appears to you, as we said, until the fracture be united and the flesh over it be near to joining. Then bandage more tightly than before, and increase the heaviness of the patient's food as has been mentioned.	0.89729583
If you see that the site of the fracture has dried and become emaciated more than it should, then know that nourishment is prevented from reaching it, so moisten it with lukewarm water every time you loosen it, and let that be every three days, and slightly reduce the tightening, for by this action nourishment will flow to the limb and it will heal quickly.	If you see the place of the fracture getting more dry and thin than it should, you may know that nourishment is being prevented from reaching it; so foment it with tepid water each time you loosen it; do this every three days, and ease the bandaging somewhat. This action makes nourishment flow to the limb and it will quickly heal.	0.9410885
As for what the ignorant bone-setters do, of breaking the limb again if it did not set properly the first time and set crookedly, it is a mistake of their doing and a great deception. If it were correct, the ancients would have mentioned it in their books and practiced it, and I have not seen any trace of that from any of them at all, and the correct thing is not to do it.	What some ignorant bone-setters do is to break the bone again if at first the repair is not as it should be and has mended crookedly. This operation of theirs is mistaken and dangerous; if it were right the Ancients would undoubtedly have spoken of it in their books and would have used it. But I have not found a trace of it in a single one of them; and the right course is not to use it.	0.83992183

chapter-3-subchapter-2.txt
The second chapter on the fracture occurring in the head.	CHAPTER TWO. On a fracture occurring in the head.	0.82322794
The types of fractures occurring in the head are many, their forms are various, and their causes are diverse.	The kinds of fracture occurring in the head are many, of various forms and differing causes.	0.93754673
Some fractures result from a sword blow, and it may either completely shave the bone until it reaches the membrane beneath it, like an adze does to wood, and therefore this type of fracture is called adze-like (qadumi).	Some fractures are due to a sword-stroke which may cut right through the bone and reach the membrane beneath the bone, like an adze-cut in wood, for which reason this kind of cut is called 'ascial'.	0.83301413
Or, the sword may cut part of the bone and shave only its surface without penetrating through it completely, and this type of fracture is called a simple extraction (qala).	Or the sword may cut through part of the bone, only slicing through the surface and not reaching the depth; this kind is called an absolute avulsion.	0.7293142
The wound of these two types of fractures may be either large or small.	The wounds in these two fractures can be either big or small.	0.94512606
Some fractures are comminuted or crushed, caused by a blow with a stone or a fall on a stone or something similar.	There are also some fractures accompanied by smashing or crushing; such as by a blow from a stone or by falling on a stone, and the like.	0.83921546
This fracture is either penetrating, having almost reached the membrane under the bone, or it is on the surface of the bone. The wound of these two types of fractures is also either large or small.	A fracture of this kind will be either penetrating, reaching the membrane beneath the bone; or superficial; the wound in these two fractures may be either big or small.	0.91437465
Some fractures are hidden in the bone with the thinness of a hair, which is a slight fissure, and therefore this type of fracture is called hairline (sha'ri).	Then there is a type of fracture that is hidden in the bone, as fine as a hair, a thin crack; therefore this kind of fracture is called 'capillary'.	0.7039302
Among them is a fracture caused by a fall or a blow from a stone or something similar, which causes the surface of the bone to depress inward, creating a concavity, similar to what happens to a copper pot when struck, causing a part of it to depress inwards.	There is a fracture due to a fall or a blow from a stone and the like, making a dent in the surface of the bone and a hollow at the site as occurs in a bronze bowl when a blow falls on it and a portion of it is pushed in.	0.7807399
This most often occurs in heads with soft bones, like the heads of children.	This mostly occurs in heads whose bones are soft, as those of children.	0.9485999
All of these types of fractures may have loose or non-loose fragments. We will discuss the treatment of all of this in its proper place.	Any of these kinds of fracture may also have splinters, jagged or otherwise; we shall deal with the treatment of all these in their place.	0.7650455
We identify all of these types of fractures by examining them, probing them with probes, and removing the dead flesh from them.	All these kinds of fracture are diagnosed by laying them bare and investigating them with probes and removing all the lacerated tissues over them.	0.82978034
As for the hairline type, it is identified by exposing the bone, wiping it, and smearing it with ink; the fracture will appear black.	The 'capillary' kind is diagnosed by laying bare the bone, wiping it clean, and rubbing ink on it, when the fracture will appear black.	0.6909435
As for the treatment of fractures, first look at the patient's symptoms. If you see symptoms that clearly indicate danger, such as vomiting bile, stretching, loss of consciousness, loss of voice, fainting, acute fever, bulging and redness of the eyes, and other similar symptoms, then do not approach the patient nor treat him, for death is inevitable in most cases with these symptoms.	As to the treatment of the fracture: begin by paying attention to the patient's symptoms. If you observe any symptom clearly indicating something dangerous, such as bilious vomit, convulsion, mental derangement, loss of voice, fainting, high fever, protrusion and inflammation of the eyes, and similar symptoms, then leave the patient alone and do not treat him; for in the majority of cases these symptoms undoubtedly indicate the approach of death.	0.9195881
If you see symptoms that do not alarm you, and you hope for his recovery, then proceed with his treatment.	But if you find symptoms that do not alarm you and you see hope of recovery for him, then begin treatment as follows.	0.8475592
That is, if the injured person comes to you immediately after being injured, and it is during the winter, you should strive to remove the bone before the fourteenth day in any case.	If he be brought to you immediately after his injury and it be the season of winter, you should try to remove the bone, at all events before the fourteenth day.	0.8005918
If it is during the summer, you should hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, before the membrane under the bone becomes infected, leading to the symptoms we described.	If it be summer you must hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, before the covering membrane beneath the bone and over the brain be infected, and before the above-mentioned symptoms occur.	0.8532256
If the bone fracture has reached the membrane covering the brain, and it is accompanied by comminution and crushing, then you should cut the comminuted and crushed part as I will describe to you.	If the fracture has already reached the cerebral membrane with fragmentation of the bone and depression, then you must cut out the splintered and broken part as I shall now describe to you.	0.8755013
That is, shave the injured patient's head and expose the bone in any way possible, depending on the shape of the wound and what is easiest for the patient.	Shave the head of the injured patient and lay the bone bare in any way you can, following the course of the injury and in the manner least grievous to the injured man.	0.72952193
If you encounter bleeding or a hot swelling when exposing the bone, address it as necessary. That is, pack the area with rags soaked in syrup and rose oil, and clean the wound until the swelling subsides and the bleeding stops.	If, when you lay the bone bare, you encounter a haemorrhage or abscess, meet the case with suitable remedies; that is, pack the place with dressings soaked in wine and oil of roses, and cleanse the wound until the swelling subsides and you are safe from haemorrhage; then begin the trepanning and removal of the bone.	0.85480547
Then proceed to excise and remove the bone, which can be done in one of two ways.	This may be done in one of two ways.	0.5177922
The first way is to cut the bone with a fine, narrow-bladed instrument, and this is its image:	One way is to cut the bone with a fine-bladed chisel, this being the figure of it.	0.72571766
Then you use another piece after this piece, slightly wider, and this is its picture:	Then after this one employ another chisel, a little broader. It is figured here.	0.7460994
Then you also use another chisel, wider than the second.	Then use yet another chisel still broader than the second.	0.9218601
And it is necessary that you have a set of different chisels, some of which are wider than others and some of which are shorter than others, and they should be extremely sharp at their edges. And let them be made of Indian iron or good steel.	You should have by you a number of different chisels, some broader than others and some shorter than others; their tips should be exquisitely sharp; and they should be made of Indian iron or best steel.	0.9047731
And use gentleness in striking the chisel, lest you shake the head and harm it.	Let the strokes upon the chisel be gentle lest the head be shocked or injured.	0.6864912
If the bone is strong and hard, then it is appropriate that you drill around it before using the chisels with the drills they called non-sinking drills.	If the bone be strong and hard you should, before you use the chisel, make perforations round about it with drills called 'non-sinking' drills.	0.90737414
And they called them non-sinking drills because they do not go beyond the limit of the skull bone to what is behind it, because the drill has a round edge below its sharp head, similar to a collar or small circle, that prevents it from sinking and exceeding the thickness of the bone.	Their name of non-sinking drills is due to their not piercing the cranial bone through to what is beneath, because the drill has a circular margin beneath its sharp head like a small collar or wheel, that prevents it from sinking in and going beyond the thickness of the bone.	0.8840729
And it is appropriate for you to take from these drills a large number, each one of which is suitable for the thickness of that bone, so that you have for each skull a drill whose sharp tip is of a length and shortness appropriate to the thickness of that skull.	You must obtain a large number of these drills each of which will suit a certain thickness of bone; so that for each skull you have a drill whose pointed extremity is of a length to suit the thickness of that skull.	0.86439943
And this is a picture of three types of drills: large, medium, and small:	Here are figured three kinds of drill, large, medium, and small.	0.8006225
As for the method of drilling around the broken bone, it is that you place the drill on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated. Then you move the drill to another place and make the distance between each hole the thickness of the probe or similar.	As to the manner of perforation round the fractured bone, you apply the drill to the bone and revolve it with your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced, then you transfer the drill to another place, making the distance between the perforations about the thickness of a probe.	0.91411185
Then you cut with the cutters between each two holes and do that with the utmost gentleness you can, as we said, until you remove the bone either with your hand or with something else from some of the instruments that were prepared for that, such as forceps and delicate hooks.	Then with the chisels cut out the bone between the perforations, using the utmost delicacy, as we have said. Then take out the bone, either with your hand or with some other instrument you have ready for the purpose, such as forceps or fine tongs.	0.85975957
And you should be very careful that the drill or the cutter does not touch any of the periosteum.	You will have to observe the utmost caution that neither drill nor chisel touch any part of the membrane.	0.7453159
So if you hollow out the bone and it is cleared of the periosteum, if it was attached to it, and you take it out, then you should scrape and smooth the roughness of what remains in the bone with another instrument similar to the cutter, except that it should be thinner and smoother than the rest of the cutters.	When you have cut the bone circularly, free from the membrane if adherent to it, and have removed it, then you will have to scrape away and smooth out all the roughness in the remaining bone with another instrument, resembling a chisel, except that it must be finer and slenderer than any of them.	0.8095225
If anything remains of the small bones and fragments, then take them gently with the instruments you have, then treat the wound after that with bandages and ointments which will be mentioned.	If there are any little bits or spicules of bone left, pick them out with whatever instrument you can, gently; and then treat the wound with dressings and ointments as we shall describe.	0.8486155
As for the other aspect of the procedure, it is an easy aspect, far from danger, mentioned by Galen and praised highly, and this is his saying: You should first start by exposing the part of the bone from the place where the fracture is most severe and obvious, so that when you have exposed that part, you place under it the tip of this lenticular cutter, and this is its picture:	The other way of operating is altogether easy and free from danger; Galen mentioned it and greatly praised it; these are his words: You should begin by laying bare that part of the bone where the fracture is severest and most obvious; when you have done so, place under it the tip of this lenticular chisel figured here.	0.887349
The lenticular part of it should be smooth, not cutting anything, and the sharp part of it on its sides going lengthwise, as you see, so that the lenticular part rests on the peritoneum and the face of the sharp section is on the bone.	The lenticular part of it should be smooth and not for cutting, the sharp part of it being on both sides longitudinally, as you see; so that the lenticular part is resting upon the meninges while the cutting surface is on the bone.	0.8564001
Then you strike the section from one side with a small hammer until you cut all the bone gently as it rotates, and you are safe from the membrane, no frightening accident will happen at all, even if the therapist is the most ignorant and cowardly of people, yes, even if he is sleepy.	Then with a small hammer strike the tool on one side until you gently cut through the bone in a circle, in the confident knowledge that nothing untoward can happen to the membrane even though the operator be the most ignorant and cowardly of men; yes, even if he be sleepy.	0.81967086
If something attached to the bone from the membrane remains in some places of the bone, then scrape it off with the edge of the lenticular section itself and gently remove it from it, for it will be removed without harm or fear.	If any membrane stick to any part of the bone, strip it off with the lenticular tip of the chisel and free it gently from it, for it will come away without harm or danger.	0.8730229
But if the bone fracture did not penetrate to the membrane, and what was cut from the bone was its surface, and roughness and fine fragments remained in it, then it is necessary to strip that roughness and remove those fragments with fine scrapers, of which several different sizes have been made, so that you can use them in every place that is most suitable and most appropriate, depending on what the work and the broken bone itself and its shape lead you to.	If it be a fracture of the bone not reaching to the meninges, only the surface of the bone being separated, and there remain some roughness and fine splinters, you should smooth down the roughness and remove the splinters with fine scrapers, of which you should have a number, of varying sizes so that you can use the one best fitted and most suitable, in the light of what is suggested by your operative method and the broken bone itself and its shape.	0.84085065
And you should use in your stripping first for the bone the widest of those scrapers, then use after it a finer one, and you continue to do that successively until you get to using the finest and thinnest of them all.	When you smooth the bone you must first use the broadest of the scrapers and then a finer one, and so on until you come to use the finest and slenderest of all.	0.8682128
As for the rest of the small capillary cracks and the fine fracture, it is necessary to use a treatment for each one according to what leads to its healing, and it is something that is not hidden from anyone who has the slightest training in this craft and has come across what we have written and explained in major fractures.	As to the rest, the little capillary fractures and fine fissures, you will have to apply to each of them that treatment that will bring about a perfect repair. This is obvious to anyone who has the least practice in this art and is acquainted with what we have written in explanation of the big fractures.	0.8882633
If the membrane remains exposed when you remove the bone, then you should take a linen cloth the size of the wound and dip it in rose oil and place it on the mouth of the wound, then take another folded or triangular cloth and dip it in syrup and rose oil and place it on the first cloth, and do that as lightly as you can so that you do not weigh down the peritoneum, then use a wide bandage over it and do not tighten it except as much as it holds the wound only.	If the meninges are left bare when you remove the bone, you should take a linen dressing measured to the wound, soak it in oil of roses, and apply it to the opening of the wound; then take another dressing, folded in two or three, soak it in wine and oil of roses and apply it over the first with the utmost gentleness so as not to press upon the meninges; then employ a broad bandage on top, but tighten it only enough to keep the wound covered.	0.8597995
And you leave it with this treatment for a day or two until you are safe from the hot swelling, then you dissolve it and use after that the medicines that have excess dryness, such as orris roots, cress flour, frankincense powder, and zedoary, and the like, which is to make a powder from these medicines and sprinkle it on the wound as it is dry, and in general, use a medicine in it that clarifies and does not sting.	Leave it with this dressing on for a day or two until you are sure there is no abscess; then loosen it and apply desiccant remedies such as lily roots, vetch-flour, powdered frankincense, birthwort, and the like. The method is that you make a powder of these drugs and sprinkle it, dry as it is, upon the wound; in short, in these cases use drugs whose nature is cleansing and not irritating.	0.8100071
And strive your best while treating the wound that it be clean, that there be no harm to the fat or dirt in it, and do not let pus gather in it at all, because pus, if it gathers on the brain membrane, corrupts it and rots it, so a great affliction happens to the patient from that.	In this be most diligent, that the wound, while you are treating it, be clean; nor let there be any dirty vestiges of ointment in it or any filth; and let no pus collect in it; for when pus collects on the meninges it corrupts them and renders them necrotic, which causes great harm to the patient.	0.85793126
Blackness may appear on the surface of the peritoneum of the head when the bone is exposed from it, especially if its treatment is neglected, you have observed. If the symptoms we mentioned appear to the patient, then know that he is inevitably doomed.	Sometimes the surface meninges go black when the bone is removed, especially when the treatment of them is neglected; so observe, and if the patient exhibit any of the symptoms that we have mentioned you may know that he is undoubtedly doomed.	0.7875781
And if the blackness only occurred from a medicine placed on it, and it was in the power of that medicine to cause that blackness, then it is necessary to take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil and beat them well and smear a cloth with them, then place it on the peritoneum, then treat it with the types of treatment that are necessary until it heals.	But if the blackness be due to some medicament applied to it, which has the power to produce blackness of that kind, then you should take one part of honey and three parts of oil of roses, beat them well up together, spread on a cloth and apply it to the membrane; then treat as necessary until cured.	0.8567903

chapter-3-subchapter-3.txt
Know that nothing breaks from the nose except its upper two sides together or one of them, because they are bones, because the lower part of it is cartilage and does not break.	You should know that the only portion of the nose that can break is the upper portion in its entirety or in one of its two parts; for it consists of two bones.	0.73692286
But rather, it is subject to bruising, bending, and flattening.	The lower portion is cartilaginous and unbreakable; what can happen to it is contusion, twisting, or flattening.	0.44122857
If one of its sides breaks, then you should insert the little finger into the nostril and straighten that fracture from the inside with your index finger and thumb from the outside until you restore the nose to its natural shape. And let that be done by you gently, and be careful that your action does not cause the patient pain.	If one of the two (upper) parts be broken you should pass your little finger into the nostril and straighten out the fracture from inside, with your index and thumb outside, until you reduce the nose to its natural shape; do it gently, and take care that you do not cause the patient pain in doing it.	0.89089805
If the fracture is in the top of the nose and the finger cannot reach it, then it should be straightened with the tip of a slightly thick probe.	If the fracture be in the upper part of the nose and your finger does not reach it, it should be evened by means of a probe with some thickness to it.	0.92671293
If the fracture is on both sides, then do the same.	If the break be on both sides, follow the same course.	0.79795516
And hasten to set it on the first day of the fracture if possible, otherwise after the seventh or tenth day when the hot swelling subsides.	Haste must be made to set it on the first day if possible; but if not, after the seventh or tenth day when the effusion has subsided.	0.8467715
Then insert into the nostril a wick of linen scraps if the fracture is on one side, or insert two wicks if the fracture is on both sides. And let the thickness of the wicks be enough to fill the nostril.	Then introduce into the nasal foramen a linen pad, if it be a unilateral fracture, or two pads if it be bilateral; the pads should be thick enough to fill the nasal foramen.	0.883788
Some of the early bone-setters mentioned that the wicks should be moistened with fat and changed every day. But I do not see that. Rather, the wicks should be moistened in egg white mixed with mill dust. Then leave the wicks until the bone is stabilized and the cartilage hardens.	Certain of the ancient bone-setters suggest that you should soak the pads in butter and change them daily, but I do not think so; you should rather soak them in egg-white made up into a paste with mill-dust; then leave the pads in until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardens.	0.883091
You may insert goose feather tubes in the nose in place of the wicks after wrapping soft rags around them. This will make their retention for the nasal fracture stronger and so that the patient is not prevented from breathing.	Sometimes, instead of pads, the stems of goose-quills are introduced into the nose after being wound round with a piece of soft cloth, so as to make a stronger support for the fracture of the nose and not to hinder the patient's breathing.	0.7330572
This is not necessary, if you wish, do it, and if you wish, make the wicks.	This is not absolutely necessary; do it if you prefer; or, if you prefer, put in pads.	0.7940625
If a hot swelling occurs in the nose during your work, then dress the nose with cerate or with cotton dipped in vinegar and rose oil or some of the diachylon ointment.	If during your operation an abscess occurs, apply to the nose a wax plaster or cotton wool soaked in vinegar and oil of roses or a little diachylon ointment.	0.85052073
If a hot swelling does not occur, then you should dress it from the outside with semolina flour and frankincense powder mixed with egg white. Then place a soft bandage on it and do not tie the nose with anything at all.	If no abscess occurs you should apply externally a plaster of white flour and frankincense made into a paste with egg-white; then put on top some soft tow, but do not bind up the nose at all.	0.8674832
If the nasal bones are broken into small pieces or shattered, then you should incise over them and remove them with the appropriate instrument. Then sew the incision and treat it with what heals and closes from the appropriate ointments for that.	If the nasal bones are broken into small pieces or crushed, you should cut down upon them, remove them with a suitable instrument, and then suture the incision and dress with suitable ointments which encourage granulation and scarring.	0.8873385
If a wound occurs inside the nose, then you should treat it with wicks and use lead tubes until it heals.	If there occur an internal wound of the nose, you should dress it with pads and employ leaden tubes until it heals.	0.8845303

chapter-3-subchapter-4.txt
Chapter four on the reduction of the lower jaw if it is broken	CHAPTER FOUR. On the repair of a broken lower jaw.	0.68526524
If the lower jaw is fractured and the fracture is not accompanied by a wound, examine it. If the fracture is external only and not a double fracture and it is concave inward, then its diagnosis is easy. Thus, if the fracture is in the right fissure, you should insert the index finger of the left hand into the patient's mouth. Similarly, if the fracture is in the left fissure, you should insert the index finger of the right hand.  Gently lift the hump of the fracture outward from the inside, and with your other hand from outside the bone, control and align it.	When the lower jaw is broken and it is a fracture without an open wound, examine it. If it is merely an external fracture, not broken in two but sunken inwards, which is easily recognized, you should introduce the index of your left hand into the patient's mouth if it be a right-hand fracture; but your right index if it be a left-sided fracture; and with this, from within, push the concavity of the fracture gently outwards, with the other hand outside, regulating the correction.	0.9217868
If the fracture of the jaw is in two pieces, then extension should be applied from both sides in a straight line until you can align it.	If the break in the jaw be total, into two, traction must be employed, in a straight line on both sides, until it can be set.	0.8502008
If the teeth have become loose or separated, tie those that you hope will remain with gold, silver, or silk thread. Then, place cerate on the broken jaw, and place a folded cloth over it. On the cloth, place a large, tight splint or a piece of shoe leather equal to the length of the jaw. Then bandage it from above as it seems appropriate to you to bandage it and tie it so that it will not become loose. Order the patient to be quiet and still, and make his food soft broths.	If any of the teeth be loosened or broken away, bind those that you hope may be preserved with a gold or silver or silken ligature; then put wax upon the fractured mandible, and upon that a doubled dressing, and upon the dressing a large and strong splint or a piece of shoe-sole leather, the length of the jaw; then over that bandage in such wise as you conveniently can and as will conduce to drawing it together so as not to loosen. Bid the patient hold himself quiet and still, and let his food be soft broths.	0.8984012
If you think that something has changed in the shape in any way, then quickly undo it on the third day. Then repair what you bandaged with mill dust mixed with egg white or with semolina flour, after removing the cerate from it. Place a soft bandage on the dressing.	If you think there is any change of form at all, hasten to loosen it on the third day; then correct the change and apply a plaster of mill-dust and egg-white, or of white flour, after you have removed the wax from it, applying soft tow over the plaster.	0.88280934
As long as that dressing adheres to it and the condition of the bone has not changed, leave it and do not undo it until it heals and the fracture becomes firm. This fracture often becomes firm in three weeks.	So long as the plaster sticks on it and the bone undergoes no change of state, let it be and do not loosen until it heals and the fracture mends, for often a fracture of this kind mends in three weeks.	0.8977705
If a hot swelling occurs during that time, use what we have mentioned repeatedly to soothe it until the swelling subsides.	If during that time an effusion occurs, employ those means of allaying this that we have often mentioned, until the swelling subsides.	0.8348993
However, if the fracture is accompanied by a wound, examine it. If a fragment or fragments have separated from the bone, be gentle in extracting those fragments with whatever instrument you find appropriate.	If the fracture be with an open wound, examine it, and if one or more splinters have been detached from the bone, gently remove the pieces of splinter with any suitable instrument.	0.7625587
If the mouth of the wound is narrow, widen it with a scalpel as much as you need.	If the opening of the wound be narrow, open it up with a scalpel as much as you need.	0.90928435
Then, when you have extracted those fragments and nothing of them remains, stitch the mouth of the wound if it is wide. Otherwise, apply one of the ointments suitable for it and join the wound until it heals.	When you have removed these pieces, letting no trace of them remain, suture the opening of the wound if it is wide; otherwise apply one of the ointments that are suitable for that purpose and will encourage the growth of flesh over the wound, until it heals.	0.86027664

chapter-3-subchapter-5.txt
The clavicle is most often fractured from the front at the end of the shoulder.	The collar-bone is very often broken from the end of the humerus anteriorly, and the fracture of it may be in one of three ways.	0.6285497
Its fracture takes one of three forms: either it breaks and splits in two without producing fragments, which is the easiest to reduce; or fragments occur in the fracture, which is more difficult to reduce; or the fracture is accompanied by a wound.	It may be broken and separated into two without splintering; this is the easiest to repair. Or else splintering occurs, which is most difficult to repair. Or it is a compound fracture.	0.7764708
The procedure in it, if the fracture is without a wound, is to bring two assistants, one of whom stabilizes the arm next to the fractured clavicle and the other extends the neck toward the other side.	When it is a simple fracture the operation involves having two assistants present; one of them to hold steady the arm adjacent to the fractured clavicle, and the other to stretch the neck in the opposite direction.	0.8331566
Then you straighten the fracture with your fingers until its shape becomes as it should be, and there is no protrusion or curvature in it.	Then level the fracture with your fingers until it is reduced to its proper form and there is neither prominence nor concavity.	0.85406077
If you need more extension, it is appropriate to place a ball of rags or wool under the patient's armpit, its size being according to your need, and you extend and raise the clavicle and press the ball with your hand until the fracture is straightened as it should be.	If there is need of still greater extension, place in the armpit of the patient a ball of cloth or wool made to a suitable size; and stretch and lift up the clavicle and squeeze the roll with your hand until the fracture is set in the proper way.	0.89670545
If you are unable to pull the end of the clavicle outward because it has gone deep, it is appropriate for the patient to lie on his back and a medium-sized pillow be placed under his shoulder, and the assistant presses his shoulder downward until the clavicle bone that is deep rises up, then at that time, fix the fracture and straighten it with your fingers	If you are unable to draw the extremity of the clavicle outwards on account of its being depressed, the patient will have to lie on his back and there must be put under his shoulder a medium-sized bolster. The assistant is to press the shoulder down until the depressed collar bone is elevated, and then you can set the fracture and even it out with your fingers.	0.9013604
If you feel that a fragment of the clavicle has broken and has started to move, it is appropriate to make an incision over it and remove that fragment gently.	If you feel a splinter separated from the clavicle and movable, you must cut down upon the splinter and gently remove it.	0.80379057
If the fragment is trapped in the bone, be clever in cutting it with one of the cutters that you have prepared for this purpose, after the instrument that protects the peritoneum, which is an instrument made of wood or iron, has been placed under the clavicle, and this is its image:	If the splinter sticks to the bone, you must contrive to cut it with one of the chisels you have prepared for that, having first put beneath the clavicle the instrument to protect the membrane; an instrument made of wood or iron, of which this is the figure.	0.7779692
It resembles a spoon without a curvature, its width depending on the size of the bone you need, and its length depending also on what allows you to work, and let it have two ends, as you see, one end wider and the other narrower.	It resembles a spoon but without a hollow. It should be as broad as you need, having regard to the size of the bone, and as long as you can use at operation. As you see, it should be provided with one wide and one narrow extremity.	0.8258774
If the tear in the wound that you made when removing the bone fragment is wide, and you are safe from a hot swelling, bring together the lips of the wound with stitches.	If the opening you made when you extracted the splinter of bone be wide and you feel safe against an abscess, suture the edges together.	0.7901886
And if the tear is small, or you fear a hot swelling, pack the wound with bandages and pads according to the extent of the wound's opening.	But if the opening be small or you fear an abscess, pack the wound with material and pads proportional to the opening.	0.7854061
If a hot swelling appears, soak the bandage in rose oil and vinegar or wine, and apply it on it.	If an abscess occur, soak the dressing with oil of roses and vinegar or wine and apply.	0.894534
And the key to it all is that the splint does not move from the broken bone, and therefore it is necessary that you check the patient every day, so whenever the bandage loosens and you see that the splint has moved, fix that and tighten the bandage.	The whole point is that the splint should not slip from over the fracture; so you should examine the patient every day, and whenever the bandage has loosened and you see the splint has shifted, then put it right and tighten the bandage.	0.89423895
Then make the patient sleep on his back and put a small pillow under his armpit when he sleeps at night so that his arm is raised from his side, so the clavicle fracture is raised by raising the shoulder, or tie his arm to his neck.	Make the patient sleep lying on his back, and at night when he is asleep place a small bolster under the axilla so as to raise his arm from his side, for with the raising of the humerus the fracture of the clavicle will be elevated. Or bind his arm to his neck.	0.88585943
And do not loosen the bandage unless there is an incident in the area, such as itching or swelling, until twelve days.	Do not loosen the bandage for twelve days unless there arise at the place any pruritus or swelling.	0.81524885
Then renew the poultice if you see reason for that, and repeat the tightening, and leave it until the clavicle fracture heals and sets.	Then renew the plaster if you think it necessary, and bandage again and leave until the fracture of the collar-bone is set and knits.	0.77631664
And it becomes stronger and firmer than that in twenty-eight days, and it may be in some people in less than that.	The majority of these cases are firm and strong in twenty-eight days, though in some people it takes less.	0.72061837

chapter-3-subchapter-6.txt
Chapter Six on the reduction of shoulder fractures.	CHAPTER six. On the repair of a fracture of the scapula.	0.80308473
The shoulder blade rarely breaks in its wide part. Rather, it breaks at its edges.	The scapula is rarely fractured in the broad part but it does break at its margins.	0.8820052
Whenever a place in it breaks, or it breaks in its middle, which is known by touch, depending on the shape of the fracture, you must straighten it and return it to its natural shape by any means possible.	When any part of it is broken or it breaks in the middle (which is recognized by palpation) you should attempt the correction of the fracture according to the shape it takes, and its restoration to its natural form, by whatever means you can.	0.7830802
Then apply to the area mill dust with egg white and soft mashaqa (a type of plaster). And place on top a pad of folded cloth. Then place on it a wide splint of thin wood, the size of the entire shoulder or slightly wider.	Then apply over the place mill-dust with eggwhite, and soft tow; and over that a dressing made of a folded cloth; and over that a broad splint made of thin board to the size of the whole scapula or a little wider.	0.8063779
If there is a curvature under the splint in any place of the shoulder, correct that curvature with soft mashaqa until the splint sits evenly.	If there be beneath the splint a hollow in any part of the scapula, level it with soft tow so that the splint rests evenly.	0.8350445
Then tighten it from above with a long turban, tightly and firmly, and secure the splint so that it does not move from its place.	Then bind tightly over it a long sling and make sure that the splint does not slip out of place.	0.7984587
Check the bandage every day; whenever the bandage loosens, tighten it and adjust the splint if it has moved from its place.	Examine the bandage daily; and whenever it gets loose tighten it and adjust the splint if it has shifted.	0.94376016
The patient should lie on his healthy side.	The patient should lie on his sound side.	0.9213785
The shoulder heals in twenty or twenty-five days.	The scapula mends in twenty or twenty-five days.	0.9604447
When this period is complete, untie the bandage and you will be safe, for it is among the bones that are not feared to shatter or deteriorate.	When this time has elapsed you may safely loosen the bandaging, for this is one of the bones in which there is no danger of fragmentation or cracking.	0.8870763
If a splinter of bone protrudes and it pricks under the skin, incise it and extract it, and do what I mentioned in the fracture of the clavicle about soothing the hot swelling if any of that occurs.	If a splinter of bone protrudes and starts to prick under the skin, cut down upon it and remove it, and do as I said under fracture of the collar-bone, to allay the effusion, if anything of that kind happen.	0.90450764

chapter-3-subchapter-7.txt
Chapter seven on the treatment of rib fractures.	CHAPTER SEVEN. On the repair of a fracture of the breast.	0.7470782
The chest may be fractured in its middle, and this rarely happens. As for its edges, they are most often fractured and fragmented.	The breast is sometimes fractured in the middle but this happens rarely; more often it is the extremities of it that are broken and comminuted.	0.8750434
And among its symptoms, if its middle is fractured, is that it inclines downwards, and he experiences severe pain, difficulty breathing, coughing, and perhaps he spits up blood, and the concavity in the broken bone becomes apparent and is not hidden to the senses.	The symptoms that occur when it is broken in the middle are that he bows downwards and suffers violent pain, difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and sometimes he vomits blood; and there is an obvious and palpable concavity in the bone.	0.8568118
Its treatment is that the patient lies on his back, and a pillow is placed between his shoulders, then his shoulders are pressed, and the ribs are gathered with the hands from both sides, and gentleness is exercised in straightening it in every way possible and suitable until the shape of the bone returns as it should be.	Now the way to mend it is for the patient to lie on his back, and you place a pillow between his shoulders; then his shoulders are squeezed, and with your hands you press together his ribs from both sides and skilfully try to equalize them in any way you conveniently can, until the bone is reduced to its proper form.	0.85861146
Then apply the dressing and the binding, and place over it a splint from a thin board of willow or heather, or something similar in lightness, after wrapping it in a cloth. Then be gentle in tying it over the broken bone so that it does not move. And pass the bandage around circularly to the back several times, and tighten it firmly. Then check the bandage at all times, and whenever it loosens, tighten it.	Then apply over it a plaster and a pad and place over that a splint of thin willow board or brier or similar light wood, first wrapping it in cloth; then gently bind this upon the fractured bone so that it does not slip; and carry your bandage round about the back several times, tying it firmly; then inspect it constantly, and whenever it loosens tighten it.	0.918507
And if the need arises to loosen it, due to itching that occurs in the area, or pain, or swelling, then hasten to loosen it, remove the dressing, and treat whatever has occurred in its proper manner, then replace the dressing if you see a reason for it, and keep it tight until it heals.	If you are compelled to loosen it on account of itching at the place, or pain or swelling, loosen it quickly and remove the plaster and correct whatever has occurred with the appropriate treatment. Then renew the plaster if you think fit, and keep it bandaged until it heals.	0.8753675

chapter-3-subchapter-8.txt
The eighth chapter on the mending of ribs if they are broken.	CHAPTER EIGHT. On the repair of ribs when they are fractured.	0.75350416
Know that rib fractures occur only in the thick parts adjacent to the back. And their front ends are subject to bruising because they are cartilaginous. Knowing this is not hidden from the senses when examining with the fingers.	You should know that fracture of the ribs occurs only at the thick parts bordering on the vertebrae, whereas the anterior extremities are only contused, because they are cartilaginous; this is easily diagnosed on examination with the fingers.	0.86541146
Its reduction is by straightening the fracture with the fingers in the most effective way until the shape is as it should be. Then bandage and tighten the broken bone with a splint if needed.	They should be set by levelling out the fracture with the fingers in any manner you can so that the form is as it should be; then apply the plaster and bind the broken bone with a splint, if necessary.	0.8370979
If the rib fracture is tilted inwards, it causes the patient severe pain and a stabbing sensation like the stabbing that occurs to someone with pleurisy, because the bone stabs the diaphragm. It also causes him difficulty breathing, coughing, and coughing up a lot of blood, and this is difficult to treat.	If it be a depressed fracture of the ribs, then the patient will have a vehement pain and a piercing sensation like that of pleurisy, since the bone is piercing the pleura; in addition he will have difficulty in breathing and will cough, and vomit much blood; the treatment of this is difficult.	0.8941444
The ancients devised many tricks for it.	In this the Ancients practised many devices.	0.7233229
Some of them said it is necessary to make the patient's food something that generates flatulence and wind so that the abdomen swells and expands and pushes the fracture outwards.	Some said that the patient should have food of such a kind as to generate wind and inflation to blow out and stretch the belly and so push out the fracture.	0.8950602
We dislike this lest it confirms the occurrence of a hot swelling if it has not occurred. If it has occurred, it increases and confirms it.	We, however, reject this, since it will excite an effusion if one has not already arisen; and if one has arisen it will increase and confirm it.	0.8066479
Some of them said a cupping glass is placed on the area and then sucked strongly, and this is more like the standard, except that it is feared that the cupping glass will attract superfluities to the area because of its weakness.	Some of them said a cupping-vessel should be applied to the place and strong suction be made; this seems more reasonable except that there is a risk of the vessel's drawing superfluities to the place on account of his weak state.	0.7731675
Some of them said the area should be covered with wool dipped in hot oil, and padding should be placed between the ribs until it is filled, so that the bandage is level when you wrap it around circularly.	Some of them said that the place should be covered with wool soaked in warm oil and that a pad should be placed in the intercostal space to fill it up so as to make the bandaging level when you wind it round.	0.8955457
Then treat the patient with the treatment of pleurisy in terms of food and medicine.	Then treat the patient with diet and medicines as for pleurisy.	0.9105974
If the patient is exhausted by a severe matter that he cannot bear and the bone stabs the diaphragm with a harmful stab, and we fear for the patient, then we should incise the area and expose the broken rib. Then we put under it the instrument that protects the peritoneum, which has been described previously, and cut the bone gently and take it out.	If the patient is in such a bad way that he cannot bear it, the bone painfully piercing the pleura, and we are afraid for him, then we shall have to cut down upon the place and lay bare the broken rib; then we place under it the instrument to protect the membrane, which has been described, and gently cut out the bone and remove it.	0.85881495
Then we bring together the edges of the wound, if it is large, with sutures and treat it with ointments until it heals.	Then the edges of the wound should be joined, with a suture if large, and dressed with ointments until healed.	0.8847836
If a hot swelling occurs during that, immediately wet padding in rose oil and place it on the area. And treat the patient with what soothes the swelling from the inside as well, and he should lie on the side that makes sleep easier for him until he recovers.	If meanwhile there arise an abscess, quickly soak pads in oil of roses and apply them to the place and treat the patient with internal remedies against abscess too. Let him lie upon the side which is easier for him to sleep on, until it heals.	0.88080525

chapter-3-subchapter-9.txt
The ninth chapter on the mending of the vertebrae of the back and neck.	CHAPTER NINE. On setting the vertebrae of the back and neck.	0.7917625
And if he moves them and feels the pinch and the pricking in them, then know that the bone marrow is safe and that the patient will recover with treatment.	But if he moves them both and feels in them the pinching and pricking, you may know that the spinal medulla is still intact and that under treatment the patient will recover.	0.7869345
If something similar happens to the vertebrae of the back, and you want to know whether he will also recover or not, look at his legs.  If you see that they have become limp and what happened to the hands has also happened to them, then if he lies on his back, wind and stool come out involuntarily, and if he lies on his stomach, urine comes out involuntarily, and if he lies on his back and wants to urinate, he is unable to do so, then know that he is doomed, so do not bother with his treatment.	If anything of this nature happens to the vertebrae of the back and you wish to know if he will recover or not, then pay attention to his feet. If you see them relaxed and in the situation we described in the case of the hands, and when he lies on his back he passes flatus and faeces involuntarily, and lying prone he passes water involuntarily and lying on his back he cannot pass water if he wishes, then you may know his case is hopeless, so do not concern yourself with his treatment.	0.8824922
If none of this happens to him, the matter is less severe.	But if nothing of this kind occur then the case is easier.	0.6840937
And the treatment for what happened is that you try to soothe the hot swelling by placing rose oil alone, or with roasted egg whites, on the bruised vertebra.  Apply this three times a day until the hot swelling subsides. Then apply to the area one of the strengthening, drying bandages and tighten it with a bandage. Order him to rest and stay still, and not to sleep except on the side where he feels no pain until he recovers.	The way to treat this latter kind of case is to try to reduce the swelling by applying over the injured vertebra oil of roses, alone, or with roasted yolks of egg; apply three times a day until the swelling has gone down. Then apply to the place one of the strengthening and absorbent plasters and bind it on; bid him keep quiet and still and sleep only in the attitude in which he has no pain, until he is well.	0.9046794
If a splinter or something has occurred in the bone during the bruise, from which pus has come out, then it is necessary to cut the skin over it and extract that bone. Then bring the edges of the wound together, if it is large, with stitching, then treat it with healing ointments until it recovers.	If the injury is accompanied by fragmentation or a separation of part of the bone, you must cut down on it and remove the bone; then bring together the edges of the opening, by suture if it be wide; then treat with granulating ointments until it heals.	0.79793495
If the last bone of the coccyx, which is the tailbone, is broken, it is necessary to insert the thumb of the left hand into the anus and straighten the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible and as straightening allows. Then apply a bandage and a splint if needed, and then tighten it.	If the last bone of the coccyx, which is the sacrum of the tail, breaks, introduce the thumb of your left hand into his anus and reset the bone with the other hand in whatever way is possible and affords the best setting; then apply over it a plaster, and a splint if necessary, and bind it up.	0.9199253
If you feel a broken splinter in it, cut over it and extract it, and treat the wound with the treatment mentioned previously until it heals.	And if you perceive a fragment in the fracture, cut down upon it, remove it, and dress the wound as before said, until it heals.	0.8293625

chapter-3-subchapter-10.txt
The tenth chapter on the reduction of hip fracture.	CHAPTER TEN. On setting a fractured hip.	0.6859478
Rarely do the hip bones break. If they do break, the break is such that they shatter at their ends, split lengthwise, and tilt inward. The patient experiences pain in the area, a prickling sensation, and numbness in the leg on the side of the fracture.	It is rare indeed that hip-bones are fractured, and if they are fractured the fracture consists of a comminution of the extremities of them and a longitudinal splitting and a bending inward; and the patient feels a pain and a piercing at the site, and the leg on the fractured side is benumbed.	0.8860082
Its treatment is to run your hand over it until you determine the shape of the fracture.	To set it, you pass your hand over it and ascertain what the shape of the fracture is.	0.6369589
If the break is only at the ends, then adjust the fracture according to what you can achieve in setting it until its shape resembles its natural shape.	If it is a fracture of the extremity only, set that fracture in whatever manner is convenient for you until it answers to its proper shape.	0.74818385
If the break is lengthwise, or if it has tilted inward, then lay the patient on his stomach so that you can set the fracture. Once you have set it, apply a bandage, then place a splint made of wood or leather on it, and tighten it firmly, without fear of the fracture shifting or the splint slipping.	But if it be a longitudinal fracture or it has bent inwards, have the patient lie on his stomach so as to make it convenient for setting the fracture; and when you have set it apply over it a plaster and over that a splint of wood or leather, and bandage it in such wise that you have no fear that the fracture may extend or the splint slip.	0.90015405
And level the hollow of the flanks with whatever fills it so that the tightening takes hold evenly. And instruct the patient to sleep on his back or on his healthy side.	Level out the cavity of the lumbar region with some filling so that it may take the bandage evenly, and bid the patient sleep on his back or on his sound side.	0.7988373
If a hot swelling appears, stop extending and setting it until the hot swelling subsides, and apply what soothes it, as described previously, then return to setting it and tightening it as appropriate.	If there occur an effusion, then refrain from bandaging or setting it until the effusion subsides; and apply to it something to allay it as before said; then return to setting it and bandaging it as it should be.	0.81134564
If fragments appear in the bone, or if anything shatters from its ends, it should not be removed or touched, but rather leveled from the outside, as we have said, and left untightened until it heals.	If there be any splinters in the bone or anything crumbles away from the extremities, it must not be pulled out or touched, but set externally as we have said, and the bandaging should be left until it heals.	0.9187156

chapter-3-subchapter-11.txt
Chapter eleven on the reduction of a fracture of the humerus	CHAPTER ELEVEN. On setting a fracture of the humerus.	0.71122897
The upper arm is what is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder.	The humerus is what lies between the elbow and the head of the scapula.	0.83026975
If it breaks, then set it in one of two ways.	If it is fractured it may be set in one of two ways.	0.8679971
One of them is that you take a curved, smooth stick of medium thickness in this way:	One is to take a smooth bow-shaped piece of wood of medium thickness, like this.	0.8054968
And you tie two bandages at its ends, then hang it from a high place, and the patient sits on a chair, then his broken arm is placed on the wood until his armpit is attached to the middle of the curve of the wood, then a heavy object is hung from above it or an assistant stretches it downwards, then the physician adjusts the fracture with both his hands until the fracture returns to what it should be.	You tie two bands at the two ends and then it is hung from above. The patient is to sit on a seat; then his broken arm is folded upon the piece of wood in such a way that his axilla fits into the middle of the curve of the piece of wood. Then hang a heavy weight from the arm, or have an assistant pull it downwards; then the doctor should straighten out the fracture with both hands together until it is properly reduced.	0.89655876
The other way is for the patient to lie on his back and his hand is hung from his neck with a bandage, then you order two assistants, one of them to hold what is above the fracture with his hands, and the other to hold what is below it and each of them stretches it to his side.	The other way is to make the patient lie back and to suspend his hand from his neck by a band, then you instruct two assistants. One is to grasp with both hands the arm above the fracture, and the other the arm below the fracture; and each should make extension toward himself.	0.91901493
And if you want the stretching to be stronger, tighten below the fracture with a bandage and above it with a bandage, and each of the assistants stretches them to their side.	And if you wish to extend more strongly, tie a band below the fracture and another above, and let each assistant pull toward himself.	0.8613887
If the fracture is close to the end of the shoulder, then the [middle] of the bandage should be under the armpit, and the other under the fracture towards the elbow.	If the fracture is near the extremity of the shoulder you will have to put one band beneath the axilla and the other below the fracture near the elbow.	0.72665066
Similarly, if the fracture is close to the elbow, then the bandage should be placed on that place and on the elbow itself.	Similarly, if the fracture be near the elbow you will have to put a band over the place and over the elbow itself.	0.938173
Then adjust the fracture gently without violence until the fracture is aligned as it should be and heals well, then tighten it if no hot swelling appears, but if a hot swelling appears, leave it tightened until the seventh day, and put on it clarified wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil until the swelling subsides, then tighten it.	Then gently and without violence straighten out the fracture until it is restored to its proper shape and fits together well, and then tighten it if no abscess occur. But if an abscess occur, leave the bandaging until the seventh day and apply raw wool soaked in vinegar and oil of roses until the abscess subsides; then bind it up.	0.91441035
The method of tightening it is to apply the dressing to the fracture, then apply a roll of new cloth over the dressing, then gather the forearm onto the upper arm itself and place his hand open on his shoulder.	The method of binding it is to apply a plaster to the fracture; then wind round the plaster a bandage of new material; then bind the forearm to the humerus, placing his hand open on his shoulder.	0.8486016
And apply the cloth and the tightening on the upper arm and forearm so that the forearm acts as splints, if nothing prevents you from doing so and nothing has changed on the broken bone.	Then apply pads and bandages to the arm and forearm so that the forearm serves instead of splints, if there is no contra-indication and you see no pathological change in the broken bone.	0.7489984
If you fear that something might change on you from that, then use splints, which is to place on the fracture itself a splint that is wider and stronger than the other splints, and let the width of a finger be between each splint, and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture with an increase of three fingers from each side, then tighten on the splints the tightening that I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter, which is that your tightening on the site of the fracture should be stronger, and the further away the fracture is, the less the tightening should be.	But should you fear any such change then use splints. The way to use these is to place over the fracture itself a splint that is broader and stronger than the rest; and leave a space of a finger's breadth between splints; the splint should be of a length to suit the fracture with the addition of three fingers' breadth all round. Then bandage over the splints in the manner mentioned at the beginning of the chapter. That is, you should bandage more tightly over the fracture itself and more lightly as you get away from the fracture.	0.87549406
If you see fit to place the splints and the tightening as we said while you are setting the limb from your hour, then do so.	If you decide to put on splints and bandage, as we have said, at the time you set the limb, do so.	0.7869499
And if you fear the hot swelling, then leave the tightening and the splints until the seventh day, as we said, then check the bandage every three days so that no itching or swelling occurs in the place, or that food is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive tightening, so fix all of that as we mentioned.	But if you fear an abscess, leave the splinting and bandaging until the seventh day as we have said. Then examine the bandaging every third day lest there be itching or swelling at the place; or nourishment be prevented from reaching the limb on account of excessively tight bandaging; treat all these in the proper manner according to our prescriptions.	0.88469887
If you are confident that nothing of that will happen, then do not loosen the bandage except after many days.	But if you are confident that nothing of this sort is happening then do not loosen the bandaging until after many days.	0.8896179
And the patient should lie on his back with his hand on his stomach, and a moderate elbow pad filled with wool is placed under the upper arm.	The patient should be made to sleep on his back with his hand on his stomach, and under the humerus there should be placed a cushion evenly filled with wool.	0.81429136
And check at all times, night or day, so that the shape of the broken limb does not become distorted or the bandage loosens, so fix all of that with your effort.	And examine it at all times of the day and night lest the shape of the broken limb suffer any deformity or the binding loosen; do your utmost to put any such thing right.	0.8456198
And make the patient's food of the order that we presented, that the food be light at first until the bone starts to strengthen, then you should thicken his food.	You should also direct the patient's diet along the line that we have given earlier; namely, at first the food should be light until the bone has begun to knit; then you should order heavier food.	0.8248317
It is customary for the upper arm and leg to strengthen in forty days, so then it should be loosened and the bath should be used and treated with ointments that are suitable for that.	Now it is the nature of the humerus and of the leg to knit in forty days; then they should be loosened and the patient should go to the bath and be treated with suitable ointments.	0.77922964
If the fracture is severe and crushed, do not loosen the bandage from it until fifty days or two months.	If the fracture be ugly and contused, do not unfasten it for fifty days or even two months.	0.93261933

chapter-3-subchapter-12.txt
The twelfth chapter on the reduction of a fracture of the arm.	CHAPTER TWELVE. On setting a fracture of the forearm.	0.67062575
The arm is composed of two bones called the two ulnas, one of which is small, and it is the one next to the thumb, and the other is large, and it is located below the small one from the bottom; so perhaps the larger ulna may be broken alone or the small one alone, and perhaps both may be broken together.	The forearm consists of two bones and is sometimes called 'the two firesticks'. One of these bones is small and is in line with the thumb, the other is large; this is the one placed lower, under the smaller one. The larger alone may be broken, or the smaller alone, or both broken together.	0.8945237
So when the small upper ulna is broken, its repair is easy and its healing is faster, and when the lower ulna is broken, its breakage is bad and its healing is difficult, and the worst of it is if the two bones break together.	When the small upper bone (radius) is broken it is easy to set and its mending is rapid. When the lower bone (ulna) breaks it is bad and its mending is difficult. Worst of all is when both bones break together.	0.8371954
So, if the bone that is broken is the small upper ulna, then the physician should, when repairing it, make its extension slight gently until he straightens it; and if the large ulna is the one that is broken, then he should make its extension stronger; and if both ulnas are the ones that are broken, then he should make the extension much stronger.	If the broken bone is the radius, the doctor when setting it must use light traction, gently, until he has it straight. If it is the ulna that breaks, he must employ stronger traction on it. If both bones break he must employ very strong traction. During setting and extension the hand must be disposed on a cushion, spread out with the thumb uppermost, higher than all the fingers, and the little finger downmost, while the patient sits cross-legged upon the floor.	0.74578035
And if there are splinters in the bone fracture, then you try to return each splinter to its place with your best effort. If a loose splinter appears in it and it is piercing the skin, and you have no hope of repairing it, then incise upon it and extract it in the manner we mentioned previously.	If there be any splinters in the fracture he must do his utmost to restore each splinter to its place. If a detached splinter appears there and is piercing the skin and you have no hope of restoring it, cut down upon it and remove it in the manner we have mentioned earlier.	0.90775096
And if the fracture is with a wound, then I have devoted a chapter to it, so you take the treatment for that from there.	If the fracture is accompanied by a wound, we have devoted a separate section to this, so take the treatment of it from there.	0.84604824
And if a hot swelling occurs at the beginning of your repair, then smear a cloth with the cerate made with rose oil and white wax, and let it be medium between thick and thin, and tie the cloth on it with a gentle tie until the swelling subsides, then remove the cerate and apply the poultice prepared from mill dust with egg white, then apply the splints, and let the splint that is placed on the fracture itself be slightly wider and stronger.	If, when you begin to set the bone, an effusion occurs, smear a cloth with the wax made from oil of roses and white wax, of medium thickness, and bind the dressing on gently. When the effusion subsides, remove the wax and apply the plaster prepared from mill-dust and egg-white, then apply splints; the splint that goes on the actual fracture should be a little wider and stronger than the rest.	0.86392075
And know that the number of arm splints is six in most cases, whether the fracture is in one ulna or in both ulnas together.	You should know that the number of splints for an arm is, as a rule, six, whether the fracture be of one bone or of both together.	0.8293334
Then make your tightening on the site of the fracture stronger and tighter, and whenever you turn the tightening upwards or downwards, make the tightening slightly looser, as mentioned previously at the beginning of the chapter.	Then bandage more tightly and strongly over the site of the fracture, and, as you wrap the bandage above and below the fracture, bind little by little more loosely according to the instruction given at the beginning of the book.	0.8147967
And let the cloths that are wrapped on the fracture be soft and moist cloths, and let them not be very hard, and let the thread that is tied with it be specifically linen, medium between thin and thick, as we described.	The dressings wound round the fracture should be gentle and soft, not very hard, while the cord for binding is best made of linen of medium thickness as we have prescribed.	0.715021
And examine the limb and the bandage after a few days, and if something happens that needs to be corrected, such as an itch occurring in the limb, then it is necessary to wash the limb with warm water until the itch subsides, and leave the limb untied for a night until it rests, then resume tightening.	Some days later, examine the limb and the bandaging and if anything has happened that should be put right, such as pruritus in the limb, the limb should be bathed in warm water until the pruritus has subsided. Let the limb be unbandaged for one night so that he may rest, then put the bandage on again.	0.8869709
And if the tightening has loosened and the bone has shifted or something like that, then repair all of that with your best effort.	If the bandaging has become loose and the bone has shifted or anything of that sort, correct it all diligently.	0.83519375
And look also, and if the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive tightening, then you should loosen it a little and leave it for a few days until the nourishment flows to it, then tighten it.	Look also to see if nourishment is being prevented from reaching the part on account of over-bandaging, in which case you will have to loosen it a little and leave it for a few days until nourishment flows to it; then bind it up.	0.801044
And if nothing of what we mentioned happens to the patient, then it should not be loosened until after twenty days or so.	But if none of those things that we have mentioned happens to the patient, it should not be loosened until after about twenty days.	0.943323
Then hang the patient's hand from his neck, and let his arm be straight, and let him diligently avoid turbulent movements, and let his sleep be on his back.	Then the patient's hand is to be suspended from his neck, the arm being level, and he should guard carefully against agitated movements, and should sleep on his back.	0.89015055
And know that this fracture of the arm heals in thirty days or in thirty-two, and perhaps it heals in twenty-eight days, all of that according to the states of the temperaments and the states of strength.	You should know that this fracture of the arm mends in thirty or thirty-two days, and sometimes in twenty-eight, depending on the individual's constitution and the condition of his strength.	0.8277267

chapter-3-subchapter-13.txt
Chapter thirteen on the treatment of fractures of the palm and fingers.	CHAPTER THIRTEEN. On the repair of fractures of the palm and fingers.	0.8517654
The metacarpus and phalanges of the fingers rarely suffer fractures, but they are frequently subject to contusions.	Fractures of the metacarpus and of the small bones of the fingers very rarely occur; the only frequent occurrence is contusion.	0.81372523
When a fracture or contusion occurs in the hand, the patient should sit cross-legged with a chair of equal height in front of him, then place his outstretched hand on it. Then, an assistant should extend the broken bones, and the physician should align them until they are well-joined. At that point, a bandage and a splint should be applied if there is no hot swelling.	When a fracture or crushing of the palm of the hand occurs the patient should sit cross-legged with a chair of the right height in front of him, on which he should put his outstretched hand. Then an assistant is to extend the broken bones while the doctor straightens them so as to achieve a proper union.	0.89552534
Then a splint, the size of the affected area, should be applied on top, having been inserted into a soft cloth.	Then a plaster and a dressing should be applied, if an effusion do not occur; then a splint over that, measured to the site and wrapped in a soft cloth.	0.63433707
If the fracture is downwards towards the palm of the hand, make something like a ball from a piece of cloth and instruct the patient to grasp it with his fractured hand.  Then, tie it with a long cloth, and let the splint be made of supple leather so that the leather conforms to the flexion of the entire hand, and tighten it as needed.	If the fracture be lower down, near the inner part of the palm of the hand, make a ball of cloth, bid the patient grip on it with the fractured palm of his hand, and then bind it up with a long bandage. The splint should be of leather that is somewhat soft, so as to fit into all the folds of the palm; and bandage it on suitably.	0.8735634
If the fracture is outwards, you should apply a splint from above and another splint from below in the hand so that the hand remains open and straight. Then apply the bandaging as the hand turns and connect between the fingers with the bandage.	But if the fracture be on the outside you will have to put one splint above and another beneath the palm of the hand, to keep the hand opened and straight; then put on the bandage, carrying it round the hand and in and out between the fingers.	0.85657954

chapter-3-subchapter-14.txt
Chapter Fourteen on the Reduction of a Femur Fracture	CHAPTER FOURTEEN. On setting a fracture of the femur.	0.70606816
The femur bone often breaks and is perceptible to the senses because it turns forward and backward.	The femur is often broken, and this is readily discernible, for it will rotate forwards or backwards.	0.83400124
Its mending is done by tightening a bandage above the fracture and another bandage below the fracture, while the patient is lying on his face.	It is set by binding a bandage above the fracture and another below, while the patient lies flat on his face.	0.91538477
Then an assistant stretches each bandage to its side moderately, if the fracture is in the middle of the bone.	Then each assistant should make an even extension in his own direction, by the bandage. This is when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.	0.7684397
But if it is close to the origin of the femur, it is necessary to tighten a soft bandage, either from wool or similar, at the origin of the femur towards the pubis, so that the stretching is upwards, and the other bandage below the fracture.	But if the fracture is close to the root of the thigh, you should tie on a soft bandage of wool or something similar, at the root of the thigh toward the groin, so that extension may be applied above, and another bandage below the fracture.	0.8864324
Similarly, if the fracture is near the knee, let the bandage be near the knee so that the stretching is downwards.	Likewise if the fracture is near the knee the bandage should be near the knee, so that extension may be made downwards.	0.92974615
Then the physician straightens the bone with both hands until he restores it to its natural form, and the bone unites well.	Then the doctor should straighten it out with both hands until he has reduced it to the pattern of the natural form and the bone unites neatly.	0.8931755
Then it is necessary to apply the bandage and tightening if no hot swelling occurs to the limb. If swelling occurs in it, leave it for a few days until the hot swelling subsides, then return to its treatment.	Then you will have to apply the plaster and bandage if there is no effusion in the limb, but if there is an effusion leave it for a few days until the swelling has gone down, then resume your treatment.	0.8423128
As for its tightening, it is necessary to twist a solid, wide turban over the fracture two or three times, and whatever is left over remains.	As to the bandaging, you should wrap a firm broad sash two or three times round the fracture, leaving some over; then bind the leg up so that the heel is brought to reach the root of the buttock.	0.70531344
Then twist the leg until the heel is at the origin of the buttock, and insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg near the knee from below, and the ends of the thread become from above on both sides. Then wrap what is left of the turban around the leg and thigh.	Then pass a long cord in the space between the thigh and the leg, low down near the knee, and let the ends of the cord come up on either side, then bind the rest of the sash over the leg and the thigh.	0.90382195
Then place the splints on the thigh at the fracture site itself, and place one of them on the leg bone.	Then apply splints to the thigh at the very site of the fracture and put one of the splints on the leg-bone.	0.93341947
Then fill the gap between the thigh and the leg with soft cloths to level the tightening.	Then pack soft material in the space between the leg and the thigh to make the bandaging even.	0.8437664
Then start with strong tightening from the middle over the fracture site, three or four turns, and the further you move the bandage from the fracture site, let your tightening be less, softer, and looser.	Then start with three or four turns of a strong bandage in the middle over the site of the fracture, and as you get away from the site of the fracture bind lighter and softer and looser.	0.91802543
Then go to the ends of the thread that you had inserted between the thigh and the leg, and tie with it the adjacent splints from above, then pass the ends of the thread down until you reach the man's ankle, and tighten with them also the ends of the splints from the other side so that the bandage does not move from its place.	Then turn to the two ends of the cord which you previously passed between the thigh and the leg, and with the cord bind the adjacent splints above, then carry the ends downward until you end up at the great tendon of the foot and with them bind also the extremities of the splints at the other end so that the bandaging will not shift from its place.	0.8671657
Then leave the tightening on it as long as no erosion, swelling, inflammation, or the like occurs to the limb. If any of this happens, immediately loosen it and fix what has happened according to what we have mentioned repeatedly.	Then let the bandaging remain on as long as no pruritus or abscess or effusion or anything of that sort happens to the limb; but if any of these occur loosen it quickly and put right whatever has taken place, in the manner we have often mentioned.	0.8726283
If there is a splinter in the bone that pricks, it is necessary to straighten it if you can, otherwise cut on it and remove it, and treat the wound as mentioned earlier until it heals.	If there be a penetrating fragment of the bone, you must reposition it if you can; but if not then cut down upon it and remove it and treat the wound in the sort of way mentioned previously, until it heals.	0.89039886
This fracture of the femur may be tightened without adding the leg to the splints, as we mentioned in the humerus and forearm.	This fracture of the thigh is sometimes bandaged without bringing the leg alongside with splints, in the way we spoke of for the humerus and the forearm.	0.8457611
Except that its mending in this way does not cause lameness to the patient, and if it is mended alone without adding the leg to it, its owner will inevitably limp forever.	But setting after the former manner does not cause the patient any lameness; whereas if the femur is set alone without binding the leg to it the patient will inevitably be lame for always.	0.78858393
And know that the femur heals in fifty days, or a little more or a little less, all according to the difference in temperaments and other conditions.	You must know that the femur knits in fifty days or a little more or less, according to the different constitutions and other circumstances.	0.8267455

chapter-3-subchapter-15.txt
Chapter Fifteen: On the Fracture of the Patella	CHAPTER FIFTEEN. On setting a fracture of the patella of the knee.	0.69561064
The patella rarely fractures, but it is often subject to bruising.	You should know that the patella is rarely fractured, but crushing often occurs.	0.8068484
If it does fracture, it will either be a fissure or a comminuted fracture into pieces. This can happen with or without a wound. You can determine all of this by palpation.	If a fracture does happen to it, it will be either a splitting or a shattering which may be simple or compound; and all these can be palpated.	0.8315099
Its treatment is to align the separated parts with your fingers until they are joined and fitted together, to the best of your ability, gently and skillfully.	Now the way to set is for the separated parts of it to be put right with the fingers, so that they unite and join as far as straightening and gentleness and skill can serve.	0.7745013
Then apply a bandage, and over it a rounded splint, if needed, and tie it firmly as appropriate.	Then apply the plaster and put upon that a circular splint, if need be, and over that a suitable bandage.	0.921821
Then treat all the conditions we have described for other fractures, such as hot swelling and the like, by addressing each symptom with what is appropriate for it until it heals.	Then keep an eye on it for all the conditions described for the other fractures, such as an effusion and the like, meeting whatever arises with what is good for it, until it is healed.	0.80024284

chapter-3-subchapter-16.txt
Chapter Sixteen on the Reduction of a Fracture of the Leg	CHAPTER SIXTEEN. On setting a fracture of the leg.	0.7332372
The leg has two bones, one thick, called the tibia, and the other thin, called the fibula. They are subject to the same types of fractures as the bones of the arm, and therefore their treatment is the same as the treatment of the arm, and the procedure is one.	The leg consists of two bones. One of them is thick and is called 'leg bone' (tibia). The other is slender and is called 'fire-stick' (fibula). Both of these are liable to the same kinds of fracture as occur in the two bones of the forearm, therefore the repair of them will be like that of the arm, and the operation is one and the same.	0.89054793
If both bones are broken, the leg will turn in all directions.	If both bones are broken together, the leg will turn in all directions.	0.97960305
If the thinner bone is broken, the leg will turn forward.	If the fibula is broken there will be a forward deformity of the leg.	0.7245525
And if the thicker bone is broken and it happens from below, it is something that is not hidden from you.	If the tibia be broken, and that low down, it will be obvious to you.	0.5368477
So use extension and alignment and tying splints according to that, except that if the fracture of the leg is severe with many fragments, the extension should be less and lighter, and be gentle in your effort to treat it.	But it will be necessary, if the fracture of the leg be a serious one with much fragmentation, for the extension to be gentler and lighter; and you must employ the utmost gentleness in setting it.	0.71407396
In the leg, there is something extra in the procedure compared to the arm, which is that when you have aligned the splints and finished all your work, take two thin strips of pine wood, which are used in leveling rooms, that are placed between the cracks of the planks, or they can be from palm leaf ribs, or similar, and choose from them those that have a little thickness and are not thin, and let their length be the length of the leg from the knee to the bottom.	The operation on the leg involves one more process than that on the arm, namely, that when you have set the splints and have finished the task, you should take two strips of pine wood such as are used for roofing upstairs rooms, being put in the gaps of the planking, or they may be palm stalks; pick out such as are somewhat thick and not too thin; they should be as long as the leg from the knee down.	0.8376989
Then wrap a cloth around each one twice along its length, and place one on the leg and the other on the other side, and let them be from the knee to the bottom of the foot.	Then wrap each of them in a cloth folded into two longitudinally, and put one on each side of the leg; they should reach from the knee to the extremity of the foot.	0.8639037
Then tie the two thin strips in three places, at the ends and the middle, for by this restraint the leg is prevented from tilting right and left and is well stabilized.	Then tie the two strips in three places, namely at the two ends and in the middle; this binding prevents the leg from bending to right or left and it will be held in a good straight position.	0.9126551
A wooden gutter may be used along the length of the leg and placed in it to protect it from movement, and it is most important to do this in a fracture, especially if it is accompanied by a wound.	Sometimes a 'gutter-splint' is used, made of wood according to the length of the leg; the leg is placed in this and it keeps the leg motionless. This is particularly necessary in a compound fracture.	0.7474974
Then check the leg every day and take great care of it for swelling or inflation or any of that, so whenever anything of that happens, treat it with what is necessary until it heals.	Then carefully examine the leg every day and use the utmost care to guard against effusion or swelling or other like things; and when anything of this sort happens employ the means to meet the case until it heals.	0.88247347
And the leg bone heals in thirty days or so.	The bone of the leg mends in thirty days or so.	0.90263855

chapter-3-subchapter-17.txt
Chapter seventeen on the fracture of the bones of the leg and fingers.	CHAPTER SEVENTEEN. On fracture of bones of the foot and of the toes.	0.8897147
As for the heel, it does not suffer a fracture at all.	The heel is never fractured; but the bones of the foot sometimes are.	0.425942
As for the bones of the leg, they may suffer a fracture, and the toes also rarely suffer a fracture, but rather they suffer a bruise in most cases.	The toes too are rarely fractured; but mostly they get crushed.	0.7045841
If the bones of the leg suffer a fracture and you see that those bones have overlapped, let the patient place his foot on the ground upright like a walker, then you stand and place your foot on the raised part of those bones, then step on it and straighten it until it returns to its place.	If a fracture occurs to the bones of the foot, and you see the bones riding over one another, let the patient plant his foot flat on the ground as if walking. Then stand and put the sole of your foot on the prominent bones and with your foot put pressure upon them and level them to their proper place.	0.89260954
Then carry the bandage and the splint from above and place under the sole of the foot a small board that has two flat ends.	Then apply a bandage and some tow on top, and put under the inner part of the sole of the foot a small board with two flat heads.	0.8613814
Then tighten the foot tightly after wrapping it with rags and all that you need.	After you have wrapped them in material and so on, bind them tightly to the sole of the foot.	0.65580016
When three or four days have passed for him, release the bandage, for you will find the bones straightened, whether they were broken or dislocated, so the procedure is as you see.	When three days or four have passed, loosen the binding and you will find the bones in position; whether they have been fractured or dislocated, the operation is (the same,) as you see.	0.8673506
But if some of the toes are broken, set them and straighten them according to what I described to you in setting the fingers of the hand. Then make for the broken toe a splint along the length of the toe, and let it be slightly wider than it.	If one of the toes be broken, reposition and straighten it in the way that I described for the fingers; then apply to the broken toe a splint of a length corresponding to the toe and a little wider than it.	0.83556974
Then place under the foot this board that I described to you and tighten it tightly.	Then under the sole of the foot put the board that I have just described, and bandage it on firmly.	0.91731584
If the broken bones are two or three or more, then put on each toe a splint of its size inserted in a soft cloth and tighten the board at the bottom of the foot, and let each end of the board rest outside the sole of the foot to secure it well.	If the broken bones number two, three, or more, then apply over each toe a single splint measured to it, wrapped in soft material, and bind the board on the sole and let the flat portion of each of the two heads extend beyond the end of the sole of the foot, so that it may be held firmly.	0.8855949
And you should not forget to observe all that we have mentioned to you in the rest of the fracture, of the symptoms that we have mentioned, and treat each symptom with what is appropriate.	And you must not forget to pay attention to all those contingencies that we have mentioned to you in other fractures; meet each contingency with the means proper to it.	0.7752465

chapter-3-subchapter-18.txt
Chapter Eighteen on the fracture of the woman's clitoris and the pubic bone and the man's penis.	CHAPTER EIGHTEEN. On fracture of the female pudenda and of the pubic bone and of the male organ.	0.89059305
When a woman's vulva is fractured, sit her cross-legged, then bend her slightly towards her back, and let someone hold her from behind. Then the midwife should pack her vulva with cotton until it is full and becomes like a ball in her vulva. Then shake the woman and lift her back slightly, so that the cotton comes out until it is at the entrance of the vulva like a ball and the bone fracture returns to place.	When a woman's pudenda are fractured, make her sit cross-legged, then bend her backwards little by little, being supported from behind. Then let a midwife pack the vulva with cotton wool so as to form a kind of spherical packing in the vulva. Then shake the woman and by degrees elevate the dorsal spine, for the cotton wool will emerge until it is like a sphere at the opening and the fractured bone will be reduced.	0.89250755
Then place a support on her back, and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton gently until she urinates and return it in the same way you inserted it first. Then she returns to her initial support.	Then put a pillow upon her back and when she wants to pass water gently remove the cotton wool so she may do so, then put it back in the same way in which it was put in at the first. Then she should return to her pillow as before.	0.85926807
Do this for seven days or so, and it will heal.	She should do this for about seven days, then it will be mended.	0.7922771
If you wish, take a sheep's bladder and tie a reed tube to its opening, and insert the whole bladder into her vulva, then blow strongly into the tube until the bladder inflates inside the vulva, and the fracture will return to place.	If you prefer, take a sheep's bladder and bind a hollow reed to the opening of it; introduce the whole bladder into the pudenda and then blow hard into the tube so that the bladder is inflated within the passage and the fracture will then be reduced.	0.83627105
Then pack it with cotton and stay for days as we described until it heals.	Then pack with cotton wool and let her wait a few days as we have described, until it be healed.	0.9398415
As for when the pubic bone of a man or woman is fractured, use what we described for the hip bone to repair and straighten it.	Now when a man or woman has the pubic bone broken you can use for the setting and repair of it the method we gave for a fracture of the hip.	0.8321073
The correct approach in these strange fractures, which rarely occur, especially for someone with some experience who understands this book of mine well, should not be hidden from you, because the fracture itself in most cases guides you to the correct way to repair and tighten it, so understand.	The correct practice in these uncommon fractures, which very rarely happen, will be obvious, especially to one who has some experience and understands well this book of mine. For the fracture itself will in most cases indicate the correct way to repair it and bind it up, so use your intelligence.	0.8628842
As for a man's penis, if it is fractured, take the gullet of a goose and insert the penis into it, then place a bandage of cloth on it and bind it and leave it for three days or so until it heals.	When a man's organ is fractured, take a goose's neck and introduce the penis into it; then let it be wrapped and bandaged and left for about three days until it be healed.	0.85254276

chapter-3-subchapter-19.txt
Chapter nineteen on the reduction of bone fractures if they are with a wound.	CHAPTER NINETEEN. On the repair of fractures accompanied by wounding.	0.6782415
It is advisable for one who has experienced a fracture with a wound, especially if the bone is large, such as the femur or humerus or similar, to immediately phlebotomize him at the time, if the conditions for phlebotomy are met, as we have previously mentioned.	When a man has a compound fracture, especially when it is a large bone such as the femur or humerus or the like, you should at once venesect him if the conditions are suitable for venesection as set out above.	0.8369346
If the wound is bleeding, then you should hasten to stop it by sprinkling powdered vitriol on it, if you have nothing else available.	If there is bleeding from the wound you must hasten to stanch it by sprinkling it with powdered vitriol if you have nothing else at hand.	0.928474
Then proceed to set the fracture on that very same day and do not delay it unless a hot swelling occurs.	Then begin on the reduction of the fracture the very same day; do not put it off unless an abscess occur.	0.8512316
If a hot swelling occurs, leave the setting of the fracture until the ninth day until the hot swelling subsides, and do not approach it at all on the third and fourth days, for bad symptoms may arise.	But if an abscess does occur, leave the reduction until the ninth day so that the abscess may subside, and in no circumstances touch it on the third or fourth day, for you will bring evil consequences on him.	0.8094971
If the broken bone is protruding from the skin and exposed, you should attempt to reduce and align it with your hands gently and with a slight extension.	If the fractured bone be overriding the skin you must try to reduce it and to straighten it out by hand, gently and with moderate extension.	0.8935748
If you are unable to reduce and align it with your hands, then reduce it with this instrument, which is an instrument made of iron, its length being about seven or eight fingers and its width according to the size of the wound. Therefore, the physician should acquire three or four of them, according to what he needs for treatment in each type of fracture.	If reduction and straightening by hand is unsuccessful, then reduce it with this instrument; it is made of iron, seven or eight fingers' breadths long, and wide in proportion to the size of the wound; that is why the doctor should have three or four of them in the sizes he may need for treating every kind of fracture.	0.9255855
And let it be rounded with a slight thickness so that it does not bend when pressed upon during the operation, and let it have a sharp end with a hook at its tip, its upper part being thick and from its middle to the bottom very thin.	It should be round and somewhat thick so as not to bend when pressure is put upon it at the time of operating. It should be sharp-ended with a bend at the end; the upper part should be of some thickness, but from the middle to the lower part it is a good bit thinner.	0.81767917
And this is its image:	This is its form.	0.640175
And it is called in Greek "peron" meaning a small lever.	It is called in Greek bayram, meaning a small lever.	0.7528291
It is necessary that its sharp, curved end be placed on the protruding end of the bone, and push it with it at once, so that when the bone returns and is somewhat leveled, then level the ends of the fracture on each other.	You must place the sharp incurved end of it over the end of the protruding bone, and push it firmly with it. When the bone is repositioned and straightened in some measure, try to straighten the ends of the fracture, one to another.	0.8515839
If its broken end is thin and the instrument does not grip it well, it is necessary to cut the end of that bone so that the instrument can grip it.	If the fractured end be very thin and the instrument does not grip it firmly you will have to cut off that end so as to give purchase for the instrument.	0.8380835
If you are absolutely unable to reduce the bone with what we have described, then cut it with something similar to the cutters that we mentioned, or saw it with one of the saws however you can.	If you cannot reduce the bone at all by the means we have described, cut it off with any of the osteotomes we have mentioned that is suitable, or saw it off with one of the saws as best you may.	0.85221577
Then scrape off what remains on the bone of roughness and thin scales.	Then strip away any remaining roughness of the bone and fine pieces of shell.	0.8632971
If you reduce the bone and the patient finds, after its reduction, severe and harmful pain, know that the bone has not returned to its natural position.	If, when you have reduced the bone, the patient feels severe and troublesome pain, you may know that the bone has not returned to its natural site.	0.87630343
If you can return it to its natural position, do so, for you will greatly benefit the patient.	If you can restore it to its natural site, do so, for you will render the patient a signal service.	0.80333894
When you have completed your setting of the bone, dip a cloth in a black astringent drink, especially if you are in the summer, and do not put on the wound a cerate nor anything containing fat, lest putrefaction and corruption occur in it.	When your setting of the bone is complete, soak a dressing in dark sharp wine, especially if it be in summer, but do not put wax or anything oily upon the wound lest it cause putrefaction or corruption.	0.8715217
Then use splints when you have finished setting the bone, and leave the wound uncovered by cutting a hole in the bandages with scissors according to the size of the wound, and beware, with all caution, of tightening the wound with the fracture, for ignorant doctors often do that, causing their patients either death or gangrene or inflammation; and let your tightening be gentle and relaxed, unlike the tightening of the rest of the fracture.	Then apply splints the moment you have finished setting the bone; and leave the wound open, that is, by making with scissors an opening in the coverings the size of the wound. And take the utmost care not to bandage up a wound with a fracture; for many ignorant doctors have done that, thereby causing their patients either death or ulceration or a defluxion; so make your bandage soft and loose, as opposed to that of other fractures.	0.9009226
If the wound is bad, or it is a large wound and you fear some of the bad symptoms that we have described, and he finds disturbing pain in the place, it is not necessary to put splints on it; make for it bandages of hard cloths in the place of the splints and tighten it with them.	If the wound be severe or of great size and you fear for it some one of the grave accompaniments such as we have described, and the patient feels a disturbing pain at the place, then you should not put on splints; but instead of splints make wrappings of a stiff material and bind them on.	0.87353325
If it is after a day or two and you see that pus has begun to generate in the wound, remove the cloth that you put on it with the drink, then use the threads and ointments that we are accustomed to treat wounds with, such as the quadruple ointment and the like.	If, after one or two days have passed, you see that the wound is beginning to suppurate, remove the dressing with wine that you had put on it, and then apply the pads and ointments with which it is our custom to heal wounds, such as Tetrapharmacon ointment and the like.	0.82521296
It is necessary for you to loosen the bandage and inspect the wound every day, evening and morning, until it heals and recovers.	Every evening and morning you will have to loosen the bandaging and carefully examine the wound until it knits and is healed.	0.8574601
It is necessary to position the limb in a way that the pus flows down from it easily.	You must also place the limb in such a position as to let the pus flow down easily.	0.82265896
If many days pass for the wound and it does not heal and the pus does not stop from it, know that there are small bone fragments there, so it is necessary to search the wound with a probe, and whatever of those fragments are loose, extract and remove them, and whatever of them are not loose and are pricking the limb and causing pain, then cut and extract them in every way you can.	If, after many days, the wound is unhealed and it goes on suppurating, you may know that there are some little fragments of bone there; so you will have to examine the wound with a probe; and those fragments that are loose take and extract; and those that are not loose but nevertheless pierce the limb and cause pain, attempt to cut them out and extract them by whatever means you can.	0.9005866
If inflammation or gangrene or another type of corruption and putrefaction occurs to the wound, it is necessary to address each symptom of it with something similar to the treatment that was previously described in its chapter.	If a defluxion or ulceration or other kind of corruption or putrefaction happen to the wound, you must meet all these occurrences with the proper remedy described before in its place.	0.78500205
And among what you should pay attention to my words and keep in mind is if a large bone breaks and protrudes from the limb, such as the femur bone, the humerus bone, and the like of the large limbs, do not attempt to pull it or remove it, for death often results from that, rather leave it until it putrefies, for it may fall off by itself after twenty or thirty days, then at that time treat the wound if you see a place for treatment in it, otherwise leave it.	One thing that is necessary is that you should comply with my words and keep them in mind: when a large bone is broken and protrudes from the limb, such as the femur, the humerus, and the other bones of the long limbs, do not meddle with pulling or extracting it, for this often causes death; but leave it to suppurate. It may come away of itself in twenty or thirty days. Then dress the wound if you find occasion; if not, let be.	0.89663374

chapter-3-subchapter-20.txt
Chapter Twenty on the treatment of the complication that occurs after some fractures.	CHAPTER TWENTY. On the treatment of the callus that remains from a fracture.	0.6874652
This complication often occurs after the healing of a fracture, especially near the joints, which deforms the shape of the limb and may prevent the limb from its natural function.	This callus often occurs after the healing of a fracture, especially one near a joint, and thereby the shape of the limb is spoilt; and sometimes there is limitation of the natural function of the limb.	0.8961066
Look, if the complication is soft, then use astringent medicines in it, such as aloe vera, frankincense, myrrh, spikenard, acacia, and the like, by taking some or all of these and kneading them with an astringent syrup or with egg white or with vinegar, and apply it to the complication in a poultice and tie it tightly and leave the bandage without loosening it for many days, then loosen it and repeat it until the complication is gone, God willing.	Examine it, and if the callus be soft, apply astringent remedies to it, such as aloes, olibanum, myrrh, balsam of sarcocol, acacia, and the like. Take some or all of these; beat them up with a dry wine or egg-white or vinegar, apply to the callus on some tow and bind up firmly. Leave the bandaging on for many days; then undo it and repeat until the callus is removed, God willing.	0.8089894
Or tighten a plate of sealed lead on it, because lead has a property that removes everything that protrudes in the limbs.	Or bind on it a firm sheet of lead; for lead has the property of taking away lumps from limbs.	0.79851115
If the complication has hardened and intensified, and necessity urges its removal, then incise it from above and cut off the protruding excess or scrape it with some scrapers until it is gone, and treat the wound until it heals.	But if the callus is stony hard and its removal is urgent, incise the place and cut away the superfluous prominence, or pare it away with a scraper until it is gone; and dress the wound until it heals.	0.7577603

chapter-3-subchapter-21.txt
Chapter twenty-one on the treatment of a fracture if it has healed and the limb remains.	CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE. On the treatment of a fracture when, after repair, the limb remains unnaturally thin.	0.6727931
After that, it becomes thin, unlike its original nature, if the bone fracture heals, and the limb remains thin and weak, then this is due to many reasons, one of which is either due to the frequent loosening of the ligaments and tying them in a way that is not appropriate. Or due to excessive tightening of the ligaments until the nourishment is prevented from flowing to the limb. Or due to excessive and frequent suspension/dangling. Or due to excessive movements at the wrong time.	When a fractured bone has been repaired but the limb remains thin and weak, this may be due to many causes: the bandaging being too often loosened and not properly tightened; or excessive binding-up so that nourishment cannot flow to the limb; or excessive fomenting; or excessive and premature movement; or the thinness and weakness of the patient's blood.	0.7452321
And the treatment for this is to nourish the patient and enrich his body until the blood increases in it, and to use the bath, and to bring him joy and happiness, and so on.	The treatment of this consists in the nourishing and restoring of his body so there be plenty of blood; and the use of the bath; and cheering the patient and making him happy, and so on.	0.88095206
Then apply tar to the limb so that the tar attracts a lot of nourishment to it, or continue suspending/dangling it with lukewarm water until the nourishment flows into it and it returns to its natural shape.	Then apply pitch to the limb so that it may draw much nourishment to itself, or continue the massage to the limb with tepid water, so that nourishment flows in the limb and it returns to its normal shape.	0.8405603

chapter-3-subchapter-22.txt
Chapter Twenty-Two on the Treatment of Broken Bones if They Are Set Crooked And its action was prevented as it should be.	CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO. On the treatment of fractured bones when they mend crooked and are inhibited from their proper functioning.	0.80729467
So when a limb that has been set after its healing exhibits a curvature or a protrusion of the broken bone, or a knotting, and the appearance of the limb is thus disfigured, but the limb is not prevented from its natural function. Then it is not appropriate to accept the statement of someone who claims to break the limb again, although many of the ignorant physicians and bone-setters do that in our country, and this action is very reprehensible, leading to great harm, the least of which is damage.	When a limb that has been set has some distortion after healing, or the bone that was broken has some prominence or callosity, so that the limb is deformed, but there is nevertheless no limitation of its natural movement, then you should not listen to those who think that the bone should be broken again. In our parts there have been many ignorant doctors and bone-setters who have done this. The operation is most blameworthy and leads to great dangers, death itself not being the worst possibility.	0.859
But if the curvature and knotting are soft, then it should be fomented with water in which softening herbs have been cooked, such as marshmallow leaves and its root, and melilot, and so on, and it should be dressed with softening dressings such as well-made diachylon.	But if the distortion and callosity be recent you should massage it with an infusion of the herbs that have an emollient quality, such as leaves and roots of the marsh mallow, and melilot and the like: and apply one of the emollient plasters such as carefully prepared diachylon.	0.83414745
Or marshmallow root mucilage should be taken and mixed with chicken fat and sesame oil, and it should be dressed with it.	Or take mucilage of the root of the marsh mallow and beat it up with chicken fat and oil of sesame, and let a cataplasm of these be applied.	0.82500327
Or fatty figs should be taken and pounded with pigeon dung, and similar medications that are called dissolvers of healing.	Or take a fat fig and beat it up with pigeon's dung; and the like remedies that are termed 'inhibitors of scarring'.	0.7974264
And the knotting may be dissolved by constant gentle massage done with the hands, and the limb should be moved in all directions at all times.	Sometimes also the callosity is resolved by long-continued gentle friction with the hands; and constant movement in every direction should also be applied.	0.7428851
But if the curvature is old and severe and hardened, and necessity calls for its treatment with iron, then it should be incised at its top and the connection of the bone should be released, and the excess of knotting or bone should be cut with gentle cuts, and gentleness should be employed in this with effort and care.	But if the deformity be long-standing and fixed and hardened and you are compelled to treat it operatively, you will have to cut down on it from above, and free the junction of the bone, and with fine chisels cut away the redundant callus or bone; be gentle in this, with diligence and care.	0.8567292
Then the wound should be treated with what has been mentioned previously until it heals.	Then treat the wound with the means previously described until it heals.	0.90397537

chapter-3-subchapter-23.txt
Chapter Twenty-Three on the Discussion of the Jaw	CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE. Discourse on dislocations.	0.6753776
The jaw is a joint's dislocation from its place, thus hindering movement, disfiguring the limb, and causing severe aches and pains to the patient.	A dislocation is a displacement of any of the joints from its place, whereby the movement of the joint is hindered, the member is deformed, and the patient is caused violent pain and hurt.	0.872963
So when a jaw dislocation occurs to someone, it is necessary to immediately reduce it without any delay, because if it is delayed, the place swells, making it difficult to reduce the jaw.	When anyone sustains a dislocation he should hasten to have it reduced, not delaying it at all. For if it is delayed the place will swell up and the reduction will be thereby made difficult.	0.7750985
Therefore, it shouldn't be delayed, moved, or extended while it is swollen because it often causes convulsions and harmful pains to the patient.	So it should not be delayed, nor moved or extended during the time it is swollen, for that often leads to spasm and excruciating pain.	0.89080495
But if this happens, it is necessary to immediately phlebotomize the patient, then leave it until the swelling subsides a little, then wash the limb with hot water and oil, then reduce it gently and treat each limb with what will be mentioned in its place.	Instead, when this occurs, you must hasten to venesect the patient, and then let be until the swelling has subsided a little. Then massage the member with hot water and oil and let it be gently reduced. And treat every member with the things that will be mentioned in their place.	0.76103324
I have also arranged the chapters on the jaw according to what was previously mentioned regarding fractures, from the top of the body to the bottom.	I have disposed the chapters on dislocations in the same order as the foregoing ones on fractures, that is, from the upper part of the body to the lower part.	0.84686977

chapter-3-subchapter-24.txt
Chapter Twenty-Four on the Treatment of Dislocation of the Lower Jaw	CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR. On the treatment of a dislocation of the lower jaw.	0.8559406
Rarely do the jaws dislocate except in rare cases.	It is rare indeed for the jawbones to be dislocated.	0.74202293
And their dislocation occurs in one of two ways: Either they shift from their places slightly, so they relax a little, or they dislocate completely, so they relax towards the chest until the patient's saliva flows and he cannot hold it back, nor can he close his jaw, and his tongue stammers when speaking.	Their dislocation may be in one of two ways: either they may shift slightly from their place and be a little relaxed; or they may be completely and utterly dislocated so as to be relaxed down toward the breast so that the patient's saliva runs out and he cannot control it; nor is he able to close his mouth, and he stutters in speaking.	0.9195732
So if the dislocation is slight, it may return to its place on its own in most cases with minimal effort.	If it be only a slight displacement it will go back in most cases spontaneously without much trouble.	0.69074535
But if the dislocation is complete, it is necessary to hasten its reduction quickly and not delay it at all.	But if the dislocation be complete and total it is necessary to set about the reduction of it at once without any delay.	0.883137
This is done by having an assistant hold the patient's head, and the physician inserts the thumb of one hand into the base of the jaw inside his mouth if the jaw is dislocated on one side, or inserts both thumbs if the jaw is dislocated on both sides, and with the rest of his fingers on the outside, he adjusts it and orders the patient to relax his jaw and let it go in every direction, and the physician adjusts and pushes the jaw until it returns to its place.	This is done thus: an assistant holds the patient's head and the doctor introduces into his mouth the thumb of one hand at the root of the jaw, if it be a dislocation on one side, or both thumbs if it be a bilateral dislocation, with the rest of the fingers outside to keep it straight. Then let him bid the patient relax his jaws and allow them to move in any direction; while the doctor sets the dislocation, thrusting the jaw until it return to its proper place.	0.94610065
If its reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated, use a compress with hot water and oil until their reduction is easy, and do not delay their reduction at all, as we said.	If the reduction be difficult, especially if it be a bilateral dislocation, administer a fomentation with hot water and oil, so that the reduction of both sides may be facilitated. And on no account delay the reduction, as we have said.	0.8405335
So when they have returned and straightened and the patient's mouth has closed and they do not relax, then place on them pads of cloth with cerate made from wax and rose oil, then tie them gently with a loose bandage.	When the reduction and straightening have been done and the patient's mouth closes and is not relaxed, then apply to both sides dressings steeped in wax prepared from wax and oil of roses. Then bind it up gently, with a loose bandage.	0.77124405
And the patient should sleep on his back with his head supported between two pillows so that he does not move it right or left and does not strain to chew anything, but makes his food a soft soup. Until the pain is gone and the jaw is firm, let him eat what he pleases.	The patient should sleep lying on his back with his head held between two pillows so that he does not move it either to right or to left; nor should he burden himself with chewing but should be on a diet of broth of corn starch until the pain is gone and the jaw is firm; then he may eat whatever he wishes.	0.8765513
And let him do that gently and not strain to open his mouth when eating, drinking, and yawning until the jaw is firm and healed.	Let him use it gently; let him not work his mouth heavily in eating or drinking or yawning until the jaw is firmly knit and healed.	0.804108
If the reduction of the jaws is difficult when they dislocate at some point and do not return to their places, fevers and persistent headaches often occur from that, and perhaps the patient's bowels loosen, and perhaps he vomits pure bile.	If the reduction of both sides is hard when it is a simultaneous bilateral dislocation, and there is no return to the proper position, then thereby in many cases fevers and perpetual headaches occur; sometimes the patient's belly is loosened and he vomits actual bile.	0.80640876
So if you see that, know that he is damaged, and often one who experiences that dies within ten days.	When you see this you will know that he is doomed; in most cases in which this happens death follows in ten days.	0.7537908

chapter-3-subchapter-25.txt
Chapter Twenty-Five on the Reduction of the Dislocation of the Clavicle and the Tip of the Shoulder	CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE. On the reduction of a dislocation of the clavicle and of the head of the humerus.	0.8164966
As for the clavicle, it does not dislocate from the inner side due to its connection to the chest. It may dislocate outward, and that is apparent to the senses.	The clavicle is never dislocated inwards because of its continuity with the breast-bone; but sometimes it is dislocated outwards, and then it is detected by palpation.	0.683468
Its treatment is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms, then you press the area firmly with your palm, and it will return.	The replacement is thus: the patient is to lie on his back and stretch out both arms; then with the palm of your hand press heavily upon the place and it will go back.	0.797914
Then you put on it the bandage and the supports and tighten them.	Then apply to it the plaster and pads, and bandage it up.	0.85936326
As for its end, which is next to the shoulder and connected to it, it does not dislocate except rarely. If it ever dislocates, then it should be reduced and adjusted as we have mentioned and as is possible for you.	As to the extremity of the clavicle, which is close to the shoulder and joined to it, it is only rarely dislocated; but if ever it is dislocated you must reduce it and set it straight as we have mentioned, by any convenient means.	0.8553003
Then put on it the bandage, the supports, and the tightening, and instruct the patient to maintain rest and stillness until he recovers.	Then apply the plaster, pads, and bandages, and bid the patient keep quiet and still until it is healed.	0.8987973
With this same treatment, you reduce the end of the shoulder if it also moves from its place.	By this same treatment you may also reduce the head of the humerus when it is displaced.	0.8129877

chapter-3-subchapter-26.txt
Chapter Twenty-Six on Reducing a Dislocated Shoulder	CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX. On the reduction of a dislocation of the humerus.	0.73950875
Know that the shoulder dislocates in three ways, one of which is that it dislocates downwards towards the armpit	You should know that there are three ways in which the humerus may be dislocated.	0.6570398
and the second is that it dislocates towards the chest and sometimes it dislocates upwards above the shoulder, and that is rare	One is a dislocation down into the axilla, another is a dislocation toward the breast; it may also be dislocated upward, which is rare.	0.7395063
and it does not dislocate backwards because of the scapula and it does not dislocate forwards because of the nerves	It is not dislocated backward, because of the scapula; nor is it dislocated forward, on account of the tendons.	0.8000858
And it mostly dislocates and comes out downwards towards the armpit, especially in those who have little flesh, because it comes out quickly and goes in quickly in them	Mostly it is dislocated and displaced down into the axilla, and particularly in those of a spare build; in such it quickly comes out and quickly goes back.	0.7281685
But as for those who have much flesh, it is the opposite of that, I mean that it comes out with difficulty and goes in with difficulty	But in those of a fleshy build it is the opposite; it comes out with difficulty and goes back with difficulty.	0.72106767
And sometimes a person experiences a blow or a fall, and the shoulder swells with a hot swelling, so it is thought that it has dislocated, so it is necessary to examine it until you ascertain its truth, and then proceed with its treatment	Sometimes a man suffers a blow or a fall, so that the upper arm swells up with an effusion, whence he forms the opinion that there is a dislocation. So you must examine it to make sure of it and then proceed to treat it.	0.85374403
The dislocation is recognized, if it is downwards towards the armpit, if you compare the dislocated shoulder with the healthy shoulder, for you will find a clear difference between them, and you will find the head of the shoulder with a curvature, and under the armpit, upon touching, the head of the shoulder is like an egg, and the patient is unable to raise his hand to his ear, nor to move it in all movements	A dislocation down into the axilla may be diagnosed by comparing the sound and the dislocated humerus; for you will find an obvious difference between them; you will find a hollow at the head of the humerus, and in the axilla the head of the humerus may be palpated like an egg, and the patient is unable to lift his hand to his ear, and full movements are restricted.	0.8210466
Likewise, if it dislocates towards the chest or upwards, you will find that obvious to the touch, not hidden	Similarly if it is displaced toward the breast or upward you will find it obvious to the touch and not hidden.	0.90087104
This dislocation may be easy to reduce if it is fresh or if the patient is a child	The reduction of this dislocation will be quite simple if it be only recent or the patient be a child.	0.8583667
Its reduction is that an assistant raises his hand upwards, then you place your two thumbs under his armpit, and lift the joint forcefully upwards to its place, and the assistant raises his hand and extends it upwards, then lowers it downwards, and it will return quickly	To reduce it, his hand should be lifted up by an assistant, then you should put both your thumbs under his axilla and lift the joint up powerfully into its place, while the assistant lifts and stretches his hand upward; then he puts it down and the dislocation will at once go back.	0.8865187
If it does not return by what we have mentioned, and the dislocation has been there for many days, then it is necessary for the patient to bathe in hot water and to use the emollient that softens and relaxes, such as cooking marshmallow root, fenugreek, and melilot in water and using it	If it is not reduced by the means we have stated, being a dislocation of many days' standing, the patient should take a hot bath and use relaxing and softening fomentations, such as decoction of marsh mallow root and fenugreek and melilot.	0.8751619
Then the patient lies on his back, and you place under his armpit a ball of wool that is moderate between soft and firm, then the physician places his heel on the ball, and holds the patient's hand with his hand, and extends it downwards, and pushes the ball with his foot, and it will return to its place	Then the patient should lie on his back and you put under his axilla a ball of wool of moderately hard consistency. Then the doctor should put his heel on the ball and grasp the patient's hand and draw it downward, while pushing the ball with his foot, and it will straightway be reduced.	0.88847303
And if you wish, reduce it in this way, which is that you bring a man taller than the patient and have him stand by the side, and he puts his shoulder under the patient's armpit, and lifts his armpit upwards until the patient is suspended in the air, and another assistant pulls the patient's hand down to his lower abdomen, and if the patient is light, then it is necessary to hang something else on him to weigh him down, and the dislocation will return immediately	Or, if you prefer, reduce it in this way: get a man taller than the patient to stand on one side and pass his shoulder under the patient's axilla and lift it up until the patient is suspended in mid-air, while another assistant pulls the patient's hand down towards his lower abdomen (if the patient is light it will be necessary to hang a weight from him); then the dislocation will straightway be reduced. It is also reduced by another method: that is, to fix in.	0.8869801
It may also be reduced in another way, which is to fix a long piece of wood in the ground, the top of which is round like the bottom of a mortar, neither thick nor thin, then it is placed under the patient's armpit after you place a soft cloth on the top of the wood, and the patient is standing along the wood, then you extend his hand downwards from the other side, and he also extends his body from the other side with force, and the joint will return to its place quickly	It is also reduced by another method: that is, to fix in. the ground a long spar of wood; its head should be of a round shape like the pestle of a mortar, neither massive nor slender; then after a soft pad has been put on the head of the spar it should be placed under the axilla of the patient, who should be standing alongside the spar; then let his hand be drawn downward on one side and his body on the other, powerfully. Then the joint will immediately return to its place.	0.8879782
If its reduction is difficult by all that we have mentioned, then use this treatment, which is to take a piece of wood about two cubits long, four fingers wide, and two fingers thick, with a rounded head to facilitate its entry into the depth of the armpit, in this way:	If it proves difficult to reduce it by any of the means we have stated, employ this treatment: take a wooden spar some two cubits in length, two fingers thick, and four wide; it should have a round head to facilitate its introduction into the hollow of the axilla; of this shape.	0.9003909
Then soft rags are tied on the rounded head so that the wood does not harm the patient.	Then you bind on the round head soft rags so that the wood will not hurt the patient.	0.9447024
Then it is placed under the armpit and the entire hand and arm are extended on the wood downwards, and the wood is tied on the upper arm, forearm, and the edge of the hand.	Then it is placed under the patient's axilla, and his whole hand and arm are stretched down over the spar, which is to be bound down to the upper arm, the forearm, and the tip of the hand.	0.83891106
Then the arm is placed horizontally on the rung of a ladder and the hand is extended downwards, and the rest of the body is left hanging from the other side, for the joint will enter immediately.	Then let the arm be placed cross-wise over the rung of a ladder and the hand stretched downward, and let the rest of the body hang down on the other side; then the joint will very quickly go back.	0.87608945
Once it has entered, by whatever means possible, a moderately sized ball of wool should be placed under the armpit. Then the prepared poultice of mill dust, frankincense, and egg white is carried on the entire shoulder as it rotates from above.	Once it has gone back properly, in whatever way is possible, there should be put under the axilla a ball of wool of moderate size; then apply the plaster prepared from mill-dust with olibanum and egg-white, all round the shoulder.	0.84680104
Then the ball is tightened firmly from under the armpit, and it is rotated with the bandage on the poultice from above, and his hand is hung to his neck, and he is left without moving his hand for seven days.	Then firmly bandage the ball under the axilla and carry the bandaging round over the plaster. Sling his hand from his neck, then let him be left without moving his hand for a week.	0.80069613
And it is necessary that the patient's food be made little until the limb strengthens, for it is faster for his recovery.	The patient's diet should be light until the limb gets strong, for that will hasten the cure.	0.79707134
Then it is loosened after seven or five days, and he is trained in movement, and if it is stable and does not relax, then he has recovered.	After five or seven days it can be unfastened and he can make trial of its movement; if it is firm and not slack then it is healed.	0.8337835
If the joint dislocates frequently due to moisture affecting it or another ailment, then it is necessary to use cauterization with the three needles as mentioned previously in the chapter on cauterization.	If the joint is frequently dislocated, on account of a humidity arising in it or some other cause, then use should be made of the cautery with three prongs spoken of earlier, in the book on cauterizations.	0.8916296
If you have done all of this, and loosened the bandage after seven days and the joint did not stabilize, and you repeated the poultice and tightening on it several times, and it did not stabilize and fell and relaxed, and you were unable to raise it upwards, then know that its nerve in the head of the shoulder has been severed, or stretched, or relaxed. Then know that the joint will never be stable in its place.	If you do all this and loosen the bandaging after a week and the joint is still not firm, and you repeatedly plaster it and bandage it, and it is still loose and comes down and dislocates and you are unable to raise it up, then you may know that the tendons at the head of the humerus are either cut through or stretched or loosened; in which case you may know that the joint will never stay firm in its place.	0.8891891
As for the dislocation that is towards the chest and breast and backwards, its reduction is by pushing and extending with the hands until it returns.	As to the dislocation toward the chest and breast, and posteriorly, the reduction of this is done by thrusting and extension with both hands until it goes back.	0.93066615
And all the tightening and treatment is used on it until it heals.	And apply the usual bandaging and treatment until it is healed.	0.75839597
If after healing there appears a stiffness in the limb and slowness in movement, then let the patient use the bath frequently until that stiffness softens and it returns to its original state.	If, after it has healed, a callosity arises in it, and it is slow in movement, the patient should take frequent hot baths until that callosity is softened and the member returns to its original condition.	0.8105259

chapter-3-subchapter-27.txt
Chapter twenty-seven on the treatment of dislocation of the elbow.	CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN. On the treatment of a dislocation of the elbow.	0.89905846
The elbow joint dislocates with difficulty and also returns with difficulty, and it dislocates in all directions, especially forward or backward, and its dislocation is not hidden from you because it is located under the sight and under the touch, in whatever form it is dislocated.	The elbow is with difficulty dislocated and with difficulty put back. Now dislocation may be in all directions, and particularly forward and backward.	0.78347224
And if you compare the dislocated elbow with the healthy one, this will be clear to you with a clear explanation by the concavity of the joint, and he cannot bend his arm nor touch his shoulder with it.	Whatever way it is dislocated it will not be concealed from you, because it is both visible and palpable, and whenever you compare the dislocated elbow with the sound one it is quite openly and plainly manifested; for the elbow joint is hollow and the patient cannot flex the forearm back or touch his shoulder with it.	0.6257898
And it is necessary to hasten and reduce the dislocation immediately before a hot swelling occurs to it, because if a hot swelling occurs to it, it will be difficult to reduce it, and perhaps it will not heal at all, especially if the dislocation is backward, because it is the worst of all types of dislocation and the most severe in pain, and death often occurs with it.	You must hasten and reduce the dislocation as rapidly as possible before an abscess occur. For if an abscess occur the reduction of it is difficult and maybe it will never be healed; especially when it is a posterior dislocation, for this is the worst and most painful of all the kinds of dislocation, and often it is fatal.	0.85785884
And its treatment, if it is possible to return it, is that an assistant extends his hand with both his hands and his arm outstretched, and the physician's hands are from above the elbow and from below it, and he pushes the joint with both his thumbs or with the base of his palm until it returns to its place.	Now when it is one of those that can be reduced, the way to reduce it is for an assistant to perform a two-handed extension of the patient's hand, the patient's forearm being opened out, while the doctor's hands are above and below the elbow joint and he thrusts the joint with both thumbs together or with the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.	0.80772334
But if the dislocation is forward, it may be returned by bending the hand suddenly until it strikes with the base of its palm the shoulder that it faces.	If it be an anterior dislocation, it may go back if the hand is bent sharply back until it strikes its own shoulder with the root of the palm.	0.8064793
If the dislocation does not respond to returning, then use very strong and powerful extension, which is that two assistants extend the arm and two assistants hold the patient so that he does not move during the extension, then the arm is rotated in every direction after wrapping a folded cloth or a wide bandage on his hand.	If the dislocation does not respond to reduction, apply very strong and powerful extension. For this, let two assistants pull on the arm while two other assistants hold the patient against the extension. Then the arm should be rotated in all directions after the limb has been wrapped in a long folded cloth or a broad wrapper.	0.9183011
And when the physician handles the joint with his hands, he wipes it with oil so that it helps in sliding the joint easily, then he pushes the joint strongly until it returns.	When the doctor begins manipulating the joint he should anoint his hands with oil so as to assist, by its lubrication, the movement of the joint; then he should thrust the joint powerfully until it goes back.	0.84637046
And after its return, it is necessary to apply a bandage on it that contains astringent and drying properties with egg white, and tighten it firmly, and suspend the arm from the patient's neck, and leave it for days, then loosen it. If the joint is stable in its place, then loosen the bandage from it and leave it.	After its reduction he should apply to it a plaster having some styptic and absorbent qualities, with egg-white; and put on a firm bandage and suspend the patient's arm from his neck and leave it for some days. Then undo it; and if the joint remains fixed in its place, then untie the bandaging and leave it.	0.86245286
And if you see that the joint has not become firm yet, then repeat the bandage and the binding and leave it also for days until it becomes firm, then loosen it.	If you see that the joint is not thoroughly firm, replace the plaster and bandaging and leave it for a few more days until it is firm; then untie it.	0.8370957
If stiffness occurs to it after the return of the joint and its loosening and difficulty in movement, then let him use moisturizing in the bath and gentle massage and rubbing until it softens, or place the tail of a fat ram on the joint, then tie it and leave it on him for a day and a night, then remove it and let him enter the bath. And when he sweats, rub the joint moderately, then repeat the tail on him once, twice, and thrice with entering the bath until it softens.	If, after the reduction and unbandaging of the joint, it becomes stiff and is difficult to move, soften it in the bath and apply gentle friction and massage until it is softened, or apply to the joint the tail of a fat-tailed sheep; bind it on and leave it on for a day and a night; then remove it and send him to the bath, and when he sweats apply moderate friction to the joint; then replace the tail and again and again, alternating with the bath, until the joint softens.	0.91625136
And if you want to put on it fresh, soft cow dung with ghee and tighten it on him, do that several times, because it will soften and return to its original state.	If you prefer, apply to it, and bandage on, fresh cow-dung lightened with butter. Do this a number of times and it will soften and return it to its original state.	0.81295

chapter-3-subchapter-28.txt
Chapter twenty-eight on the treatment of dislocation of the wrist.	CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT. On the treatment of a dislocation of the wrist.	0.9012842
The wrist joint frequently dislocates.	The carpus of the hand is often dislocated.	0.8239497
And the reduction of its dislocation is easy, unlike other joints. Except that it is necessary to hasten to reduce its dislocation the hour in which it dislocates before the place swells or a hot swelling occurs in it.	Unlike other joints, the reduction is easy, but there should be haste to reduce it as soon as it is dislocated, before the place swells or an abscess occur.	0.789297
And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the wrist of the ill person on a board and an assistant extends his hand and the physician places his palm on the prominence of the joint and pushes it until it returns.	The way of reducing the dislocation is to place the patient's wrist upon a board while an assistant stretches the hand, and the doctor puts the palm of his hand upon the prominence of the joint and applies pressure on it until it goes back.	0.8841328
Except that it is necessary to look, if the dislocation has shifted towards the inside of the hand, then let the ill person place the back of his hand on the board during the extension and reduction. And if the dislocation is prominent towards the back of the hand, then let the placement of his inner hand (palm) be on the board so that the physicians hand falls on the prominence itself of the joint.	But he should examine: if it is a displacement toward the ventral aspect of the hand, the patient should place the back of his hand upon the board for extension and reduction; but if it be a luxation toward the dorsum of the hand, then the inner part of the hand should be laid upon the board so that the doctor's hand may come upon the prominence of the joint itself.	0.8474432
And if it returns immediately (well and good), otherwise tighten it with a bandage that soothes the swelling and leave it, do not return to it, because it does not bear it, and you will not be able to reduce it after days have passed for it.	If it go back at once, good; but if not, bandage it with a plaster that settles swelling and let it be. Do not revert to it, for it will not tolerate that, and you will not be able to effect its reduction after some days have passed.	0.72341466
Except that the joint remains in its crookedness and does not harm the ill person at all, except if the hand becomes loose and is unable to grasp anything. Then you know that the nerve has been severed or bruised, so there is no recourse for it except to tighten it with cauterization, perhaps it will benefit and perhaps that will not benefit at all.	But the joint will retain its deformity; and the patient will in no wise be harmed except if his hand is slackened so that he be unable to grip anything; then you may know that the tendons are either severed or bruised. In this situation there is no method but to strengthen it by cauterization; this sometimes helps but sometimes is of no use at all.	0.87535864
So if the reduction of the wrist is completed, then apply to it the bandage that we described, then it is tightened and left for five days, then it is loosened, and the hand is exercised.	When the reduction of the joint is complete, apply to it the plaster we have described, then bandage it and leave it for five days; then loosen it and try out the hand.	0.84815764
And if its movement is difficult and some stiffness occurs in it, then soften it with heated water and rubbing repeatedly until it softens.	If movement be hampered and any hardness occur in it, soften it repeatedly with hot water and sweating until it be softened.	0.8771883

chapter-3-subchapter-29.txt
Chapter twenty-nine on the treatment of dislocated fingers.	CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE. On the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.	0.86817276
Fingers may dislocate in any direction.	The fingers may be dislocated in any direction.	0.9860742
So when a finger dislocates to the back or palm of the hand, extend the finger and push the dislocation with your thumb until it returns (to its place).	When one of the fingers is dislocated dorsally or ventrally, then extend the finger and thrust the dislocation with your thumb until it goes back.	0.78310084
Then, bind the tip of the finger and suspend it towards the direction to which it was dislocated and leave it for two days, then release it and extend it until it straightens itself on that day.	Then bind the head of the phalanx, suspending it in the direction in which it was dislocated, and leave it for two days. Then unbind it and extend it so that it may straighten out all that day.	0.8492942
If you tied it at night in the same manner, continue to untie it during the day and exercise it with movement and tie it at night, doing that for several days until it strengthens.	Then at nightfall bind it in just the same way. Continue to loosen it by day and to exercise it with movement, bandaging it by night. Do this for some days until it is knit.	0.8304265
And do the same with it if it dislocates towards the palm of the hand, tie it towards the same direction and do with it what you did before until it heals.	Do the same with it if it is a ventral dislocation, binding it in that direction, and treat it as explained above until it is healed.	0.757768
And do the same with it whenever it dislocates in any other direction.	Do likewise with dislocations in other directions.	0.7592884

chapter-3-subchapter-30.txt
Chapter Thirty on the Treatment of Dislocation of the Vertebrae of the Back	CHAPTER THIRTY. On the treatment of dislocation of the spinal vertebrae.	0.8150803
When a vertebra of the back or neck is completely dislocated, or many vertebrae are displaced from their positions, there is no treatment for it because death comes quickly to the patient,	When any of the vertebrae of the back or the neck are completely dislocated or a number of vertebrae are displaced, there is no treatment in this case for death is hastening toward the patient.	0.89856654
And a sign of this is that the patient's stool comes out involuntarily, he cannot hold it, and often some of his limbs become relaxed, either his legs or his arms, or one of them.	The sign of this is that the injured man passes a motion involuntarily, being unable to hold it back; often too some of his limbs go limp, either both legs or both arms or one of them.	0.84007293
But if one vertebra is displaced from its position, it often shifts, and its shifting can be in four directions, and the one that shifts backward is called a hump.	If, as often happens, a single vertebra is displaced, the displacement may be in any of four directions. When there is a displacement backwards it is called 'curvature of the spine'.	0.7582848
And as for its treatment, you should observe: if the hump occurred from childhood, there is no treatment for it, nor any cure at all.	As to its treatment: examine it; if the curvature dates from childhood then there is no treatment or cure at all for it.	0.8287873
But as for the one that occurred from a fall or a blow and the like, the ancients mentioned it with various kinds of treatment in lengthy discourse, most of which is not beneficial, and I have summarized from that what little suffices for much of what they brought, from my approaching the meaning and my explanation of it, and I have depicted the instrument differently from what they explained and illustrated.	As for the sort that occurs from a fall or a blow or the like, the Ancients indulged in lengthy dissertations thereon, giving many kinds of treatment, the greater part of which is of no use. But I have abbreviated from it, making a little which will serve in place of their much, consisting in my clarification and exposition of the sense. I have also depicted the instrument differently from their account and their explanation.	0.88926786
So I say that the hump that occurs from the front in the chest, there is no remedy for it, nor any cure from it, and likewise the one that is to the two sides also, but only the one that occurs in the back is treated, especially with what I am describing.	I say then, that in a curvature occurring forward there is no technique or cure for it. And likewise in a curvature laterally. The only curvature that can be treated is that of the dorsal spine exclusively, by the means I now describe.	0.7426025
If it does not return with this treatment, then you take a board whose length is about three cubits and dig in the wall that we said should be near the patient a place into which the end of the board is inserted, then you place the middle of the board on the hump, and the physician places his feet on the other end and pulls well until he presses the vertebra and it returns to its place.	But if it does not go back under this treatment then let a board be taken, about three cubits long, and let a place be hollowed out in the wall, which, as we said, should be near the patient, into which you put the end of the board; then place the mid-point of the board upon the hump, and hethe doctorshould place both his feet on the other end and strongly thrust upon the spine until it is forced back into position.	0.89545166
Then you tighten the bandage that you tightened on the patient's chest in the screw that is at his head, and the bandages that you tightened on his legs in the screw that is at his feet.	Then bind the wrapper that you have bound round his chest to the shaft at the patient's head, and those bound round his legs to the shaft at his feet.	0.9117632
Then an assistant stands at each screw, turning his hand with the turner with which the screw is twisted, and the physician straightens the hump as we have described.	Then have an assistant standing at each shaft to turn with his hand the handle by which the shaft is revolved, while the doctor straightens out the curvature in the way we have described.	0.9072511
And this is a picture of the screw, the bench, and the patient:	This is the figure of the winch, the bench and the patient.	0.72443783
Then, after the vertebra returns and the place becomes level, it is necessary to apply the dried dressing with egg white. Then the scarification. Then you place over the dressing a splint from a board whose width is three fingers or so, and its length is as much as it takes up the place of the hump and on some of the correct vertebrae.	After the spine has been restored and the place has been straightened it will be necessary for you to apply an absorbent plaster with egg-white, then packing, then over the plaster apply a flat splint about three fingers wide and long enough to cover the site of the curvature and several sound vertebrae on either side.	0.773636
Then it is tied with the appropriate bandage, and the patient uses light food until he recovers.	Then let it be bandaged as is needful and let the patient follow a mild diet until he is cured.	0.82185966
If some protrusion remains in the place at the end of the healing, it is necessary to use the medicines that relax and soften, along with the use of the board that we described for a long time. And a sheet of lead may be used for that.	If after he is healed there still remains some prominence at the site, it will be necessary to employ remedies to relax and soften the parts, together with the use for a long time of the flat splint we described; in this case a leaden plate may be employed.	0.8228054
And a protrusion may appear at the end of the vertebrae of the back, and it is thought to be a dislocation, and it is an extra bone that has protruded, so do not treat it with this treatment, for death may occur.	Sometimes there occurs a prominence at the end of the dorsal vertebrae, from which one may form the opinion that there is a dislocation, whereas it will be a superfluous bone that has become prominent; do not interfere with it by this treatment, for death may result.	0.77355933

chapter-3-subchapter-31.txt
Chapter thirty-one on the treatment of dislocated hip.	CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE. On the treatment of a dislocated hip.	0.9032445
Know that the hip joint and the shoulder joint are only subject to dislocation, and they are not subject to what happens to other joints of slight displacement and concavity.	You should know that a complete dislocation alone is sustained by the hip and shoulder joints; they do not sustain the lesser displacements, with concavity, as do the other joints.	0.83230895
And the hip joint dislocates in four ways, that is, it dislocates inward, outward, forward, and backward, and it most often dislocates inward, and rarely dislocates forward or backward.	Now the hip joint is dislocated in four directions, interior, exterior, posterior, and anterior. Most commonly it is dislocated interiorly; and rarely is it dislocated anteriorly or posteriorly.	0.8693104
And the sign of its dislocation inward is that if you compare the healthy leg of the patient with the diseased one, it will be longer, and the knee will be more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient will not be able to bend his leg at the groin, and the area next to the groin will be swollen, a clear swelling, because the head of the femur has gone there.	The indication of an internal dislocation is that when you compare the patient's sound leg with the injured leg it will be longer and the knee will be prominent as compared with that of the sound leg; nor will it be possible for the patient to flex the foot back on the groin; and there will be an obvious swelling near the groin because the head of the femur has moved there.	0.86052084
And the sign of that which is subject to dislocation outward is that its symptoms are the opposite of these symptoms.	The sign of the occurrence of an external dislocation: the symptoms will be the exact contrary to these.	0.7218306
And the sign of that which is subject to dislocation forward is that he extends his leg completely, except that he cannot bend it without pain being in the knee, and if he intends to walk, he cannot do so forward, and he retains his urine, and his groin swells, and when walking, his weight is on his heel.	The sign of an anterior dislocation is that the patient can stretch his leg out fully but cannot flex it without feeling pain in the knee; and if he tries to walk he will be unable to walk forward; and he has retention of the urine and his groin swells, and in walking he hobbles upon his heel.	0.8779512
And the sign of that which is subject to dislocation backward is that he does not extend the knee, and he cannot bend it before he bends the groin, and his leg is also shorter than the other, and the groin is relaxed, and the head of the femur is clearly at the position of the loin.	The sign of a posterior dislocation is that he cannot extend the knee, nor can he flex it before flexing the hip; also the leg will be shorter than the other, the groin will be relaxed, and the head of the femur will be evident at the lumbar region.	0.8705362
As for the reduction of the types of this dislocation, it is that you look; if the dislocation is old, it has become chronic with its owner, and he has not tried to reduce it, and it has remained in its state, then there is no treatment at all, so you should not deal with it.	As to the reduction of the various forms of this dislocation, you must examine the case and if it be an old dislocation which the patient has suffered from for a long time and the reduction of which has not been contrived and which remains as it was, there is no treatment for it at all, nor should any be attempted.	0.8107077
As for he whose dislocation is recent, and whatever type it may be of the four ways of dislocation, hasten to twist the joint and extend it inward and outward and move it right and left, perhaps it will return and will not need any other treatment.	But in that case whose dislocation is recent, whichever of the four kinds of dislocation it be, hasten to rotate the joint and extend it internally and externally and move it to the right and the left; for often it will return and no further treatment will be needed.	0.8745711
If it does not return like this, then you should prepare a strong servant who will extend his leg from below, either with his hands or with a bandage tied around his leg above the knee, and another servant will extend him from above by putting his hands under his armpits, then he will tighten a soft bandage on the origin of the thigh, and a third servant will hold the end of the bandage, and his extension will be either from the front from the groin to the collarbone or from the back to the back.	But if it does not go back thus, you must have ready a sturdy and powerful assistant to extend the leg from below, either with both his hands or with a wrapper bound upon the leg above the knee; while another assistant pulls from above by putting his hands under the patient's axillae; then you should bind a soft wrapper upon the root of the thigh, with a third assistant to hold the end of the bandage. Then extension should be made either anteriorly from the direction of the groin to the direction of the clavicle, or posteriorly toward the dorsal spine.	0.8874202
And their extension will all be at once until the patient is raised from the ground with his body and remains suspended.	Let them all make their extension simultaneously so the patient is lifted up bodily and remains suspended.	0.7603454
For this type of extension is a common type for the four types.	This kind of extension is common to all four kinds of dislocation.	0.83848834
If the dislocation returns as we said, otherwise, each type must have the special treatment that I mention.	If the dislocation goes back by the way we have said, good. Otherwise, each kind must have the special treatment I shall describe.	0.90030855
As for its special reduction if the dislocation is inward, the patient should lie on his healthy side, then you place a bandage on the origin of the thigh between the head of the femur and the area under the groin, then you extend the bandage upward from the groin to the upper body to the collarbone, then another strong servant takes with his arms and embraces the thick area of the diseased thigh and extends it outward with a strong pull, then it returns to its place.	When it is an internal dislocation then the special reduction is for the patient to lie upon his sound side; then apply a wrapper to the root of the hip in the space between the head of the femur and the part below the groin; then carry the bandage upward from the groin toward the upper part of the body, in the direction of the clavicle. Then another powerful and sturdy assistant is to take hold of his arms while the thick part of the afflicted thigh is clasped and strongly extended outward; then it will return to its place.	0.89142275
And this type is easier than the other types of treatment by which this limb is reduced.	This kind of treatment is easier than the others for the reduction of this limb.	0.85665905
If it is difficult for you and it does not respond to entering with this type of treatment at all, then you should tie the patient's legs together with a strong, soft bandage on the heels and on the knees, and the distance between each one of them should be the length of four fingers, and the diseased leg should be extended more than the other by the length of two fingers.	But if you find it refractory and it does not answer to this method of treatment, then the patient's two feet will have to be bound together with a strong soft bandage round his two ankles and his two knees. The distance from each to the next should be four fingers, and the injured leg should be stretched two fingers beyond the other.	0.81613433
Then the patient is suspended from the head by a wooden beam that is in the house, and its distance from the ground is the length of two arms, then you order a strong boy to embrace the head of the femur, and another boy will hold onto the patient, and the other boy who is embracing the femur will push strongly, then the joint returns to its place quickly.	Then the patient is to reach upward and grasp any beam that may be in the house; he should be about two cubits from the floor. Then tell a powerful servant to clasp the head of the hip and another servant to hang from the patient; and the other servant, the one who is clasping the hip, should thrust powerfully; then the hip will speedily go back.	0.7668711
As for its special reduction if the dislocation is outward, the patient should lie on the bench according to what we described for the hunchback, and tighten the bandage on his diseased leg especially and on his chest, then two wooden beams are placed, one at his feet and the other at his head, then an additional wooden beam is placed in the middle of the bench, very securely fastened, with a wet cloth wrapped around it so as not to hurt the patient, so that the beam is between his thighs so that he does not be pulled downward during the extension.	The special method of reduction in the case of an external dislocation: it will be necessary for the patient to be lying on a bench after the manner described for the one with a curvature of the spine; but wrappers are to be tied only on the injured leg and the chest. Then the two spars are to be set in position, one at his feet and another at his head; and have an additional spar firmly fixed in the middle of the bench and wrapped in soft cloth so as not to injure the patient; this spar is to be between his thighs so that he will not be dragged down during extension.	0.84976375
Then each servant extends to his side and the physician straightens the hip with his hands.	Then each assistant is to pull in his own direction while the doctor sets the hip with his hands.	0.83364
If it responds to the return, otherwise, place the board on him and compress it as we mentioned in the hunchback, except that the patient should lie on his healthy side.	And if it goes back, good. But if not, place the board upon it and put pressure upon it just as we prescribed for curvature, except that the patient will have to lie upon his sound side.	0.8157365
And if the dislocation is forward, then you should extend the patient's leg at once, while he is in this very description on the bench, and the physician places the palm of his right hand on the diseased groin, then he presses it with the other hand, and with that, the pressure is extended downward to the knee.	When it is an anterior dislocation, extension will have to be applied forcefully to the patient's leg, on the bench, exactly as described; the doctor should place the palm of his right hand upon the injured groin and then apply pressure with the other hand, directing the pressure so as to make extension downward toward the knee.	0.8731017
And if the dislocation is backward, it should not be extended downward while it is raised from the ground, but it should be placed on something solid, as it should also be if his hip is dislocated outward, according to what we mentioned of his lying on the bench, and he is on his face, and the bandages are tightened as we said before, and the compression with the board should also be used on the place where the joint came out.	If it is a posterior dislocation the patient must not be raised above the ground and extended downward; rather must he be placed upon something hard, in the manner that we prescribed for an external displacement of the hip: he is to lie prone on the bench with the bands tied as we said before. It will also be necessary to apply pressure with the board to the site to which the joint has been displaced.	0.86566424
When the hip joint returns completely as it should, and the sign of its return will not be hidden from you, which is that you extend the patient's legs; if you see them level and the patient grasps and extends the leg without difficulty, then know that the limb has returned as it should. Then, bring the thighs together, apply the bandage, and tighten it with a turban so tightly that the hip does not move to any side, and the patient must remain still for three or four days, then untie the bandage, and compare the leg with the other.	When the proper reduction of the joint is completedthe signs of reduction will be plain to you; namely, that you extend both the patient's legs, and when you see that both legs are of equal length and the patient can draw up and stretch out the leg without difficulty, then you may know that the limb has gone back as it shouldthen bring both thighs together, apply the plaster and bind with a sash so that the hip does not move in any direction; and the patient is to keep perfectly quiet for three or four days. Then loosen the bandage and the plaster, and compare the leg with the other.	0.910774
If you see them equal in size, then know that the dislocation has healed, so allow the patient to walk.	If you see that they are both the same size you may know that the dislocation is cured and you can allow the patient to walk freely.	0.82902
And if you see some relaxation in it, then return and bandage it and tighten it according to your first tightening and leave it for three days as well, then untie it and let him walk slowly on it for days until it strengthens well, God willing.	But if you see any slackening then repeat: replaster and rebandage as you did at first, and leave for another three days. Then unfasten. He should be cautious about walking on it for some days, until it is thoroughly strong, God willing.	0.83493257

chapter-3-subchapter-32.txt
Chapter thirty-two on the treatment of knee dislocation.	CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO. On dislocation of the knee.	0.7787584
The knee dislocates in three directions: it dislocates inwards, outwards, and downwards, I mean backwards, and it does not dislocate forwards at all.	The knee is dislocated in three ways; it is dislocated interiorly and exteriorly and inferiorly, that is, posteriorly. It is never dislocated anteriorly.	0.86288095
And the sign of its dislocation is that you order the patient to bring his leg to his thigh, and if it does not stick to the thigh, then know that the knee is dislocated.	The sign of dislocation is to bid the patient flex his leg on his thigh, and if it does not reach the thigh you may know the knee is dislocated.	0.8446747
And the treatment of all its dislocations is that you sit the patient down, having extended his legs, if he is able to do that, and you sit a servant behind him to hold his waist and twist it backwards a little, then you sit on his thighs, putting your back to his face, and you put his leg between your legs, then you grasp his knee with your palms, interlocking them between your fingers on his knee, then you squeeze both sides of his knee with your palms strongly, and another servant extends his leg until the knee returns to its place.	The way of setting all the types of dislocation is to make the patient sit down with both legs extended, if he can, with an assistant sitting behind him to hold him by the middle and incline him slightly backward. Then do you yourself sit on his thighs with your back to his front, and put his leg between yours; then the palms of your hands should be applied to his knee, and join them together by twining the fingers; then with the palms put strong pressure on both sides of his knee while another assistant extends his foot until the knee goes back to its place.	0.8901552
And the sign of its return is that the leg sticks to the thigh softly, without force.	The sign of its return is that the leg can be flexed back easily and without hindrance upon the thigh.	0.7679932
Then bandage it, and stick the leg to the thigh, then bind them both with a bandage for three or four days, then release them.	Then apply a plaster and flex the leg on to the thigh and bandage them together for three or four days; then loosen them.	0.8940822
And he should not engage in anything except a little walking for some days, until it strengthens.	He should do little walking for some days until it gains strength.	0.7769383
If its return is difficult for you with what we described, otherwise, use strong extension with the bandages that I previously described for the treatment of the hip, until it returns.	But if you cannot effect reduction by this method, apply powerful extension by bandages as we have described above for the treatment of the hip, until it goes back.	0.8153018

chapter-3-subchapter-33.txt
Chapter thirty-three on the treatment of dislocated heel.	CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE. On the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.	0.8711564
The heel bone may be slightly displaced. It may also be completely dislocated. Its dislocation can be either inwards or outwards.	The ankle is sometimes slightly displaced, sometimes fully dislocated, the dislocation being either internal or external.	0.8059853
The sign of its dislocation is that you see the heel bone swollen, protruding towards the side to which it has been dislocated.	The sign of its dislocation is that you will see the ankle swollen, and projecting on the side to which it is dislocated.	0.9082071
As for the treatment of its slight displacement, it is easy to reduce. This is done by gently extending it with the hands and straightening it until it returns (to its place).	As to the treatment of its displacement, the reduction of it is easy: if it is gently extended with the hands and straightened, it will go back.	0.77257884
As for its treatment if it is completely dislocated the patient should be seated and a strong assistant should hold him from behind his back at his waist.	As to treatment when it is dislocated completely, you should make the patient sit upright with a strong and sturdy assistant holding him about the middle from behind.	0.87847996
Then you take hold of his foot with your right hand from above and with your left hand from below his foot at the ankle.	Then hold the dorsum of the foot with your right hand, and with the left grasp the foot from below about the heel.	0.84142876
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand then with your left hand twice.	Then draw the foot toward you with your right hand, then with the left, twice.	0.9614687
Then extend it with the left hand and push the dorsum of the foot with the right hand towards the leg without force, you do this twice as we have described.	Then extend it with the left hand and thrust the metatarsus with the right hand without violence toward the leg. Do this as we have described, twice.	0.84501445
Then push the dorsum of the foot to the leg on the third time while you pull at the ankle.	Then thrust the metatarsus toward the leg a third time while exerting traction at the heel.	0.8630128
If it returns (to its place) in one or two times in this manner and you see the foot leveled	If it goes back in one or two attempts thus, and you see the foot is straightened, well and good.	0.65411043
otherwise repeat the procedure, it will return.	If not, repeat the operation and it will go back.	0.80455995
If its return is prevented using what we have described then lay the patient on his back on the ground and plant a stake firmly in the ground so that it falls between his thighs, having wrapped cloths around it so that it does not harm the patient.	If you find it impossible to reduce it by what we have said, make the patient lie on his back on the ground and firmly fix in the ground between his thighs a stake wrapped in material so as not to hurt him.	0.86888516
Then an assistant secures his thigh. Then another assistant extends the leg either with his hands or with a strap that he ties to the ankle of the leg. Then each assistant extends opposite the extension of his companion, and the stake is standing between the patient's thighs, holding him so that his body is not pulled downwards during the extension.	Then an assistant should grasp his thigh and another assistant should extend the foot, either manually or with a cord tied round the narrow part of it; the assistants should pull one against another, with the stake upright between the patient's thighs holding him so that his body will not be dragged down with the extension.	0.90136623
Then the physician sets the dislocation with his hands and another assistant holds the healthy leg down. For the dislocation will return quickly.	Then the doctor should straighten out the dislocation with both hands, while another assistant holds down the sound leg; then the dislocation will speedily go back.	0.86877126
So when the dislocation returns and you are certain of its return, apply the bandage and the splint and tighten it with firm bandages and tie the foot with the bandage downwards.	Then when the dislocation is reduced and the soundness of the reduction is manifested to you, apply a plaster and packing, bandage firmly and bind the foot downwards.	0.81406105
It is necessary to avoid the tendon that is above the heel from behind so that the bandage is not tight on it and harms it.	You will have to be careful of the tendon above the ankle at the back, not to bandage tightly over it so as to injure it.	0.830029
Then leave it for two or three days. If the bandage loosens, tighten it.	Then leave him for two or three days; and if the binding works loose, tighten it up.	0.9230401
Then release it on the third or fourth day. And the patient should refrain from walking for forty days. If he attempts to walk before this period, you cannot be sure that the dislocation will not recur and be ruined and will not accept treatment after that.	Then on the third or fourth day loosen it, but the patient is to abstain from walking for forty days, for if he tries to walk before this lapse of time you cannot be sure that the dislocation will not collapse and corruption set in and thereafter be incurable.	0.9205133
If he experiences a hot swelling, it is necessary to use in its soothing what we have previously described in another place of treatment and softening until it disappears.	If an abscess occur you must allay it by the application of such dressings and embrocations as we have already described more than once, until it is gone.	0.60124356

chapter-3-subchapter-34.txt
Chapter thirty-four on the treatment of dislocation of the toes.	CHAPTER THIRTY-FOUR. On the treatment of dislocation of the toes.	0.92563486
It is appropriate that you straighten what has become dislocated from it with a gentle extension, without violence, and this is not difficult, but easy.	Any that are dislocated must be straightened by means of gentle extension, without violence; that is not hard but positively easy.	0.84781563
If the dislocation is in some of the joints of the back of the foot, then it is appropriate that the patient place his foot on a level place on the ground or on a board while he is standing like someone walking.	If the dislocation be in one of the joints of the dorsum of the foot, the patient must set his foot on level ground or upon a board, standing as though walking.	0.8866883
Then stand yourself and place your foot on what protrudes from those joints, then tread on it with your foot with force until it returns and you see that it has straightened, and no protrusion appears in the place.	Then you must stand and put your foot on what protrudes of those joints, and put strong pressure upon it with your foot until it goes back and you see that it is evened out and there is no prominence at the place.	0.8922339
Then place under the sole of his foot a board that takes the whole foot, which has two ends, then tighten it with a tight and firm binding for three days, then loosen it and protect him from walking for many days until it strengthens and you are assured of no recurrence, God willing.	Then put under the sole of his foot a flat splint with two heads to take the whole foot, and bind it on with a tight and secure bandage for three days; then loosen it; but keep him from walking for a good many days until it binds and you are sure it will not revert, God willing.	0.9340547

chapter-3-subchapter-35.txt
Chapter Thirty-Five: On the types of jaw dislocation that occurs with a wound or with a fracture or with both of them.	CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE. On the kinds of dislocation that accompany a wound or a fracture or both.	0.8234726
Whenever something like this happens, and you intend to treat it and fix it, it often results in death.	When anything of this kind happens and you attempt treatment and restoration, death is a frequent sequel.	0.83849573
Therefore, no one should attempt to treat such a thing except someone who is skilled in the craft, long-experienced, gentle, compassionate, deliberate, neither reckless nor daring.	Therefore such treatment should be undertaken only by a person that is skilled in the art, has long experience, is dexterous, sympathetic, cautious, and not reckless or over-bold.	0.84929496
And he should use, in the beginning, only the medicines that soothe hot swellings and entrust the sick person to fate - God willing - except for what you hope for his safety from damage, along with the mildness of the illness and you see in it some hope.	To begin with he should apply only remedies for the allaying of abscesses and then leave the patient to Divine providence, unless, of course, the injury is light enough to give some hope of his escaping death; in which case you should set out to reduce it at once before an abscess arise.	0.72534704
So send him away immediately at the beginning of the matter before the hot swelling occurs, and if the limb returns to what you wanted, then use the regimen that soothes hot swellings and treat the wound with appropriate drying ointments.	If the part goes back as you wish, employ the treatment for allaying abscesses and dress the wound with suitable desiccant ointments.	0.60608816
If the jaw is fractured and bone fragments that are loose occur, then extract them and follow in that what we mentioned in simple diseases from what preceded in their places.	If it be a dislocation with a fracture and there occur splintered fragments in the bone, try to remove them, following therein the instructions relating to the simple diseases we have mentioned before in their place.	0.8497629
And strive your utmost and keep yourself from entering the path of risks, as I have previously advised you, for that is more preserving of your prestige and safer for your honor, God willing.	Use your utmost diligence; keep clear of entering upon a course with a dangerous outcome, as I have enjoined on you before. For this will best ensure the continuance of your prestige and safeguard your good name, God willing.	0.8105937

