preface.txt
Preface. After I completed for you, O sons, this book, which is the final one in medical science, along with its supplements, and I reached its end with its explanations and clarifications, it seemed fitting to me to complete it for you with this Treatise, which is a part of practice, that is, surgery by hand.	AFTER finishing for you, my sons, this book which is the part of knowledge dealing with medicine in its entirety; and having made it as clear and explicit as possible, I thought it well to complete it for you by adding this treatise which concerns surgical operating.	0.86492556
The reason why a skilled practitioner in this art with his own hand is not found in our time is because the art of medicine is extensive, and its practitioner must first be trained in the science of anatomy, as described by Galen, until he knows the functions of the parts, their forms, and their connections and separations, and has knowledge of the bones, nerves, muscles, and their numbers and origins, as well as of the veins, both pulsating and still, and the places of their exits.	Now this is the reason why there is no skilful operator in our day: the art of medicine is long and it is necessary for its exponent, before he exercises it, to be trained in anatomy as Galen has described it, so that he may be fully acquainted with the uses, forms, and temperament of the limbs; also how they are jointed, and how they may be separated; that he should understand fully also the bones, tendons, and muscles, their numbers and their attachments; and also the bloodvessels, both arteries and veins, with their relations.	0.88840353
And because of this, Hippocrates said that name with name is plentiful, but with practice it is scarce, especially in the art of the hand.	And so Hippocrates said: 'Though many are doctors in name, few are in reality, particularly on the surgical side.'	0.7257992
We have already spoken of this in the introduction of this book.	We have already spoken of this in the introduction to this book.	0.9965155
For anyone who does not know what we have said about anatomy is not immune from error, an error by which people are killed, as I have seen many of those who are trained in this science and boast of it without knowledge and without experience.	For he who is not skilled in as much anatomy as we have mentioned is bound to fall into error that is destructive of life. Thus I have seen many laying claim to this knowledge and boasting of it, but having neither knowledge nor experience.	0.7968348
For instance, I saw a foolish physician who cut into a scrofulous abscess on a woman’s neck and severed certain arteries in her neck, causing her blood to flow until she died in his hands.	I saw an ignorant doctor incise a scrofulous tumour in a woman's neck; and he cut certain arteries in the neck so that the woman bled until she fell dead before him.	0.7913668
And I saw another physician who presumed to extract a stone from an older man, and the stone was large. He therefore reached the stone and extracted it along with a piece of the bladder. Thus the man died on the third day.	And I saw another doctor presume to take out a stone from a man of advanced age. The stone was large; he rushed blindly at the task and extracted the stone and with it a piece of the bladder itself; and the man was dead in about three days.	0.9082505
And I had been called to extract the stone myself, but I saw from the size of the stone and the patient’s condition that he would die.	I had myself been previously called in to extract the stone but from what I saw of the size of it and the condition of the patient I judged that the outcome would be so.	0.78796947
And I saw another physician who took payment from a certain Duke of our land for his practice, and a black eunuch under his care suffered a fracture in his leg near the heel. The physician, in his ignorance, rushed and bound the fracture over the wound with cushions and tight splints, not allowing the wound to breathe.	I saw another doctor who had a regular salary from one of the high officers of our country for medical treatment. There had occurred to a negro boy of his a fracture of the leg near the heel, together with a wound; the doctor rushed in, in his ignorance, and bound up the fracture, over the wound, very tightly, with pads and splints, not allowing the wound to breathe.	0.9027735
Then he discharged him according to his own wishes. Afterwards, he left him for several days and instructed him not to loosen the bandage, and so it remained until his leg and foot became infected, resulting in ruin.	He then let him go as he wished and then dismissed him for some days bidding him not to loose the bandage. Eventually his leg and foot swelled and he was close to death.	0.86785114
I was therefore called to him, and I hurried to loosen the bandage, and peace followed, and he was freed from his pains.	I was called in and made haste to loose the bandage, upon which some ease and reduction of the pain followed.	0.72363067
Nevertheless, the decay in the limb was already set in, and I could not halt it.	Nevertheless, gangrene had already taken hold on the limb and I could not hinder its progress; it.	0.7656787
Thus, the decay ceased to spread through the limb until it perished.	continued to extend in the limb until he perished.	0.58505046
And I saw another physician who pierced a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated after several days, until its malignancy grew along with the suffering of its owner.	And I saw another doctor incise a malignant tumour; after some days the place broke out in open ulceration, thereby adding to the misery of the patient.	0.83625
This is because, when cancer is purely from a melancholic humor, it must never be treated with iron at all, unless it is in a limb that can endure having the entire affected area excised.	For a cancer that arises from a melancholic humour should never be touched by the knife unless it should happen to be in a part of the body which may be removed thoroughly and in its entirety.	0.763394
And therefore, O sons, it is necessary for you to know that manual operation is divided into two categories: namely, operations associated with safety, and operations that involve danger in many conditions.	Wherefore you must know, my sons, that operative surgery is divided into two parts, namely, where operation is associated with the health of the patient, and, on the other hand, where it is for the most part fraught with danger.	0.7122977
And I have already pointed out in every place in this book where there is an operation involving terror and fear.	Throughout the following book I point out wherever I have described an operation that is accompanied by fear and danger.	0.80541486
Therefore, it is necessary for you to be cautious of such things and to avoid them, so that fools do not find a reason to speak and dishonor the profession.	It behoves you to be wary and to shun such, lest the ignorant have an opportunity to reproach and slander you.	0.69964755
Therefore, approach with care and protection, and treat your patients with gentleness and firmness, using the best method, guided by the grace of God toward health and praiseworthy outcomes; and avoid terrible illnesses that are difficult to heal; and keep your souls from things that cause you fear, lest hesitation should enter your faith and your practice.	Show, then, caution and care for yourselves and gentleness and perseverance for your patients. Take the best road that leads to health and a happy outcome. Illnesses that are very threatening or difficult to cure, leave alone.	0.7400712
For this will be of greater benefit to your glory, and will elevate you more in this world, and ultimately increase your honor.	Purify yourselves of anything which you fear may cause doubt as to your religious life and your secular life; for this will perpetuate your good name and will elevate your fortunes in this world and the next.	0.57357085
Galen has already said in certain of his teachings: Do not treat a malignant disease, lest you be called a poor physician.	For Galen once said in certain of his admonitions: 'Do not treat mischievous maladies lest you get the name of mischievous doctors.'	0.8689523
Now, I have divided this Treatise into three Chapters. ¶	I have divided this treatise into three books:	0.8140392
Chapter One.	BOOK ONE.	0.6399479
Chapter Two.	BOOK TWO.	0.7118776
On cutting and piercing, bloodletting, cupping, and wounds; and on extracting arrows, and things similar to these; all arranged chapter by chapter and organized with the forms of instruments. ¶	Concerning incision and perforation; blood-letting and cupping; wounds and the extraction of arrows and the like. The whole is divided into chapters in order; and illustrations of instruments are given.	0.84903264
Chapter Three.	BOOK THREE.	0.71328473
On restoration, dislocation, and treatment of twisting and similar injuries; arranged chapter by chapter from head to foot, with the forms of instruments.	Concerning the setting of bones; dislocations; the treatment of sprains and the like. This is similarly divided into chapters set in order from head to feet, with illustrations of instruments.	0.79739785

chapter-1.txt
But before I discuss the procedure with it, it is necessary to speak of its benefits and harms, and in what temperament it should be applied.	Before we expatiate on the actual operation of cautery it is necessary to mention its advantages and disadvantages and the temperament upon which it is to be used.	0.7497443
I say, then, that the discourse on the nature of the benefit and harm of cautery is a long and subtle matter, involving knowledge and hidden secrets.	I say that a discourse on the advantage and disadvantage of cautery is a long one, a subtle learning, a hidden secret.	0.81962633
Many wise men have spoken about it, and there has been disagreement on it; for me, a little of their discourse will suffice, as I wish to avoid length.	A great number of wise men have spoken on the subject with differing opinions. Lest I should be over long I have reduced their opinions to a summary.	0.75527453
I say, then, that cautery is universally beneficial for all temperaments with or without matter, except for two temperaments: those that are hot without matter and dry without matter.	Now I say that the cautery has universal application for every ill constitution, whether organic or functional, with the exception of two: the functional hot temperament and the functional dry temperament.	0.77249146
Some have said that cautery is beneficial in this case. Others have said the opposite, namely that cautery is not suitable for an illness arising from heat and dryness, because the nature of fire is heat, and it is unsuitable to treat a hot and dry illness with something that is also hot and dry.	About the organic dry temperament the Ancients differed, some saying that cautery helps in a constitution of this kind, while others said the opposite: that cautery is of no use in a disease caused by heat or dryness; for fire is naturally hot and dry and it is obviously absurd to treat a hot dry sickness with a hot dry remedy.	0.8416234
And the one who claims the opposite says that cautery provides relief in any hot and dry illness occurring in human bodies, because when you compare the human body and its moistures to the temperament of fire, you find the human body to be cold.	But he who holds the opposite view says that actual cautery may help in the case of such hot dry illnesses as arise in the human body; for when you compare the human body, humid as it is, with the nature of fire you find the human body cold.	0.8227356
And I myself agree with his words because experience has already shown me this many times.	I myself from much experience agree with this last opinion.	0.65691406
Nevertheless, no one should apply it except one who has already been proven and trained in the chapter on cautery, through complete practice, and who understands the diversity of human temperaments, the disposition of illnesses within themselves, their causes, their symptoms, and their timing.	However, no one should attempt this operation unless he has had long training and practice in the use of the cautery, and is fully acquainted with the various human temperaments, and the character of the complaints in themselves; their causes, symptoms, and duration.	0.8678875
As for the remaining temperaments, there is no fear upon you, especially in cold and moist illnesses. Indeed, all physicians have agreed on these, and they have not disagreed on the benefit of cautery in such cases.	Concerning the rest of the temperaments there is no reason for fear, particularly the cold and humid distempers; all medical men are agreed and none differs concerning the utility of the cautery in such cases.	0.86912286
And know, my sons, that one secret of curing with cautery by fire, and its superiority over cautery with burning medicine, is that fire is simple, and its effect reaches only the member being cauterized and does not harm other parts connected to it, except with minimal harm.	Now you should know, my sons, that the actual cautery and its superiority over cauterization with chemical caustics is one of the secrets of medicine. For fire is a simple substance having no action except upon the actual part cauterized; nor does it do more than slightly harm any adjacent part.	0.82462347
The action of burning medicines, however, spreads to the surrounding parts, and it may even cause a difficult-to-heal illness in the affected member, or it may even kill.	But the effect of cauterization with caustic may spread to parts at a distance from that burnt; and also in the part cauterized it may give rise to a disease difficult to cure or even fatal.	0.81458557
But fire, because of its subtlety and the quality of its substance, does not cause this unless it is excessive.	Whereas fire, on the other hand, on account of the nobility of its nature and its superiority has no such effect unless it is overdone.	0.8170252
And indeed, this has become known to us through experience, due to prolonged service and study in the art, and dedication to the truth of things; because of this, I excuse myself from prolonging the discussion.	That has become clear to us by experience through length of service, devotion to the art, and acquaintance with the facts of the matter. So I need not prolong this discourse.	0.83950883
And if it were not that my book does not permit it, I would bring to you the hidden secret of fire, and the quality of its action in bodies for expelling sicknesses, demonstrated through philosophical reasoning, which would sharpen your minds.	Were it not inappropriate to this my book I should relate to you a deep secret concerning fire, the manner of its action on bodies and its expulsion of diseases; with a reasoned philosophical discourse too subtle for your understanding.	0.7890789
And know, my sons, that they disagree on the time when cautery is best performed, and they consider spring to be the best time.	Know also, my sons, that the Ancients disagreed also as to the fit time for cautery, affirming that spring was the best.	0.796011
But I say that cautery is suitable at any time because the harm occurring due to timing is outweighed by the benefit drawn from cautery. Especially when cautery is needed for pains among the necessary pains—severe, sudden, and not tolerating delay—because it is feared that a greater harm may arise than the small harm brought by the timing.	Myself, I say that the cautery is suitable at all times; for whatever harm may arise from the season of the operation is utterly outdone by the benefit deriving from the cauterization itself; especially if the cautery is applied to pains that are severe, grievous, and swift, brooking no delay, because of the fear that the consequences may be more grave than the slight harm from the season.	0.8704154
And do not let it enter your minds, O sons, what only the common people and ignorant physicians believe, namely, that the illness cured by cautery never returns; they take this as certain, but it is not as they think. Cautery is no more than a substitute for medicine, which changes the temperament and dries the moistures that are the causes of pain.	Nor let enter your minds, my sons, the groundless notion of the laity and of ignorant doctors, that the complaint cured by the cautery never comes back later; do not cleave to this opinion. The fact is not as they think; for the cautery is homologous to the drug which alters the constitution and dries up the humidities that give rise to disorders.	0.85213876
Nevertheless, cautery surpasses medicine through the speed of its healing power, the strength of its action, and the intensity of its efficacy. And it is possible that the illness may return at some time, depending on the patient’s temperament, the location of his illness, and its strength, as well as what accumulates in his body from an aggregation of superfluities within it, and from what it acquires from foods and other similar causes—unless it is an illness for which cautery is applied.	But the cautery excels the drug by the rapidity of its success, the strength of its action, and the potency of its powers. It may be that the disease will return at some time according to the temperament of the patient, and the persistence and virulence of the disease; and from the formation of a mass of superfluities in the body; from his neglect of himself in acquiring them from food; and from causes of a similar nature.	0.90199685
A subtle illness in a part of the body with few superfluities and humidities, as in the case of cautery of a tooth for pain, and similar instances, may indeed not return in that area with the same pain. But this happens in few cases.	Of course, if the disease to which the cautery is applied be a slight one, and in a part only slightly liable to superfluities and humidities, as, for example, the cauterization of a molar tooth for toothache, and the like, then it may happen that the pain does not return; but that happens rarely.	0.7578534
However, the common saying, again, that cautery is the final remedy, is a correct saying—not for the reason they assume in it, because they believe that there is no treatment that matches medicine, nor any other remedy after cautery has failed.	Another common saying is that the cautery is the final remedy; which is true, but not in the way which they mean. For they believe that after cauterization no treatment, either with or without medicine, will help.	0.8328069
But the reality is the opposite of that, and the meaning of cautery as the final remedy is only that when we have applied all methods of treatment to some illness, and those medicines do not succeed, then we finally apply cautery, and it is effective; hence it is said that cautery is the final remedy—not with the intention understood by the common people and the multitude of ignorant physicians.	It means something precisely the opposite: after various treatments have been applied to a certain disorder without success, then last of all we apply cauterization and this proves effective; whence comes about the saying that the cautery is the final remedy—not in that sense in which it is popularly held by the laity and by many ignorant medical men.	0.8378156
The ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron; and they said this only because of the uniformity of gold and the excellence of its substance; and they said that the cauterized place does not produce pus. But this is not absolutely true, for I have already tested it and found that it does not do this in some bodies, while it does in others.	The Ancients have stated that cauterization by gold is more effective than by iron. Now they said that on account of the temperateness of gold and its noble character. They also stated that the site of cauterization does not become purulent, but that is not absolutely so; for I myself have experience of that and have found that it happens in some cases and not in other cases.	0.8994951
And cautery with gold is good and better than with iron, as they said. Nevertheless, when you heat a gold cautery in the fire, it is not clear to you when it reaches the desired degree of heat because of the redness of the gold; and when it quickly cools, and if you add more heat, it melts in the fire and turns into thin layers.	Cauterization by gold is indeed better and more successful than with iron, as they have stated; except that when you are heating the gold cautery in the fire you are uncertain, by reason of the redness of the gold, when it reaches the desired temperature. In addition to this it cools very quickly; and if you overheat it it melts in the fire, melts and runs, and the practitioner finds himself in difficulties.	0.90387046
Thus, the practitioner is inconvenienced by it, and for this reason, cautery with iron is faster and more accessible for us, being more straightforward in operation.	Therefore in our own opinion cauterization is swifter and more successful with iron.	0.6324039
And I have indeed arranged this chapter on cautery according to topics, and I have ordered them from head to foot, so as to make it easier for the one who seeks what he wants from it.	Now I have arranged this book on cauterization by chapters, set in order from the head to the foot, to make it easy for the seeker to find what he wants.	0.7962438

chapter-1-subchapter-1.txt
Chapter II.	CHAPTER ONE.	0.6377668
This cauterization helps to control moisture and coldness over the brain: which are two causes of headaches, and excessive flow of humors from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears, and excess sleep, and tooth pain, and throat pain; and generally all illnesses that arise from cold, such as paralysis, headaches, epilepsy, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.	This cauterization helps against excessive humidity and coldness on the brain, which cause headache, abundance of defluxions from the head to the regions of the eyes and ears, excess of sleep, toothache, sore throat, and in general any sort of disorder arising from frigidity, such as palsy, fits, apoplexy, and diseases similar to these.	0.83522576
The method of cauterization is to instruct the patient: first to be purged with a cleansing medicine for the head over three or four nights, according to the strength, age, and usual condition of the patient.	The manner of performing this operation is first to bid the patient open the bowels with an evacuant which will also clear his head, for three or four nights, according to the strength, age, and habits of the patient.	0.78932965
Then instruct him to have his head shaved with a razor. Then make him sit upright between your hands, so that he has already placed his hands on his chest.	Then tell him to have his head shaved; then seat him cross-legged before you, with his hands on his breast.	0.8399489
Then place the base of your palm on the base of his nose between his eyes. Wherever your middle finger reaches, mark that place with ink.	Then place the lower part of your palm upon the root of his nose between his eyes; and where your middle finger reaches mark that place with ink.	0.9511467
Then heat the olive-shaped cautery tool: which has this form.	Then heat an olivary cautery.	0.44268107
Then place it on the spot marked with ink, with a downward motion, gradually applying pressure with your hand, and rotate it. Then lift your hand quickly, and examine the spot.	Then bring it down upon the marked place with one downward stroke with gentle pressure, revolving the cautery; then quickly take your hand away while observing the place.	0.85086954
If you see that an area the size of an alkiel seed or a zeuherb seed has been exposed to the bone, then lift your hand. If not, repeat the process with the same tool, or another one if it has cooled, until the bones I told you of are visible.	If you see that some bone is exposed, the size of the head of a skewer or a grain of vetch, then take your hand away; otherwise repeat with the same iron, or, if that has got cold, with another, till the amount of bone I have mentioned is exposed.	0.8015923
Then take some salt, dissolve it in water, soak a piece of cloth in it, and place it on the spot, and leave it there for three days.	Then take a little salt dissolved in water; soak some cotton in it, apply to the place and leave for three days.	0.91138136
Then place over it a cloth soaked in butter, and leave it on the spot until the burn scab is removed. Then treat it with tetrapharmacon ointment until it heals.	Then apply some cotton soaked in butter and leave it on till the eschar falls off; then dress with Tetrapharmacum ointment till healed.	0.87674713
They have said that the longer the wound remains open, the more pus it discharges: thus it is better and more beneficial.	The Ancients said that the more a wound is kept open, discharging pus, the better and more efficacious.	0.7531693
Some of them said to cauterize the skin down to the bone: and hold the cautery until some thickness of the bone is burnt.	Some said the skin was to be cauterized through to the bone and the cautery held until some of the thickness of the bone was burnt.	0.8430826
Then shave off the part of the bone that has been burnt, then treat it.	Then the burnt bone was to be scraped out, then dressed.	0.7156987
Others say that it is necessary to go to the end with the cautery, so that it makes a strong impression on the bone, so that the bone falls away, forming something like the shape of a kirate, or like the instrument women use with small carved letters, believing that the head vapors escape from this spot, and the wound is left open for a long time.	Others said that the cautery should be carried through to burn a deep impression in the bone so that there should come out of the bone a piece shaped like a grain of a carob tree or a small spindle-whorl; they asserted that the vapours of the head would be exhaled through this place.	0.7465031
Then treat it until it heals.	The wound should be kept open a long while, then dressed until healed.	0.51734436
To me, however, these two forms of cautery do not seem advisable, except in certain people as a last resort.	But these two methods of cauterization I do not consider right except on certain men; and I regard them as risky.	0.7521845
In my view, leaving it as it is, is better for his well-being.	In my opinion, to let the patient alone is preferable and safer, if it is to be.	0.623471
For the head is weakened by the disruption of its natural integrity, as we have observed in other limbs, especially when the head of the patient is naturally weak: and the first form of cautery is indeed safer and better in my opinion, and I use it; therefore, perform it with care for health.	For the head is weakened when its natural continuity is broken, as we see in other parts, and particularly when the patient's head is weak by nature. In my opinion the first type of cauterization is safer and better; therefore use that and be safe.	0.914946

chapter-1-subchapter-2.txt
Chapter III.	CHAPTER TWO.	0.64066124
And I will describe this cautery in its place: and it is necessary that it is a cautery used for cauterizing the sides and back of the head, more finely than the cautery used on the center of the head.	I shall describe this cauterization in its own place. The cautery for the frontal prominences and occiput must be more slender than that for the middle part.	0.70676434

chapter-1-subchapter-3.txt
Chapter IV.	CHAPTER THREE.	0.6334295
When pain and headache occur in part of the head, or the pain extends to the eye, and the head is cleared with cleansing medicines, and the rest of the treatment I mentioned in the divisions of ailments is applied and still does not help: then cauterization is done in one of two ways: either with a sharp burning medicine, or with iron.	When there occurs pain with headache in one side of the head and the pain extends to the eye; and the patient has cleared his head with purging drugs and there has been applied the other treatment that I have mentioned in the sections on diseases, but to no avail; in this disorder cauterization is of two sorts, either with caustic or with the actual cautery.	0.8226663
The cauterization with sharp burning medicine involves taking one clove of garlic, peeling it, and cutting off its ends on both sides. Then make an incision at the site of the pain with a broad lancet, until there is a place under the skin where the clove can fit.	This is the manner of cauterization with caustic: take one clove of garlic; peel it and cut both ends off; then cut open the site of the pain in the temple with a broad scalpel till there is room to contain the clove under the skin; then introduce it under the skin till it lies completely hidden.	0.8047234
Then insert it under the skin until it is hidden: next apply a pad with appropriate pressure over it, and leave it for about fifteen hours, then remove it, extract the garlic, and leave the wound for two or three days; afterward, place a cloth soaked in butter over it until the place produces pus; then treat it with ointment until it heals.	Then bind up the wound tightly over it with pads and leave for fifteen hours; then unbind it, remove the garlic, and leave the wound open for two or three days; then apply cotton wool soaked in butter till it suppurates. Then dress with ointment till it heals.	0.8616
And if you wish, perform it with certain burning medicines that I wrote about in the twelfth treatise, on Burning Medicines.	If you would rather, you may carry it out with one of the caustic drugs that I have included in the eighteenth treatise, on caustics.	0.7775306
The cauterization with iron is done in this way. Heat the cautery tool, which has this form.	The actual cauterization with iron should be done in this way: heat a cautery of this shape.	0.7306256
It is called the "Clauilis" because the shape of its head resembles a nail, with a slight curve, and in the middle of it is a small protrusion.	It is called the claviform; the head is nailshaped in that there is a slight curvature with a small protuberance in the middle.	0.70594037
Then place it on the spot, hold your hand steady, and gradually rotate the iron with speed; let the amount burned from the skin thickness be about half of it. And lift your hand so that the artery beneath is not burned, causing a flow of blood.	Apply it then to the site of the pain, hold your hand steady and revolve it little by little. Let the thickness of skin burnt be about half; then remove your hand so as not to burn a subjacent artery, for thus a haemorrhage arises.	0.862208
Then soak a cloth in salt water, place it on the spot, and leave it for three days; then place a cloth with butter on it; afterward treat with ointment until it heals.	Then soak some cotton wool in saline, apply to the place, and leave three days; then apply cotton wool with butter; then treat with ointment till it heals.	0.9453653
And if you wish, cauterize this hemicrania with the blade tip of the second cautery. And be careful not to cut the artery in this hemicrania, as it is not a typical case.	Or if you prefer you can cauterize this migraine with the knife-edge that juts out from the cautery; but be careful not to cut an artery, specially in this kind of migraine that is non-chronic.	0.73813725

chapter-1-subchapter-4.txt
On the method of cauterizing for an old hemicrania.	On the cauterization of chronic migraine.	0.6229958
When you treat hemicrania using the preceding treatment we mentioned and what we described in the divisions of ailments, and the treatment is ineffective, and you see from the illness that what we said about the initial cautery with medicine or with fire is not enough, then you should heat the knife-shaped cautery until it turns white, after marking the area of pain with a line about half a finger’s length or close to that; place your hand down once, and press it until you cut into the artery and reach the bone.	When you have treated a migraine in the way we have described and with what we have mentioned in the sections on diseases, and the treatment is ineffective, and you perceive that the malady is such that the cauterization we have mentioned before does not suffice for it, either with caustic or with the actual cautery, you should heat an edged cautery to white heat after you have marked the place with a line half a finger's breadth long or thereabouts; and impress your hand once and maintain the pressure till you cut down upon the artery and reach the bone.	0.89067054
However, it is necessary for you to avoid the area of the jaw joint, which moves during chewing, to avoid burning the side or the nerve that controls it, lest spasm result.	You must be careful of the mandibular joint which moves in chewing, that you do not cut the muscle or tendon that moves it, causing spasm.	0.7604175
And be cautious and careful regarding the blood flow from the artery that is severed. For there is danger in its cutting, especially for one who does not know what he is doing and is neither diligent nor experienced, and abandons the procedure at the first difficulty.	Have the utmost care of haemorrhage from the artery you have cut, for the occurrence of that is dangerous, specially with one who does not know what to do, having no experience or practice; it is better to refrain from operating.	0.7745934
And I will address the regulation of blood flow that may occur from the artery in its own proper method and place in this book.	We shall later on mention a treatment for accidental haemorrhage of the artery, in due detail, in its proper place in this book.	0.65434164
But if you see from the illness that this cautery is insufficient for him, and you see that the patient’s body can tolerate the cautery in the middle of the head, as we have described, treat the wound until it heals.	But if you see that this cautery is not enough for this disorder and you see that the patient is of bodily fitness for it, cauterize him in the middle of the head as we have described, and treat the wound till healed.	0.90864503
And if you wish, apply the cautery we described in the chapter on artery extraction, using a cautery with two blades. For this cauterization is better than this one and more effective.	If you prefer, employ that cauterization which we have described in the chapter on the extraction of an artery, with the cautery of two blades; for that is a cauterization better and more effective than this.	0.9108169

chapter-1-subchapter-5.txt
On the method of cauterizing in cases of ear pain.	On cauterization of pain in the ears.	0.8082026
When pain in the ear occurs due to cold, and it is treated with loosening agents and the remaining treatment mentioned in the division, and the pain does not subside, then heat the cautery, called "the Point," which has this shape.	When the ear gets a pain from the cold and is treated with laxatives and other medicine as mentioned in its section and the pain nevertheless persists, heat the cautery termed 'punctate'.	0.81927943
Then, after heating it, use it to puncture around the entire ear, as it is revolved, or around both if there is pain in both ears at the same time. And keep the cautery a little distance from the root of the ear after marking the locations with ink; let the amount of cautery be about ten points on each ear, or so.	Then after it has been heated prick with it in a circle right round the ear, or around both if there is pain in both, after the place has been marked with ink; the cauterizations being a little away from the ear. Let the cauterization be of ten punctures or thereabouts round each.	0.9077132
Then treat the locations until they heal.	Then dress the places till healed.	0.8594107

chapter-1-subchapter-6.txt
Chapter VII.	CHAPTER six.	0.70649326
The tortura treated with cauterization is only one of the conditions that arise from phlegm, as we said in the divisions of ailments.	The twisting of the mouth which is curable with the cautery is of that nature which arises from phlegm, as we have already noticed in the sections on sicknesses.	0.7449987
And avoid cauterizing the type that arises from dryness and nerve spasm.	But cauterization is to be carefully avoided in that type which is due to dryness or spasm of the tendon.	0.6636627
When you treat this type of tortura with syrups, head purgatives, and gargles, and your treatment is ineffective, then you should cauterize the patient in three places: one at the root of the ear, the second a little lower near the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.	When this kind of deformity has been treated with electuaries, errhines, and gargles, and your treatment is ineffective, you should use three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear; the second a little below the temple; and the third at the junction of the lips.	0.81681925
And place your cautery on the side opposite the weakened area. For the relaxation does not occur except in the part that appears healthy.	Let your cauterization be on the opposite side to the affected side, for the relaxation will arise in the side which seems normal.	0.717914
And the procedure for cauterization is to cauterize him with the cautery directly below the upper end of the ear near the horn of the head a little; and another at the temple, the length of which is the length of a thumb. And place your hand down with the cautery until half the thickness of the skin is burned.	The form taken by the cauterization is that you burn him a little below the frontal prominence, on a level with the upper tip of the ear, and also on the temple the length of the thumb; carry the burning to a depth of about half the thickness of the skin.	0.83092374
And this is the form of the cautery, which is a type of knife, whose shape was previously shown; however, it is a bit less delicate, as you see, and it should be slightly thicker than necessary.	The shape of the cautery. It is a variety of the bladed cautery such as has already been described, but is rather more slender as you see. Its blade should have a certain thickness.	0.76526916
Then treat the locations with the same treatment as before until they heal.	Then dress the place with what we have mentioned till healed.	0.66981137

chapter-1-subchapter-7.txt
On the method of cauterizing in cases of chronic apoplexy.	On the cauterization of a chronic apoplexy.	0.7865225
When apoplexy has become chronic, and you treat it as we have described, and your treatment is ineffective, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries on each corner of his head, a cautery in the middle of the head as we have discussed, and a cautery at the back of the head, as previously outlined. The method for these cauteries should follow the previously described approach.	When an apoplexy has lasted a long while and has been treated by those methods we have given and your treatment has been ineffective but the patient has no fever, then burn him with four cauterizations: one on each frontal prominence; one in the middle of his head as we have described; and one at the back of the head as has been said. The shape of the cauteries to be as before.	0.89643824
Additionally, apply a cautery over the pit of the stomach, which is the last step in this method.	He may also be given one burn over the cardia of the stomach; that will be more efficacious.	0.44426358
Then treat the cauterized areas following the earlier instructions.	Then treat as described.	0.60244757

chapter-1-subchapter-8.txt
Chapter IX.	CHAPTER EIGHT.	0.71677077
To begin, the patient should be given a drink containing potent hyeerae and pills that purify the brain.	First, great electuaries should be given to the patient to drink; and pills to clear the head.	0.72749984
Then, shave the patient's entire head and apply a mustard plaster over the occiput, as described in the chapter on plasters, and repeat this application several times.	Then let his whole head be shaved and apply a mustard plaster to the hinder part as described in the treatise on plasters.	0.66145396
This serves as a form of cautery, and perform it according to the sequence described in that section.	That should be applied several times as it is a kind of cauterization; do it in the very way described there.	0.60263515
If the patient is healed by this, it is well. If not, then make three cauteries on the back of the head, extending from the top of the head down to the lower part of the eye, spacing each cautery a finger’s width apart.	If he is cured, well and good; but if not, burn him with three cauterizations on the back of the head, arranging them in a row downward from the upper part of the head to the base of the neck; and make an interval between each pair of one finger's breadth.	0.8195891
Then treat the cauteries as previously instructed.	Then treat as aforesaid.	0.7730803
If you want to add more, and the patient can tolerate it, then make an additional cautery in the middle. If further treatment is desired, then cauterize over the two horns of the head.	If you wish to add to these cauterizations and the patient be fit to bear it, give him a burn in the middle; and if still more, then burn him on the two frontal prominences.	0.7901883
Then treat the patient until he is healed, using the olive-shaped cautery as previously described.	Then dress till healed. Let the cautery be an olivary as described before.	0.68188465

chapter-1-subchapter-9.txt
Chapter X.	CHAPTER NINE.	0.6375629
It is necessary to proceed with cleansing the head using hyeeras and according to the previously described methods.	Purgation of the head should come first, with electuaries and the other things we have mentioned.	0.5489552
Then shave the patient’s head; afterward, apply a cautery in the middle of the head, a cautery on each corner of the head, one on the back, and three on the vertebrae of the neck.	Then shave the patient's head; and then burn him with one cauterization in the middle of the head and one on either frontal prominence and one on the occiput, and three on the vertebrae of the neck.	0.8812146
If the ailment requires more extensive muscle relaxation and the patient can tolerate it, and the ailment is severe, then apply four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, with the last cautery burning deep into the skin until much of it is seared, then lift your hand. Then treat him until he is healed, using the olive-shaped cautery in this manner.	And if the malady of flaccidity of the body require still more and the patient be fit to bear it, and his disease be severe and have a strong hold on him, burn him with four more cauterizations on his dorsal vertebrae and carry the cautery to burn almost through the thickness of the skin; then remove your hand and treat him in the aforesaid manner till he is healed. Let the cautery be olivary.	0.8514217

chapter-1-subchapter-10.txt
On the method of cauterizing in cases of epilepsy.	On cauterizing for epilepsy.	0.75785446
Epileptics should only be cauterized if their condition is caused by phlegm.	The epileptic who may be cauterized is he whose epilepsy arises from phlegm.	0.4937209
Thus, the brain must first be cleansed with hyeeras and other treatments mentioned in the section on disease division, especially if the patient is an adult or can tolerate medicines.	When the patient is an adult and can stand taking the drugs, he should first purify his brain by great electuaries and the rest of the treatment mentioned in that section.	0.6252446
However, if the patient is a child and cannot tolerate medication, administer gargles and chewing agents that purify the brain over several days along with good dietary practices.	But if it be a boy unable to tolerate the drugs he should employ gargles and medicaments to chew, to clear his brain, for several days beforehand, with an improvement in his diet.	0.82912713
Then, shave his head, and apply one cautery in the middle of the head as previously outlined, one on the back of the head, and one on each corner of the head. If the patient is strong and can tolerate it, apply cauteries as described for paralysis and body relaxation, along the cervical and dorsal vertebrae, using the olive-shaped cautery as previously described.	Then let his head be shaved and burn him with the single cauterization on the middle of the head in the manner described before, and with one cauterization on the occiput, and one on each frontal prominence; and, if the patient be fit and able to bear it, add those additional cauterizations on the cervical and dorsal vertebrae that we have already described for paralysis and for flaccidity.	0.87657905
For children, however, use a finer cautery, following this approach.	If the patient be a boy, use a fine cautery.	0.59118354

chapter-1-subchapter-11.txt
On the method of cauterizing in cases of melancholy.	On cauterization for melancholy.	0.67961967
When melancholy arises from corrupted humors and thick phlegm, apply cauteries as described for paralysis.	When the cause of the melancholy be corrupt humours and a thick phlegm, burn him with those cauterizations mentioned in the case of the paralytic.	0.77266026
If melancholy is caused by an excess leading to melancholic conditions and the patient's body is moist, then give him a drink to purify the brain as described earlier; then shave his head and make a linen band like a small ring.	If the cause of the melancholy be a redundance of humour turning to black bile, and the patient's body be humid, make him drink that which will purge his head as described in a previous section. Then shave the patient's head and apply a compact ring-bandage of linen and put it round the middle of his head.	0.8535134
Place it on the center of the head, and have the patient sit in a stable, upright position held on all sides.	Have him sit cross-legged, held firmly on all sides.	0.6200254
Warm it gently over a fire to a temperature that a finger can comfortably withstand when dipped in. Then pour it onto the middle of the head in the ring, and leave it until it cools.	Then take a pound of stale sheep's butter and warm it on the fire to a moderate heat so that a finger put in can bear it; then pour it out on the middle of the head inside the circle of the bandage and leave it till it has cooled.	0.81141144
Repeat this treatment once weekly, in combination with a proper regimen, until he is healed.	Do this once a week with other efficacious treatment till he is cured.	0.8110056
Alternatively, if desired, cauterize the patient by making numerous small punctures, carefully managing the cautery, ideally with a light touch.	If you wish, burn him with multiple small puncture cauterizations; nor press long on the cautery but let this cauterization be only just punctured.	0.49345624
This form of cautery moistens the brain beneficially.	For this kind of cauterization will moderately moisten the brain.	0.7446067
Then apply a pad soaked in butter or chicken fat.	Then let cotton soaked in butter or hen's grease be applied.	0.8939908

chapter-1-subchapter-12.txt
Chapter XIII.	CHAPTER TWELVE.	0.61586666
When signs of fluid accumulation in the eye become evident, as discussed in the disease divisions, begin by giving the patient something that will purify the head.	When by those signs I have mentioned in the relevant section there is brought to your notice the beginning of a cataract of the eye, start with draughts for the patient such as shall cleanse his head; and guard him from all humidities.	0.70251036
Keep the patient away from all sources of moisture, and have him sit in a steam bath while fasting for several days.	Make him also sweat for some days, fasting, in the bath.	0.49804538
Then instruct him to shave his head, and apply a cautery to the middle of the head. Next, cauterize both temples if the fluid is affecting both eyes or on one side if it is in one eye, severing all veins and arteries under the skin with the cautery. These cauteries should extend along the temples' width; take care to avoid excessive blood flow.	Then tell him to have his head shaved; and burn him with one cauterization in the middle of the head; then cauterize him with two burns on the temples if the cataract is beginning in both eyes; or on the one side only if it is in one eye. And with the cautery cut all the subcutaneous veins and arteries; and let the cauterizations be long, across the breadth of the temples.	0.82147765
If bleeding is observed, immediately cut it off with whatever means possible. I will elaborate further on artery extraction and cutting and ways to prevent excessive blood flow.	Beware of haemorrhage; if you see any, stanch it straight away with any means you can. We shall deal later on with the method of extraction and cutting out of arteries, and provision against haemorrhage.	0.8284039
In some cases, two cauteries should be applied at the back of the neck, beneath the two bones, as a final step.	Two strong cauterizations are sometimes made on the back of the neck below the two bones.	0.7596546

chapter-1-subchapter-13.txt
On the method of cauterizing in cases of chronic tearing.	On cauterization of persistent lachrymation.	0.6442108
When tears of the eyes are chronic, continuous, and located over the veins and arteries on the external surface of the head, it is confirmed that this is due to cold, phlegmatic excesses. Then cauterize with the same cautery I described at the beginning for descending fluid, with a cautery at the middle of the head, two cauteries over both temples, and two cauteries at the neck under the two bones. And if you need to add more, then cauterize it on each side near the eye, on the tip of the eyebrow with a small cautery.	When tears are constantly in the eye and arise on account of the arteries and veins visible on the outside of the head, and you are sure that they are from cold thick phlegmatic superfluities, burn him with the very cautery that I taught for the beginning of cataract, namely, a cauterization in the middle of the head and two on the temples, and two on the back of the neck below the two bones; and, if you are compelled to add more, one cauterization on the side of the outer corner of each eye at the end of the eyebrow, with a small cautery.	0.9001769

chapter-1-subchapter-14.txt
On the method of cauterizing in cases of nasal odor.	On cauterization for foetor of the nose.	0.66256064
When you treat this with what we mentioned in the division, and the medication does not help, then hasten and give cochias in drink for three nights. Then shave his head, and cauterize it with a middle cautery, using an olive-shaped cautery. Then cauterize it with a nail-shaped cautery with two cauteries, on both eyebrows just below the hairs.	When you have treated foetor by those methods given in its section and your treatment is unsuccessful, give the patient laxative draughts for three days; then shave his head; and burn with a median cauterization with the olivary cautery; then cauterize him twice above the eyebrows a little below the hair with a claviform cautery.	0.7780348
And be careful of the artery, so you do not cut it.	Beware of cutting the artery.	0.60674465
And this is the form of the nail-shaped cautery.	The figure of the claviform cautery.	0.48330885

chapter-1-subchapter-15.txt
On the method of cauterizing in the softening of the eyelid.	On cauterization for relaxation of the eyelid.	0.73214746
When the eyelid of the eye softens from disease or moisture, then cauterize the eyelid with a single cautery, using this crescent-shaped cautery.	When an eyelid droops either from disease or humidity, then burn the lid with a single cauterization with this crescent-shaped cautery.	0.91136223
And if you wish, cauterize it slightly over both eyebrows with two cauteries on each side, distancing them from the temples. And let each cautery’s length match the length of the eyebrow, and do not press your hand down with the cautery; rather, only cauterize about a third of the eyelid.	And if you wish burn him also a little above the eyebrows with two cauterizations (; that is, one) on each side; but keep clear of the temples; and let each cauterization be of the length of the eyebrow. Nor let your hand apply the cautery longer than to burn a third of the way through the skin.	0.8629608

chapter-1-subchapter-16.txt
On the method of cauterizing the eyelid when inverted hairs prick the eye.	On cauterization of the eyelid when the eyelashes are turned inwards, irritating the eye.	0.7337791
The cautery for this is of two types: either cautery with fire or cautery with a burning medicine.	The cauterization is of two kinds, by fire and by caustic.	0.7046246
In cauterizing with fire, instruct the patient beforehand to let his hairs grow out, if he is one who trims them, until they are long and even. But if they prick him at their root, then bind his eyes with a band so that they do not move, until they grow.	Cauterization by fire will be thus: tell the patient previously, if he is one of those who pluck the lashes, to let them grow till they are long and straight; and if during growth they irritate him, bind the eyes with a fillet so as not to move till they have grown.	0.84653986
When they grow out and are even, then place the patient’s head in your lap, then mark on his eyelid with ink in the shape of a myrtle leaf, starting the mark near the hairs.	When they have grown and are straight, put the patient's head in your lap and mark upon the eyelid with ink the shape of a myrtle leaf, beginning near the lashes.	0.94916224
Then place a cloth soaked in egg white or in psyllium mucilage over the eye.	Then apply cotton wool soaked in egg-white or mucilage of psyllium seeds.	0.8276978
Then heat the cautery, the form of which is this.	Then heat a cautery of this form.	0.77622956
Then cauterize along the shape you marked gradually in many strokes, until the surface of the skin, shaped like the myrtle leaf, is properly burned entirely.	Then burn over the shape marked out, slowly, with many small strokes, till the whole surface of the skin marked out to the shape of the myrtle leaf be cauterized, specially the outer part of it.	0.83187306
And the sign of success in your work is if you see the eyelid of the eye begin to contract and the hairs lift away from the puncture of the eye.	It will show the correctness of your work if you see the eyelid contracted and the lashes risen away from the white of the eye.	0.7469077
Then lift your hand and leave it alone for three days.	Then remove your hand and let him be for three days.	0.9521836
Then place a cloth with butter on it until the scab is removed. Then treat it with ointment until it is healed.	Then apply cotton wool soaked in butter till the scab falls off; then treat the place with ointment till healed.	0.8866774
But if some hairs return after a while, and the eyelid softens, then repeat the cauterization on that spot as you did the first time.	But if after an interval there be a return of the same condition of the eyelash and of drooping of the eyelid, repeat the cauterization in the same place just as you did before.	0.8337675
But if the hairs are in the lower part, then cauterize it until it is lifted to its natural position and leveled so that the hairs no longer prick the eye.	And if it be in the lower lid cauterize this also till it falls back to its normal position and the hairs do not irritate the eye.	0.7894843
Instruct the patient to let his hairs grow until they are long and even. Make a myrtle-leaf shape from a cloth paper.	This is the method of burning with caustic: bid the patient let the lashes grow long and straight; then make the shape of a myrtle leaf out of paper.	0.668595
Then take a known soap and unslaked lime, each in a weight of one ounce or close to that; then grind them together thoroughly, and do this quickly so it does not cool. Then spread this mixture over the paper you made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it on the eyelid of one or both eyes. And place a cloth soaked in egg white under the eye, and the patient's head should rest in your lap.	Then take of common soap and of quicklime of each the weight of a drachm or thereabouts and beat them well together rapidly lest the mass get cold; then spread this on the paper shaped like a myrtle leaf and apply to the eyelid of one or both eyes; place also under the eye cotton wool soaked in egg-white; the patient's head being in your lap.	0.91957426
Place your index finger on the medicine and press it gently. Move it each time the patient feels the medicine’s stinging, as he perceives its sting like fire.	Place your forefinger on the caustic and press it down a little and move it about according as the patient feels the bite of the caustic; for he will feel it sting like fire.	0.8283047
As long as he continues to feel the sting, leave the medicine in place and move it with your finger. When the stinging stops, remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.	While the stinging lasts, let the caustic remain on and move it about with your finger; and when the stinging dies down take away the caustic and wash the eye with water; then look, and if you see the eyelid raised up as by a blepharoplasty, either by fire or by incision, good.	0.6913573
Then observe if the eyelid rises, as it would from contraction by fire or incision; if so, it is good. If not, reapply the medicine to the area where it did not take effect and did not darken, until your work is balanced and the eye contracts.	If not, repeat the caustic application in the place that the drug has not affected and which has not gone black, until your operation is complete and the eyelid draws together.	0.61425024
Then place a cloth with butter over it until the burned skin is removed. Then treat it with diaphinicon ointment or another ointment until it heals.	Then apply cotton wool with butter till the crust of the burn falls away; then treat with Palm ointment or the like till it be healed.	0.7588161
During the procedure, you must exercise utmost care to ensure that none of the medicine falls into the eye.	But in your operative procedure take the utmost care lest the least bit of caustic get into the eye.	0.74197245
If the eyelid softens after a few days and any hairs prick the eye, then repeat the medicine on the specific part of the eyelid that softened, as you did at first. Then treat it until it heals.	And if, after some days, the eyelid be relaxed and some eyelash irritate the eye, then repeat the application, particularly in that part of the lid that has dropped, in the same manner as before; and treat till cured.	0.8619113
And this is the shape of the myrtle leaf.	This is the shape of the myrtle leaf.	0.879139
Know that human eyes vary in size and smallness. Therefore, let your consideration be according to this, for the way of righteousness is not hidden from one dedicated to this art.	You should know that the human eye varies in size; so let your contracture be in proportion to this. The right procedure is well known to him who has experience in this art.	0.7615387

chapter-1-subchapter-17.txt
On the method of cauterizing in the case of a tear duct fistula.	On cauterization of a fistula in the angle of the eye.	0.6271414
When you treat a fistula using what we discussed in the divisions of diseases and your treatment is ineffective, then you should cauterize it according to this method.	When you have treated a fistula in those ways mentioned in the sections on diseases, without success, it should be cauterized after this manner.	0.8635841
Instruct the patient to place his head in your lap, and have an assistant hold his head in his hands so that it remains still and does not move.	Bid the patient put his head in your lap; and let an assistant hold his head in front of you without moving or stirring.	0.8446863
Then place a cloth soaked in egg white or in a psillium mucilage over his eye; next, heat the cautery, which has this form.	Then place on his eyes cotton wool damped with egg-white or mucilage of psyllium seeds. Then heat a cautery shaped thus.	0.8852891
It should be concave, like the shape of the tip of a vulture’s feather on one end, with which the cauterization is performed; and if you wish, it can be penetrating to the other end, and, if you prefer, it should be raised in this way.	It should be hollow and in shape like a fine tube, like an eagle's quill, at the one end that is used as a cautery. And if you wish it may be perforated to the other extremity; or it can be solid like a probe.	0.79690397
However, this concave form is better for your work.	But this hollow instrument will be better for your operation.	0.7437959
Then squeeze the fistula, if it is open, to drain the fluid, and dry it; if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus.	Then press on the fistula if it be open and get the matter out of it and wipe it away; or if it is not open, then open it.	0.8543153
Then place on it the cautery, which has been heated very much.	Then apply to it the cautery, which should be very hot, and press it in with your hand till it reaches the bone.	0.5721997
And hold your hand steady on the cautery, positioned away from the eye towards the nose, so that your hand does not slip or the patient become disturbed; place the cautery on the fatty tissue of the eye and destroy it.	While you are burning keep the hand away from the eye slightly toward the nasal side, lest your hand slip or the patient draw away so that you put the cautery into the ball of the eye and destroy it.	0.7763787
If with the beginning of your cauterization you reach the bone, it will be good. If not, then repeat the cauterization once or twice as needed, and leave it for three days.	And if you reach the bone at the first cauterization, good; if not, repeat the cauterization if necessary.	0.6717736
Then apply a cloth with butter and treat it with a drying ointment until it heals.	Leave it a few days, then put on cotton wool with butter and treat with hygroscopic ointment till it heals.	0.6596345
If forty days pass and it does not heal, then apply a sharp, corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed, and scrape it as described in the relevant chapter.	And should forty days have passed and it does not heal, apply a sharp corrosive ointment so as to expose the bone, and strip it as will be explained in the appropriate chapter.	0.8999641
There is another method of cauterizing a fistula that some early practitioners have described. Direct your attention to the location of the fistula, split it open, and place a fine rod, that is, a thin tube, into the fissure, shaped like this. Pour into it an amount of a drachma of molten lead, holding your hand steady on the tube with a good grip, and ensure the patient does not move at all, so that the lead does not flow or reach his eye.	Another method of cauterizing a fistula is that which some of the Ancients mentioned: apply yourself to the site of the fistula and incise it; then insert into the incision a fine funnel, this being the figure of it, and pour into it a drachm of molten lead; and keep your hand on the funnel, holding it firm all the time, and do not let the patient move at all, lest the molten lead run into his eyes.	0.8410346
It is essential to place a cloth soaked in egg white or water over the patient’s eye.	Then you should put cotton wool soaked in egg-white or water upon the patient's eye.	0.83337474
The lead burns the site of the fistula and heals it with remarkable efficacy.	For the lead cauterizes the site of the fistula and acts as a marvellous cure.	0.7517585
If the fistula heals with the cautery and treatment as we described, it is good. If not, then it is necessary to create an opening in the nose and redirect the fistula towards the nasal passage, as it naturally should be.	If the fistula heals by the cauterization and medication we have described, well and good; otherwise perforation of the nose will undoubtedly have to be undertaken to lead the fistula into the meatus of the nose, by the technique that will come in its own place.	0.8333818

chapter-1-subchapter-18.txt
On the method of cauterizing in the fissures of the lips.	On cauterization of hare lip.	0.697466
Frequently, fissures called “Pili” occur on the lip, especially on children’s lips.	There often occur fissures in the lip to which are given the name 'hairs'; they are particularly common in the lips of boys.	0.74500597
When you treat these fissures using what we discussed in the divisions of diseases, and the treatment is ineffective, then heat a small, knife-shaped cautery to this form.	When you have ineffectually treated these clefts with those things that we have mentioned in their section, then heat a small edged cautery of this shape.	0.8098985
Its concavity should match the thinness of a knife.	The hollow should be as sharp as a knife.	0.6486025
Then quickly apply it, heated, to the fissures themselves until the cautery reaches the depths of the fissures.	Then quickly place it, hot, right on the fissure till the burning has reached the depth of the lip.	0.82768166
Then treat it with wax ointment until it heals.	Then treat with wax plaster till healed.	0.93839777

chapter-1-subchapter-19.txt
On the method of cauterizing an oral fistula.	On the cauterization of fistulae occurring in the mouth.	0.7390309
When an abscess forms at the root of the gums, the palate, or the roots of the teeth, which produces pus, ruptures, and eventually ages, leading to a continual discharge of pus and the formation of a fistula, and if the treatment of it does not prove effective, then you must heat a cautery sized to fit the fistula. Then insert the heated cautery into the opening of the fistula and hold your hand steady until the hot iron reaches the depth and end of the fistula. Do this once or twice as needed.	When there comes a tumour in the base of the gums or in the palate or in the roots of the molar teeth, and it becomes purulent and breaks out and a fistula comes from the flow of pus, and you have treated this without effect, you should heat a cautery of a size to fit the fistula; then introduce it hot into the fistula opening; and continue the pressure with it hot until the iron, still hot, reaches the hollow and the extremity of it. Do this once or twice over.	0.9101623
Then continue treating it afterward as we described in the treatment section until it is healed.	Then afterwards treat as we have mentioned until it heals.	0.87080634
If the discharge ceases and it heals, it will be good. But if it does not heal, then it is necessary to expose the area and remove the corrupted bone as described in the relevant chapter.	If the matter stops and it heals, well and good; otherwise it is impossible to avoid opening up the place and removing the diseased bone in the manner we shall speak of in its proper chapter.	0.77876437

chapter-1-subchapter-20.txt
On the method of cauterizing softened gums and teeth.	On cauterization of teeth and of relaxed gums.	0.7532555
When the gums are softened due to excess moisture, causing the teeth to loosen, and medicinal treatments are ineffective, place the patient's head in your lap.	When the gums are relaxed on account of humidity and the teeth are loose, and you treat this with drugs, and your treatment is ineffectual, then place the patient's head in your lap; then heat the cautery whose picture will come later.	0.7139559
Next, heat a cautery of the following form, place a small tube over the tooth, and quickly insert the heated cautery into the tube. Hold your hand steady for a moment until the patient feels the warmth of the heat reaching the root of the tooth.	Put a cannula upon his tooth and quickly introduce the glowing cautery into it and press a little until the patient can feel the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth; then remove your hand.	0.7768464
Then lift your hand and repeat the cauterization several times as desired.	Then repeat the cauterization as many times as you may desire.	0.80494726
Then have the patient fill his mouth with saltwater and hold it there for an hour before spitting it out.	Then the patient should fill his mouth with saline, hold it for a while, then spit it out.	0.7765468
The loose tooth will firm up, the softened gums will tighten, and the excessive moisture will dry up.	Then the loose tooth will be made firm, the relaxed gum will be tightened, and the corrupt humidity will be dried up.	0.77162755

chapter-1-subchapter-21.txt
On the method of cauterizing for tooth pain.	On cauterization for toothache.	0.811821
When tooth pain is due to coldness or worms in the tooth, and medicinal treatments are ineffective, there are two methods of cauterization: cauterization with butter or with fire.	When the toothache arises on account of cold, or if there be a worm in the tooth, and medical treatment does not avail, then cauterization should be undertaken. There are two ways of doing this, one with butter, the other with the cautery.	0.7977674
For cauterization with butter, take cow’s butter and boil it in an iron spoon or small vessel. Then take a piece of cloth and wrap it around the tip of a probe. Next, dip it into the boiling butter and quickly place it on the painful tooth, holding it there until it cools. Repeat this several times until the heat reaches the root of the tooth.	Cauterization with butter is done thus: take cows' butter and let it boil in an iron ladle or pan; then take cotton wool, wind it round the top of a probe, and dip it in the boiling butter and quickly apply it to the aching tooth and hold it there till cold. Repeat this a number of times till the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.	0.8650181
Alternatively, if you prefer, soak wool or cloth in cold butter, place it over the painful tooth, and then place heated iron over it until the heat reaches the depth of the tooth’s cavity.	If you prefer, dip wool or cotton in cold butter and put it on the aching tooth, then on top of that apply the hot iron until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.	0.90826833
For cauterization with fire, use a copper or iron tube. The body of the tube should be thick enough to prevent the intense heat from reaching the patient’s mouth.	The actual cautery is administered thus: take a tube of bronze or iron with some thickness in the body of it so that the intensity of the fire does not reach the patient's mouth.	0.65410626
Then heat the cautery in the specified form, place it over the tooth, and hold your hand steady until the cautery cools.	Then heat a cautery whose figure will be given shortly, and apply it to the tooth itself and hold your hand until the cautery gets cold.	0.8220889
Repeat this several times; the pain will dissipate either that day or the next.	Do this several times over; the pain will certainly depart the same day or the next.	0.9411074
After applying the cautery, have the patient fill his mouth with good butter, hold it there for an hour, and then spit it out.	After this cauterization the patient is to fill his mouth with good butter and keep it in for a while, then spit it out.	0.85143787
This is the form of the cautery.	This is the figure of the cautery.	0.77780634
Cauterize with whichever end of the instrument you find most suitable, and this is the form of the tube.	Cauterize with whichever end you prefer according to circumstances. This is the figure of the tube.	0.7262546

chapter-1-subchapter-22.txt
On the method of cauterizing in cases of strophulae.	On cauterization of scrofulous tumours.	0.60428256
When strophulae arise from phlegm and cold humors, and are not responsive to treatment with medicines, and you want their digestion to be quickened, then heat a concave cautery iron, in this shape.	When the tumours arise from phlegm and cold humidities and are not to be dispersed with medicines and you wish for a rapid dispersal, then heat the hollow cautery of which this is the figure.	0.7437519
Having two open ends so that smoke may escape from one end of the cautery iron, and place it, heated, upon the abscess once, and a second time, if needed, until it reaches the depth of the abscess.	It is open at both ends to give exit for the fumes of burning from the other end. Place it hot, right on the tumour, once, or twice if need be, till you reach the bottom of the tumour.	0.8029746
If the abscess is small, then place the cautery iron according to the size of the abscess.	If the tumour be small, suit the cautery to the size of the tumour.	0.7709944
Then leave it for three days, and apply over it cotton soaked in butter, until what the fire has burned is removed.	Then let be for three days and apply cotton wool soaked in butter until the eschar has disappeared.	0.83804476
Then treat it with dental ointment until it heals, forming a tube.	Then treat with ointments and with plugs of lint till healed. [	0.61914533

chapter-1-subchapter-23.txt
On the method of cauterizing for hoarseness of voice and shortness of breath.	On cauterization for hoarseness and for constriction of the breath.	0.7620574
When the humors overpower the canal of the lungs, especially when it is due to a cold temperament, then it is necessary to purge the patient first with laxative medicines.	When humidities prevail over the windpipe, and especially when there is a frigid temperament, the patient should first have his bowels opened with a laxative.	0.8031248
Then cauterize him on the throat at the root of the gullet, in a depressed place, and be careful not to reach the throat itself with the cautery, nor penetrate the skin except a little.	Then cauterize him once in the hollow of the jugular fossa at the root of the throat in the hollow part. Take care that the cautery does not pierce through to the gullet, and burn no more than half of the thickness of the skin.	0.77257055
Then cauterize him again with another cautery iron at the joint of the neck at its last vertebra, finishing the procedure; let the cautery be shaped like a nail, following the previous method.	Then cauterize him once more, strongly, at the junction of the neck with its last vertebra, the cautery being claviform as described above.	0.7680793
Then treat him with what was used before, until he is healed.	Then treat as prescribed before till healed.	0.7909731

chapter-1-subchapter-24.txt
On the method of cauterizing for lung ailments and cough.	On cauterization for pulmonary disease and for cough.	0.8587845
When cough and lung disease arise from cold humors, and the patient has neither fever nor consumption, and the disease is chronic, then cauterize him with two cauteries above the fork of the collarbone, in soft, shallow, and empty places. And with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two nipples; let the cautery be tubular, following the previous form.	When the cough and pulmonary disease arise from cold humidities and the patient suffers from no fever or wasting but the disease is chronic, sear him with two cauterizations over the two clavicles, in the soft depressions ; and with another cauterization in the mid-line of the chest between the breasts. Let the cautery be claviform as described above.	0.9049847
And if you wish your cauterization to be punctuated with a cautery called “the Point,” which was previously described in the cauterization of ear pain; let there be up to thirty points, almost reaching each other.	And if you prefer, make punctate cauterizations with the cautery called 'punctate'; its shape has already been described under pricking for earache. The punctures should number upwards of thirty.	0.74226135
Then treat him with what was used before, until he is healed.	Then treat as aforesaid until healed.	0.775421
And now let the cautery have three branches, in this shape. Thus the cauterization is alleviated when you make with it three cauteries at once.	Sometimes also a trident cautery is prepared, in this manner, with which you can burn more speedily; for with this you can apply three cauterizations at once.	0.64294183

chapter-1-subchapter-25.txt
Chapter 27.	CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE.	0.5553876
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to humors and does not settle back in place upon its return from dislocation, until it becomes a habit of dislocation, and then it dislocates with slight movement, as we have witnessed before, then it is necessary to reduce the dislocation first. Then lay the patient on his back, or on his healthy side. Then lift the skin on the inner shoulder upward with the fingers of your left hand if the joint is dislocated inward.	When the head of the humerus is dislocated on account of the synovial fluid or when it does not remain in the correct position after the dislocation has been set, so that this becomes a regular occurrence—it is set and then dislocates with the least movement, as we have ourselves seen; you must first set the luxation, then make the patient lie down on his back or on his sound side; then with the fingers of the left hand lift up the skin of the axilla if the joint has dislocated downwards.	0.8611981
Then heat a cautery iron with two prongs. In this shape.	Then heat a cautery provided with two spits in this manner.	0.83026934
Then cauterize the skin until it penetrates through to the other side, and the figure of the cauterization will appear with four cauteries.	Then with that burn through the fold of skin till you have perforated to the other side, getting four cauterizations.	0.81165147
Sometimes the cauterization is done with a cautery iron having three prongs, and thus the figure of the cauterization will have six cauterizations; the prongs are as thin as a stretched thread.	The cautery may be of three prongs and then the form of the cauterization will be six burns. The prongs should be of the fineness of a probe.	0.6998857
And this is the shape of the cautery iron with three prongs.	This is the figure of the cautery with three prongs.	0.76111746
Sometimes one more is added to this method, so that there are eight cauteries.	Sometimes there is added yet one more so there will be eight burns.	0.77801144
Then apply crushed leeks with salt over the cauterized area. Then keep the patient in stillness, so the limb does not move for a while, until it is strengthened.	Put on the burns leeks well pounded with salt; then keep the patient absolutely quiet so as not to move the joint for a time till it gains strength.	0.8006361
And if the dislocation is upward, which rarely happens, then cauterize the shoulder with a nail-shaped cautery or with many puncturing cauteries.	If the dislocation has gone upwards, which very rarely happens, then cauterize him above the shoulder with one good claviform cautery or with multiple punctured cauterizations.	0.831714
For the joint is strengthened, the humor is removed, and the patient is healed.	Thus the joint will gain strength and the humidity will disappear and the patient will be cured.	0.7216337

chapter-1-subchapter-26.txt
On the method of cauterizing the stomach.	On cauterization of the stomach.	0.8103802
Let the depth of the cautery be two-thirds the thickness of the skin.	Let the depth of the burning be two-thirds of the depth of the skin.	0.91675276
Let the shape of the cauteries be according to this form without addition; and if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach in this form, and let the cautery be circular in shape.	Let the shape of the cauterizations be thus and of no more than this size. If you wish, make a single large cauterization in the middle of the stomach, thus. The cautery for this single cauterization is circular, thus.	0.8408715
The stomach can be cauterized by puncturing for those who fear this cautery: mark a point on the stomach according to the desired size with ink, then cauterize with a pointed cautery, then treat it with the previous remedy until healed.	The stomach may be cauterized with punctures in the case of a person who fears this operation. You will have marked the points with ink on the stomach, as many as you wish; then sear with a punctate cautery. Then treat as previously described until he be healed.	0.81235504

chapter-1-subchapter-27.txt
On the method of cauterizing a cold liver.	On the cauterization of a cold liver.	0.8548789
When pain occurs in the liver due to cold and moisture, or from thick winds, disrupting its natural balance by excess, and treatment as prescribed does not help, then the patient should lie on his back, and mark with ink three cauteries in this shape and this same size below the hypochondria, at the point where the elbow meets: allow space between each cautery the width of a finger, and let the cautery be straight in the length of the body; do not press your hand too hard with the cautery.	When there is pain in the liver from cold and humidity or from thick vapour, so there is a severe disturbance of its natural constitution, and the patient has been treated as prescribed in the appropriate section but with no effect, the patient should lie back, and you should mark with ink the places of three cauterizations, in this form and exactly of this size below the costal cartilages, where the elbow reaches. Let there be a finger's breadth between each pair of cauterizations and let the burning be straight along the length of the body. Do not press the cautery hard with your hand.	0.8464153
Let the amount burned be half the thickness of the skin, not more; and let the patient be standing on his feet.	Let the thickness of the skin you burn be half its thickness, not more; and let the patient be standing on his feet during the cauterization.	0.88704723
If he is not standing, then he should be lying down, with his legs extended and arms raised.	Alternatively he may be recumbent with legs outstretched and arms raised.	0.72410727
This is the shape of the cautery.	Figure of the cautery.	0.5290034
Indeed, it is possible to perform these cauterizations with a knife-like cautery, provided you possess skill and precision in the art.	You will also be able to do these cauterizations with the edged cautery when you have craft and facility in the art.	0.7359542
Be cautious not to go too deeply with the cauterization, so as not to burn the full thickness of the skin, for this would burn the entire body and reach the intestines, as the skin there is thin; know this well.	Be careful lest you go too deep with the cautery and burn the whole thickness of the skin and the abdomen and penetrate to the intestine, for the skin there is thin; bear this in mind.	0.85845244

chapter-1-subchapter-28.txt
On the method of cauterizing liver abscesses.	On incising a tumour of the liver with the cautery.	0.6479744
When an abscess occurs and you wish to know if it is in the liver's flesh or its covering: if it is in the liver's flesh, the patient suffers dull pain and heaviness; if in the liver's covering, there is sharp, intense pain; and you see that its treatment has wearied the physicians.	When there is an abscess in the liver and you are anxious to know if the tumour is in the body of the liver or in its capsule: if it is in the substance of the liver, the patient will be suffering from a feeling of heaviness and no very acute pain. But if it is in the capsule of the liver there will be the sharpest intensity of pain and you will see that it has baffled the doctors.	0.8668731
Thus, the patient should lie on his back. Then mark the site of the abscess with ink, and heat a cautery shaped like a ray. And this is its shape. Cauterize with it once, until the entire skin is burned and reaches the membrane, until all discharge is released; then treat it with the abscess remedy until healed.	Then the patient should lie back on his neck; then mark the place of the swelling with ink. Then heat the cautery in the fire, this being the cautery resembling a probe, of this form, and with that make one cauterization till the whole thickness of the skin is burnt through, finishing up at the capsule so that all the purulent matter comes out. Then apply the treatment for wounds.	0.918367
And this type of cautery should not be used except by one experienced in the art of medicine and who has often encountered such illnesses; only then should he dare this procedure.	This kind of cauterization should not be employed except by one who has a long experience of the medical art and who has frequent practice at dealing with this kind of disease. Then he can undertake this kind of operation.	0.86387277
But truly, leaving it alone is, in my view, better.	But in my opinion it would be better to pass it by.	0.7195916

chapter-1-subchapter-29.txt
On the method of cauterizing in cases of pleurisy.	On cauterization for pleurisy.	0.7501241
And also apply two cauteries between the fifth and sixth ribs, slanting slightly towards the back; one cautery at the center of the chest and another over the stomach. And apply three cauteries on the back: one between the shoulder blades, and two on each side of the chest, below the cautery placed between the shoulder blades.	And two big cauterizations above the nipples in the space between the third and fourth ribs; and two more between the fifth and sixth ribs, tending slightly toward the back; and another in the middle of the chest; and another above the stomach; and three more behind, namely, one between the scapulae and two on either side of the dorsal spine below the one between the scapulae.	0.8970191
Do not press your hand too hard with the cautery; instead, it should only be obvious enough by the smell of the burning skin.	It is not necessary to cauterize deeply, but let it be a mere hint, in the outer skin.	0.5701466
Some of the ancients have said that certain practitioners use an iron cautery similar to a rod; they heat it, insert it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess, and let the discharge exit, as we mentioned in the case of a liver abscess.	Now one of the Ancients mentioned that there were some people who used an iron cautery shaped like a probe, and introduced it red hot into the intercostal space until it reached the abscess itself and evacuated the pus, as we have mentioned under tumour of the liver.	0.81626797
But with this procedure there is a risk: either the patient dies immediately, or a fistula develops at the site, which is incurable.	But in this perforation with the cautery there is a danger either that the patient may die on the spot or that an incurable fistula may arise at the place.	0.8313271

chapter-1-subchapter-30.txt
On the method of cauterizing the spleen. Chapter 32.	CHAPTER THIRTY. On cauterization of the spleen.	0.64929897
When you treat a disease of the spleen with the treatments we discussed in the division of diseases, and it does not yield to these treatments, cautery can be used in three ways, all of which are effective.	When you have treated disease of the spleen by the means that we have mentioned in the section and your treatment is ineffectual, there will be three ways of cauterization, each of which will be correct.	0.8035451
One method is to create three or four cauteries in a line along the length of the spleen, in the same manner as the cauteries for the liver, as we previously described.	One is to make three or four cauterizations in a row over the long axis of the spleen like the cauterization of the liver, a figure of which has been given above.	0.855054
Let the space between each cautery be about the thickness of a finger, or a little more.	Let there be between each pair of burns a finger's breadth or a little more.	0.8434782
Let the method of the cautery be exactly as we described in cauterizing the liver.	Let the cautery be of the same shape as described above under cauterization of the liver.	0.7210979
Do not press your hand hard with the cautery, and have the patient lying on his back.	Do not put pressure on the cautery. Have the patient's body supine.	0.7142974
Another method of cauterization is to heat a double-pronged cautery, as we discussed in the chapter on shoulder dislocation; lift the skin directly over the spleen, where the patient’s left elbow reaches, lifting it along the body’s width, so the cauteries fall along the body’s length.	The second method is to heat the cautery provided with two prongs, described in the chapter on dislocation of the shoulder. Lift up the skin over the spleen at the level of the patient's left elbow; and let the fold of skin lie across the patient's body so that the cauterizations will fall longitudinally.	0.85071623
Then insert the two highly heated prongs until they pierce through to the other side of the skin; then remove the cautery, creating four cauteries.	Then push in the two prongs, well heated, till you have pierced the skin from side to side. Then take out the cautery; and there are four cauterizations.	0.86472905
If you wish, you may cauterize with another cautery that has three prongs.	Or if you prefer you can burn with the other cautery, of three prongs.	0.8213514
Then care for the cautery site, allowing it to discharge pus over many days, as it is more effective than other preceding treatments.	Then dress the site of cauterization after you have allowed pus to run therefrom for many days. This is more effective than any of the preceding treatments.	0.883699

chapter-1-subchapter-31.txt
On the method of cauterizing for dropsy.	On the cauterization of dropsy.	0.7720779
Cautery is only applied in cases of ascitic dropsy specifically.	The cautery is particularly effective in ascites.	0.66013694
When treating a dropsical patient with the previously described treatments and they prove ineffective, you should then cauterize with four cauteries around the navel, one cautery on the stomach, another over the liver, one on the spleen, two on the back between the vertebrae, one opposite the chest, and another opposite the stomach. The depth of the cautery should be close to the thickness of the skin.	When you have, without effect, treated a dropsical person with the various measures mentioned in the section on diseases, you should sear with four cauterizations around the umbilicus, and one over the stomach, another over the liver, and another over the spleen, and two behind his back between the vertebrae, one at the level of the breast and one at the level of the stomach; and let the burn be almost skin-deep.	0.856181
Then leave the cautery site open so it may discharge pus over a long period.	Then keep the burn open so that it suppurates for a long while.	0.7969558
And do not abandon treatment for the patient after the cautery; it is necessary to combine two aims, and healing will hasten with God’s help.	Do not let the patient, after cauterization, be without the necessary treatment, so that you combine both methods for him, and a cure will speedily come to him.	0.6711233
The shape of the cautery used for the abdomen should be nail-like, as previously described, and the one used for the back should be olive-shaped, as previously specified.	The cautery with which his belly is cauterized should be claviform like the figure previously given; while the one with which his back is cauterized should be olivary.	0.7994898

chapter-1-subchapter-32.txt
On the Method of Cauterizing Feet and Legs	On cauterization of the legs and feet.	0.7351024
When swelling occurs in the dropsical person, and yellowish water fills the feet, it is necessary to cauterize the top of the foot, specifically on the area between the little toe and the ring toe. Raise your hand with the cautery tool, do not twist it, and then lift your hand; do not repeat the procedure at all.	When, in the sufferer from dropsy, these swell and become full of yellowish fluid, you should cauterize the upper surface of the feet in the depression between the little and fourth toes; hold your hand upright with the cautery; do not let it slant.	0.77206427
This will cause the yellow water to sweat out, and the cautery should be applied as described.	Then remove your hand and do no more cauterization whatever; for the yellowish fluid will exude. The cautery should be of this type.	0.54767704
Then, apply two cauteries on each leg. Use the blade-like end of the cautery tool, applying it lengthwise along the leg, one below the knee and the other slightly lower, around the middle of the leg. Apply two cauteries on each thigh. Leave the cautery sites open without treatment for an extended time so that water may exude from them. Afterward, treat the area with the remedies previously mentioned.	Then sear the legs with two cauterizations on each leg; cauterize with the bladed end of the cautery, and let it be along the length of the leg: one under the knee, the other lower than that, about the middle of the leg; and two more cauterizations over each femur. Leave the burns open without treatment for a long while during which the fluid will exude from them. Then dress with all that we have described.	0.8922149

chapter-1-subchapter-33.txt
Chapter 35.	CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE.	0.62086517
When there is looseness of the bowels due to cold and moisture, which weakens the stomach and intestinal retention and digestive functions, and if usual treatments fail, and the patient is strong enough to tolerate cauterization, apply a large cautery to the stomach, as previously described in stomach cauterization using a circular cautery. Apply four delicate cauteries around the navel, using a fine nail-like cautery tool, and another on the alcatin (just above the pubic bone), using a large cautery or two smaller ones.	When the diarrhoea is due to frigidity and humidities so that the capacity of the stomach and intestines to hold and to digest is impaired, and this has been treated by various methods and is not cured; if you see that the patient is able to endure the cautery and is of unimpaired strength, make a big cauterization on his stomach according to the preceding instructions for cauterization of the stomach with a circular cautery; and four narrow cauterizations round his navel with the thin claviform cautery; and one or two big cauterizations in the lumbar region over the coccyx.	0.83290744
If you see an excess of moisture and the patient can tolerate it, cauterize over the pubic area and over each iliac crest. You may add two small cauteries on the stomach, close to the larger one.	And if you see that the humidities are superabundant, and the patient fit to tolerate it, then make one cauterization over the groin and one over the hypochondrium. You may also add two small ones over the stomach near the big one.	0.8460296
This treatment is effective, providing reliable relief.	This is an effective treatment that does not fail to help.	0.71840525

chapter-1-subchapter-34.txt
Chapter 36.	CHAPTER THIRTY-FOUR.	0.62978625
When there are old, multiple hemorrhoids in the anus, or even a single one, caused by thick, cold humors or corrupt moisture, and treatments have proven ineffective, cauterize with three cauteries on the lower vertebra of the back just below the waist in a triangular shape, and one cautery just two finger-widths below the navel.	When there are one or more chronic haemorrhoids in the anus arising from thick and cold humours or corrupt humidities, and they have been treated by those measures mentioned in the section, without effect, then sear the patient with three cauterizations over the lowest dorsal vertebra a little below the flat part of the back, triangularly; and one about two fingers' breadth below the navel.	0.8669387
If you suspect the patient's stomach is chilled and food is undigested, and you notice swelling in the face, then cauterize over the stomach with a large cautery as previously described, and also over the liver and spleen using a nail-like cautery. Leave the cautery site open for a while, then treat it until healed.	And if you consider that his stomach has become chilled and his food not being digested, and you see his face swollen, then do one big cauterization over the stomach as previously described; and one over his liver; and another over the spleen; with the claviform cautery. Keep the burn open a long while; then dress till healed.	0.83636117

chapter-1-subchapter-35.txt
Chapter 37.	CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE.	0.608251
When you remove althelul (lesions or ulcers), heat a cautery shaped like a rod. Then insert the heated cautery into the cut althelul, pressing until it reaches the mouth of the vein from which blood flows; do this once or twice.	On cauterization of warts after excision. When you excise warts, heat a spike-shaped cautery and bring it, hot, to the site of the excised wart, and press down till the cautery reaches the mouth of the vessel whence the blood comes. Do this once or twice over.	0.8104143
If there are multiple althelul, cauterize each one as described. Then treat them with appropriate ointments until they heal.	If the warts be more than one, sear each one separately as we have described ; then dress with suitable ointments till healed.	0.8266698
If you cauterize with a large cautery over the alcatin, this is the most beneficial method.	And if you burn the patient with one big cauterization over the lumbar region that will add to the effect.	0.4724834

chapter-1-subchapter-36.txt
Chapter 38.	CHAPTER THIRTY-SIX.	0.60497683
When a patient is unwilling to undergo surgery and the procedure we discussed earlier, and if they are afraid of it, perhaps they can be cured with cauterization.	When the patient will not submit to the cutting operation we have described in its own place, and is afraid of it, he may perhaps be cured with the cautery.	0.83765316
When someone has a fistula that has persisted for a long time, and pus and corrupted humors flow from it. First, it is necessary to examine the fistula carefully with a fine probe. Then, assess its depth with the probe.	So when somebody gets a fistula, and pus and foul humidities have for a long while been running from it, you must first explore it with a fine probe and judge of its depth by the probe.	0.90078574
Afterward, heat a rod-like cautery. Then insert the heated cautery into the fistula to the depth of the insertion mark.	Then heat a spike-shaped cautery and introduce it, hot, into the fistula, in the direction of the bottom of the fistula and to the depth to which the probe entered.	0.8222853
Repeat the cauterization over the affected area until all the corrupted tissue is burned, doing this once, twice, or thrice, depending on the need.	And repeat the cauterization till all those corrupt bodies are burnt away; once or twice or three times over, as you have need.	0.7043332
Be cautious not to burn any nerves, if present, or major veins. If the fistula is near the bladder or intestines, take care to avoid these areas entirely.	But beware of burning a nerve should one be there, or a big blood-vessel. If the fistula penetrates to the urinary bladder or the intestine, beware of all these parts.	0.79158986
Only perform this procedure when the fistula is in fleshy tissue and you believe it does not penetrate deeply.	Do this only when the fistula is in a fleshy part and you judge that it does not open into any other part.	0.7043129
Then treat the area until it is fully healed.	Afterwards dress the place till healed.	0.7231035
If the area seals and discharges material for an extended period, this indicates complete healing.	If the place cicatrizes and the flux of humours ceases and it remains so for a long while, you may know that it is perfectly healed.	0.6102588
If it fails to discharge material, then know that the fistula may be deep, possibly involving decayed bone or similar structures, which will be discussed later.	But if the flux of humours from it is not stopped, understand that it has perforated or that at the bottom there is a piece of diseased bone or the like; which will be mentioned in its proper place.	0.63559437

chapter-1-subchapter-37.txt
On the Method of Cauterizing the Kidneys	On cauterization of the kidneys.	0.66555256
When kidney pain arises due to cold or thickened wind (gas), and this reduces the patient’s virility, it is necessary to cauterize over the kidneys on the area called the almethen. Apply a nail-shaped cautery to each kidney, as previously described.	When pain strikes the kidneys from chill or heavy vapour, and the patient's sexual vigour is impaired thereby, you should burn him right over the kidneys, once on each kidney, with the claviform cautery mentioned before.	0.63894796

chapter-1-subchapter-38.txt
On the Method of Cauterizing the Bladder	On cauterization of the urinary bladder.	0.65901184
When there is weakness and relaxation in the bladder due to cold and moisture, causing urinary incontinence, cauterize the lower part of the abdomen, above the bladder, where the pubic hair begins. Apply cauterization on both the right and left sides, with a length approximately that of the thumb joint. Additionally, cauterize the lower back, using one or two cauteries if necessary, following the nail-like cautery form previously described.	When there occurs in the urinary bladder a weakness and relaxation due to chill and humidities, so that the patient cannot retain his water, sear him once below his navel, on the bladder, where the pubic hair begins; burn him once also on the right side and once on the left side of the navel; and let the distance of the burn from either side be the length of the joint of the thumb. Cauterize him also once on the lower part of the back, or twice if you need. The cautery should be claviform, as described.	0.82008743

chapter-1-subchapter-39.txt
On the Method of Cauterizing the Uterus	On cauterization of the womb.	0.6253917
When cold and moisture affect the uterus, preventing conception, causing menstrual irregularities, delays, and pain upon menstruation, it is necessary to cauterize with three cauteries around the navel, as described in bladder cauterization. Apply an additional cautery over the pubic region below the back, or use two cauteries, and use the nail-shaped cautery.	When matter arises in the womb from chill or humidities and she is thereby prevented from conceiving and her menses are upset; their flow fails or, as they pass, pain accompanies them; then you must cauterize her three times around the navel, as we have mentioned in cauterization of the bladder; and once or twice in the lumbar region in the lower part of the back over the hips. The cautery should be claviform.	0.75797117

chapter-1-subchapter-40.txt
On the Method of Cauterizing the Hip in Dislocation	On cauterization of a dislocated hip.	0.62815386
When mucus-like humors flow into the hip socket, causing it to dislocate, one leg will appear longer than the other when compared, and there will be an empty space at the dislocation site.	Sometimes harmful humidities reach the hip joint and result in its coming out of its place. The symptom of this is that one leg is longer than the other when one is measured against the other; and a hollow is found there [i.e. at the hip].	0.6018658
It is necessary to cauterize the patient over the hip socket using a circular cautery. First, mark around the hip with ink, following its contour, so that the hip joint falls within the center of the circle.	Then you should cauterize the patient over the hip joint itself with a circular burn, after you have marked with ink a circle round the femoral joint, so that the joint falls in the middle of the circle. The cautery should be the one whose description has already been given in cauterization of the stomach.	0.8052001
If this circular cautery is not available, then apply three cauteries using a large olive-shaped cautery, with a depth equal to the skin’s full thickness.	But if you have not this cautery by you, give him three cauterizations with the larger size olivary cautery. The burn should be to the depth of the whole thickness of the skin.	0.78356934
Then treat the area until it heals completely.	Then dress till healed.	0.6033866

chapter-1-subchapter-41.txt
On the Method of Cauterizing for Sciatica	On cauterization for sciatica.	0.67722416
When pain occurs in the hip joint due to cold and moisture, and the patient has been treated with the methods described earlier, but no cure is achieved, and the pain becomes chronic, it is necessary to purge the patient of thick humors using fetid pills, artificial pills, or similar remedies. Then proceed to cauterize the patient.	When pain occurs in the hip joint and is due to cold and humidities, and the patient has been treated by those means mentioned in the section, and the treatment is ineffectual, and the pain becomes chronic, the patient should be purged of the heavy humours with foetid pills or pills of tamarind or the like; then cauterize him.	0.8624698
There are two methods for cauterization in this case: cauterization with caustic medicines or cauterization with fire.	The means of cauterization in this case is twofold: either with caustic chemicals or with fire.	0.9027672
Cauterization with fire can be done in several ways.	The actual cautery will serve for several methods.	0.57236886
One method is to apply three triangular cauterizations over the hip joint, arranged in this form. Make the cauterizations either deep or shallow, as necessary. Allow a finger’s width of space between each cauterization, and use an olive-shaped cautery.	One of them is to make three cauterizations over the femoral joint itself in a triangular manner ; and let them be of a fair depth; and the space between them a finger's breadth. The cautery should be an olivary one.	0.7965838
Sometimes, a single cauterization is also applied in the center over the head of the hip joint. Thus, there will be four cauterizations in total.	Sometimes there will also be one cauterization in the middle over the actual head of the femur, making four cauterizations in all.	0.88318205
If you prefer, you may use a circular cautery as described in the treatment for hip dislocation, forming a circle around the entire hip joint.	The burning may be done with the circular cautery which has been mentioned under cauterization of a dislocated hip; a single cauterization so that the circle embrace the whole joint.	0.62515986
Burn through the entire thickness of the skin.	Burn through the whole thickness of the skin.	0.9989457
This is the method for cauterizing sciatica when the pain is localized in the hip and does not extend to the thigh or leg.	This is the form of cauterization for sciatica when the pain is localized in the hip joint and does not extend to the femur and the leg.	0.89604557
If the pain extends to the thigh and leg, apply two cauterizations on the thigh at the point indicated by the patient where the pain is located, and place another cautery on the ankle, about four fingers’ width toward the outside. Use a knife-shaped cautery.	But if it extends to the femur and the leg, cauterize him over the thigh with two burns at the place where the patient indicates the pain to be; and one burn four fingers above the great tendon of the heel, a little to the outer side.	0.8372143
Ensure the cautery penetrates to the full thickness of the skin.	The cautery should be edged, and the depth of the burn only to the thickness of the skin.	0.48142713
If the patient indicates that the pain extends to the toes, apply three, four, or more point cauterizations at the points indicated by the patient, if necessary.	But if the patient points out that the pain reaches to the toes, then cauterize where he has indicated to you, with a punctate cautery, three or four or more perforations if he needs it.	0.8514701
If the patient points to pain below the knee toward the leg, apply a single knife-shaped cautery there.	If he indicates that the pain is under the knee towards the shank, give him one burn there with the edged cautery.	0.74463564
In all cauterizations, be cautious not to apply the cautery too deeply to avoid burning any nerve or major artery, which could cause severe harm or lead to contraction in the patient.	Be careful in all your cauterizing not to carry the cautery so far as to burn a nerve or a large artery; for thence arises grave harm, or crippling, to the patient.	0.87283945
I have witnessed cases where practitioners cauterized above the ankle and applied the cautery too deeply, causing the leg to swell until the swelling reached the foot, leading to the entire foot becoming perforated and necrotic; following this, the patient experienced abdominal distress and ultimately died.	I myself have seen more than one person cauterizing over the tendon of Achilles, the cauterization being excessive, and the leg was affected with a defluxion of humours which eventually reached the foot and the whole was riddled; after that came diarrhoea, and, after that, death.	0.7310053
If the pain is present on both sides simultaneously, cauterize each side in this manner.	If there is pain in two places, cauterize both in this way.	0.8482615
Certain learned practitioners have suggested the following method for hip cauterization. Create a cautery tool from iron resembling a double samium. Its diameter should be half a palm's width, with an opening about the width of a date stone, or slightly less. Within it, place a third samium.	Certain learned doctors have mentioned a cauterization applicable to the hip in this manner: make a bowl of iron with a diameter of half a span; the thickness of the edge of its mouth should be that of a date-stone or a little less. Another bowl is introduced into this, and a third into that; and there is a distance between the bowls of a thumb-joint.	0.83189017
Ensure there is a space between each samium about the size of a thumb joint. These sami should be open on both ends, with a height of about one or two thumb joints. Attach an iron handle suitably fitted to the sami.	The bowls are open on both sides; and the depth of them should be a thumb-joint or two. Make an iron handle for them firmly fitted to the bowls.	0.7691371
Then, heat it in the fire until it becomes red-hot and emits sparks. Place it on the hip joint of the patient while they lie on their healthy side. Thus, cauterize with three round cauterizations in a single session.	Then heat this cautery in the fire until it is hot and sends out sparks; and so let it be applied to the hip, the patient lying on his sound side; and thus three circular cauterizations will be produced at a time.	0.84514624
Afterward, leave the wound undisturbed for three days. Then apply a butter-based plaster and leave the wound open for several days. Finally, treat the wound with ointment until it heals completely.	Afterwards let it be for three days; then smear with butter and leave the wound open for a while; then treat with ointment till it heals.	0.8687264
Albucasis says, "My son, we have rarely used this type of cautery because of the intimidating appearance and the lack of patients willing to undergo it."	The author of this book says that we very rarely employ this method of cauterization on account of the ugliness and dread appearance of it, and because we find few patients who will endure it.	0.6670208
Nevertheless, it is one of the most effective cauteries for those who can endure it and whose condition warrants its application.	Nevertheless, it is one of the best cauteries for him who can endure it and is correctly treated by it.	0.7969401
For cauterization with caustic medicines, make two small devices with a perforated ring through which a pivot made of brass or iron passes, the length of which is about two thumb joints.	Cauterization with caustics is thus: make two bowls like the ring into which a door-hinge descends, either of bronze or iron.	0.6572252
There should be a space between the devices approximately the width of a finger, and they should be open at the top and bottom, aligning in this arrangement.	The height of their sides should be two thumb-joints or thereabouts, and they should be separated about a finger's breadth; they should be open above and below, and joined one to another thus.	0.69639736
Place this over the hip joint of the patient as they lie on the healthy side. Press firmly over the hip joint with your hand. Then, pour warm water heated over a flame between the two rings, maintaining the heat for about an hour. The patient will feel a biting pain like fire, which they must endure until it subsides.	Then place them over the capsule of the hip joint, the patient lying upon his sound side, and press down hard; then pour caustic fluid between the two rings—it should have been heated slightly—and keep it there for the space of one hour by the sand-clock. The patient must endure the sting and heat of it (for he will find it stings like fire) till the causticity diminishes.	0.8331759
Afterward, remove your hand and the device, wipe away the hot water with fresh water, and leave the area undisturbed for three days.	Then remove your hand with the instrument and wash away the caustic from the whole capsule with pure water.	0.5327686
Apply butter to the area until the burned skin turns black, and allow it to rest for several days, during which pus will begin to flow. This process provides the most lasting relief.	Let be for three days and apply butter to it till the eschar comes away; and let the pus flow from it for a few days, for that will be more conducive to healing.	0.61275613
Then, treat it with ointments until it fully heals.	Then treat with ointment till it heals.	0.89177567
If the pain extends to the thigh or leg, perform the same procedure with the water application on that area as you did on the hip.	If the pain extends to the hip joint or the leg, make a form in some material that will hold the fluid for that, just as you did for the capsule of the femur.	0.72282755
Take equal parts of alkali and quicklime, grind them thoroughly, and place them in a new pot with a small hole at the bottom, just large enough for a rod to pass through. Place a glass vessel underneath, then pour fresh water over the alkali and lime to cover them by about a finger's width. Press down firmly with your hand and allow the liquid to drain into the glass vessel below.	Place under that pot another one, glazed. Pour enough water on the quicklime and potash to cover them to a finger's breadth after you have pressed them well together with your hand; and leave the pot until the caustic fluid has passed down into the bottom of the glazed pot.	0.77901584
Collect all this liquid, pour it over a new portion of lime, and filter it to renew its potency.	Then collect all that fluid and pour it upon a fresh lot of lime and potash.	0.64388317
This solution will be highly caustic and suitable for many medical applications, including cauterizing other parts of the body. It effectively replicates the action of fire.	Thus will the water be very caustic indeed. This is used for many medical procedures and for the cauterization of all members, as it has the very same action as fire itself.	0.71269834
Other medicinal substances used for cauterizing the hip include tesesi, cashew honey, and lime mixed with soap, all combined for maximum efficacy.	There are other drugs too with which the capsule of the femur is cauterized, such as Thapsia and Mel Anacardinum and inunction of lime with soap.	0.57453895
Galen, recounting the treatment of an ancient man cured of hip pain and sciatica, highly praised this method. He said that the man needed no further treatment and was cured after a single session, even claiming that the patient entered the bath in pain and emerged fully healed.	Galen, quoting one of the men of old, mentions a treatment for pain in the thigh and sciatica and he makes much of it, asserting that no other treatment was necessary, and that it would heal on one application, so much so that the patient would be carried into the bath and would go out completely cured.	0.841097
The treatment involves using fresh seitaragi (a specific medicinal plant), or, if unavailable, a dried, recent sample. Grind it thoroughly with some fat, apply it to the hip, leg, or thigh where the pain is located, then bind and leave it in place for about three hours or until the patient feels relief from the burning.	The method is as follows: take fresh green water-cress or new dry water-cress if fresh is not to be had; beat it up well with some fat and apply it to the hip where it hurts, or to the leg or thigh, and bind up.	0.62914824
Then, have the patient enter a bath.	Then let be for three hours or until the patient feels a diminishing of the caustic; and then let him be taken to the bath.	0.43204978
Once their body is perspiring, immerse them in a basin. The pain will subside, and healing will occur.	When his body is bedewed with sweat, get him into the pool; then the pain will vanish and he will be cured.	0.8180533
Be aware that cauterization should not be combined with these treatments until the body has been purged.	But you must know that no one should have cauterization with these drugs except after evacuation of the bowel.	0.65199625
Dioscorides stated that goat dung, when used to cauterize the sciatic vein, provides relief. The cautery is applied as follows: Take some wool, soak it in old oil, and place it over the depression between the big toe and the arch, near the ankle.	Dioscorides has said that cauterization with goats' dung is beneficial for sciatica. The cauterization is carried out in this manner: take wool soaked in old oil and put it into the cleft which is between the thumb and the forearm but nearer to the forearm.	0.8776263
Then take dried goat dung, ignite it in fire until it turns to charcoal.	Then take the dried dung of a goat and expose it to fire until it glows like a coal.	0.8691081
Continue this until the sensation extends along the pathway to the hip and the pain subsides.	Place it on the piece of wool, and leave till it cools, then replace it with another, and so on until the sensation has reached the hip joint by way of the forearm, and the pain stops.	0.54041946
This method is known as the "Cow Cautery."	This kind of cautery is called 'the dung cautery'.	0.65239537

chapter-1-subchapter-42.txt
On cauterization for back pain.	On cauterization for pain in the back.	0.980242
Sometimes pain occurs in the back from many causes, either from an accident, or from an impact, or excessive evacuation, and similar things, from the infusion of cold and moist matter: and in fact, cauterization is only used in this specific case, which results from the infusion of cold matter.	Many different causes give pain in the back. Sometimes it happens from a fall or a blow, or from excessive evacuation or the like. It may also be due to an influx of humid matter. Cauterization is only to be employed in this last case, which arises from an influx of cold matter.	0.82680446
Therefore, after evacuating the patient with stinking pills, and similar treatments, three lines should be made on the back, where the pain is, according to the width of the affected area itself, marking five cauterizations on each line with ink, or more according to the patient’s ability to endure it: and the cauterization is to be performed with a pointed cautery.	When the patient has been purged with foetid pills or the like, he should be cauterized in his back where the pain is, over the breadth of the flat of the back, after the place has been marked with ink, with three rows of cauterizations, five in each, or more, in proportion to what you see of the patient's endurance and strength. Use the punctate cautery.	0.7733099
And if you wish, cauterize with three cauteries, or four, with the middle key-shaped cautery, in this manner.	Use the punctate cautery. If you like, you may give him three or four cauterizations with the middle-sized claviform cautery.	0.7223656

chapter-1-subchapter-43.txt
On the method of cauterizing in the initial stage of hunchback.	On cauterization of early hunchback.	0.6967799
This disease often occurs in young children.	This disease often occurs in small children.	0.9809637
And the sign of its onset in children is that they suffer tightness in breathing upon lifting and movement: and you find at the end of the spine and its joints, that one part has already started to protrude above the other vertebrae.	The sign of the beginning of the disease in a child is that he suffers shortness of breath when standing or moving, and you will find that at the end of his dorsal vertebrae there is one visibly projecting above the other vertebrae.	0.80388427
When you see that, and wish to treat it, then cauterize it with a cautery shaped like a circle, in this manner.	So when you see this and you wish to stop it, cauterize him with a cautery that should be circular so that the cauterization takes in equally all sides of the vertebra.	0.6708237
And let the cautery take hold evenly on every part of the vertebra: and if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery in two lines, or three, with the points close together.	If you wish, you can cauterize two or three lines around the vertebra with the punctate cautery; let the punctures be close to one another.	0.7499924
Then treat the area until it heals with what we have prescribed.	Then dress the place with those remedies we have mentioned, till healed.	0.78414184
And be careful not to apply cautery to a hump caused by nerve spasm.	But beware of using the cautery in the deformity arising from a nervous spasm.	0.73600465

chapter-1-subchapter-44.txt
On the method of cauterizing for gout and joint pains.	On cauterization of gout and pain in the joints.	0.828398
When joint pains result from cold humors that spread to various body parts, then when pain occurs in the feet, it is customary among doctors to specifically call it gout.	When there are pains in the joints from cold humidities flowing into whatever part of the body it may be, and specially when there are pains in the feet, doctors are in the habit of calling that 'gout'.	0.81801385
Therefore, when gout of a cold cause is treated with various methods, and the pains are not relieved, then cauterization removes them.	When gout due to chill has been treated with the various treatments mentioned in its section, and the pains remain, the cautery will remove them.	0.7217354
And this is done by cauterizing around the joints of the feet after evacuation, with multiple cauterizations: and the cautery should be olive-shaped.	That is, you cauterize the patient with multiple burns around the joint of the foot, after he has been purged. The cautery should be a middle-sized olivary one, thus.	0.5770173
And if you need to prick the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. If the pains extend up to the knees or other joints, as often happens, then cauterize each knee with three or four cauteries on all sides, with this same key-shaped cautery.	If you need to make punctate cauterizations round the front of the foot, use the punctate cautery; and if the pains go up to the knee or other joints, which often happens, burn each knee with three or four cauterizations on every side with the same olivary cautery.	0.89306766
And if more cauterizations with this cautery are necessary, then cauterize it. Do not sink your hand deeply with the cautery; rather, only to the thickness of the skin.	And if you require to cauterize him more than this, do it, but do not go deeply but only about the thickness of the skin.	0.7667454
But if the pains rise to the knees and back, then apply what we mentioned in its section on cautery.	If the pains go up to the hip joints or the back, employ those cauterizations that we have mentioned in their own chapter.	0.8008775
If the pains are in the hands only, then prick around the joints, as two lines are traced.	And if the pains are in the hands only, pierce a double line all around the wrists.	0.81326437
If any pain remains in the fingers, then prick each joint and along the ridge of the hand.	If the pains remain in the fingers, pierce them once over each joint and once on the metacarpus.	0.76695466
If the pains rise over time to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize both from all sides.	And if after some days the pains go up to the elbows or shoulders then cauterize both on each side.	0.8284277
And do not evacuate the patient if they follow a good regimen and receive medicines. For if a good regimen is followed, and phlegm is evacuated, they will be healed by God’s help with this cautery.	And keep the patient to good habits and taking of medicine; for if his regimen be good and the phlegm got rid of, he will be cured with this cautery.	0.80287874

chapter-1-subchapter-45.txt
On the method of cauterizing for hernias.	On the cauterization of hernia.	0.7969042
When a rupture occurs in the groin, and the intestine or fatty tissue descends to the testicle, and it is in the early stage, then you must instruct the patient to refrain from eating for a day. And he should use laxatives, so that stool may pass from his abdomen.	When a rupture occurs in the groin, and part of the intestine and omentum comes down into the scrotum, being the onset of the disease, forbid the patient to take food for one day and have him use laxatives to empty the bowel.	0.79970145
Then let him sit on his back in your hands, and instruct him to hold his breath until the fatty tissue or intestine emerges or becomes visible.	Then let him lie on his back in front of you and bid him hold his breath till the intestine or omentum comes out; then put it back with your finger.	0.7589623
Then, reduce it with your fingers, and mark under the rupture over the pubic bone with ink, using a symbol whose end resembles half a circle facing the upper body.	Then, below the hernia over the pubic bone, mark a semicircle whose extremities point upward.	0.7239003
Then heat the cautery in the fire, in this shape, until it turns white and sparks.	Then heat a cautery of this type.	0.47775677
Then let the assistant place his hand over the area so the intestine does not exit: and now you spread the patient's legs, place a cushion under him, with one assistant holding his legs and another on his chest holding his hands.	You should first have parted his legs and put a pillow under him; let another assistant sit on his legs and another on his chest, holding his hands.	0.7184313
Then place the cautery over the marked spot, holding your hand with the cautery upright. And hold it there until you reach the bone with it; or repeat another time, if you have not reached the bone on the first attempt.	Then apply the cautery to the mark, keeping the cautery upright, and hold it till it reaches the bone; or apply the cautery again a second time if it does not reach the bone the first time.	0.90851915
And carefully watch for the exit of the intestine at the time of your cauterization, lest you burn it, and cause either death or severe harm to the patient.	You must take the greatest care that the intestine does not come out while you are cauterizing, lest you burn it and it result in death or grave injury to the patient.	0.85786587
And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your procedure will not be effective.	You must understand that if you do not bring the cauterization down to the bone your operation will not be successful.	0.76816785
And the cautery for children must be fine, according to their size.	For boys the cautery should be slender according to their proportions, and for adults according to theirs.	0.68718815
Then treat it with other ointments, until it heals.	Then treat with the usual ointments till healed.	0.7481804
And the patient should lie on his back for forty days, until the wound is sealed.	The patient should lie on his back for forty days so that the wound may cicatrize.	0.8806435
And his nourishment should be regulated during his recovery period to keep his bowels soft, so the intestine does not exit during strain or evacuation.	Throughout the course of his treatment you must make his diet such as will be gentle with his inside, so that the intestine should not come down during the effort of defaecation.	0.71220255
Then, when he wishes to get up after forty days, apply a properly made bandage, and he should wear it for another forty days.	Then when he wants to get up after the forty days, employ a tight bandage and keep this on another forty days.	0.9158866
And he should avoid labor, overeating and drinking, and loud voices.	He should be moderate in his exertion, his eating, drinking, and shouting.	0.65211475
For when he follows this regimen, he will be healed completely.	Thus under these rules he will be completely cured.	0.7415137
And I will describe the treatment of ruptures with incision in its own chapter.	I shall speak of the treatment of rupture by scission in the appropriate chapter.	0.77683455
But when ruptures occur in the rest of the abdomen, and are in the early stages, and you wish to prevent their growth, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size: and let the area burned be about a third of it. Then treat it with what we have mentioned, and it will not grow further.	When a rupture occurs elsewhere in the belly and is at its inception and you wish it not to grow, cauterize the rupture with a round cautery in proportion to its size; burn about two-thirds through the thickness of the skin and treat as we have said; he will be cured and the rupture will not grow.	0.7993894
And some of the ancients have said that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery, in this shape.	One of the Ancients said that ruptures were to be cauterized with a three-armed cautery like this.	0.68533885
After marking it with ink, a line is drawn transversely on the upper side of the rupture, and another line below. And place your hand in the middle with a key-shaped cautery.	First mark the rupture with ink; put the transverse line on the upper margin of the rupture and the other towards the lower, and apply a single claviform cautery in the middle.	0.7637319
But the first cautery is easier and better.	But the first cauterization is easier and better.	0.9740276

chapter-1-subchapter-46.txt
Chapter 48.	CHAPTER FORTY-SIX.	0.60720426
When pain occurs in certain limbs from a fall or blow, and that pain persists for a long time, and treatment with medicines is ineffective: then it should be cauterized with a pointed cautery.	When pain occurs in some limb due to a fall or a blow and the pain becomes chronic and medical treatment has no effect upon it, you should cauterize it with the punctate cautery.	0.7931788
And the cautery for each limb should be sized according to its size, and its delicacy, weakness, strength, and the location of the twist and pain from it.	In each case the cauterization should be in proportion to the size of the limb, its strength or weakness, and the chronicity of the pain and contusion in it.	0.70817065
If it heals from the first cauterization, it is well. If not, then repeat the cauterization.	If it is cured at the first cauterization, good; otherwise repeat the cauterization.	0.92186666
Because it is customary with these pains that they shift from one limb to another nearby. Therefore you should pursue them with cauterization until the patient is healed.	For it is customary for these pains to move from one part to a neighbouring part, and you must follow them with the cautery till the patient is cured.	0.9342956

chapter-1-subchapter-47.txt
On the method of cauterizing for leprosy.	On cauterization for elephantiasis.	0.68734694
Leprosy patients are sometimes greatly aided by cauterization. Especially the type of leprosy that arises due to the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy; when you decide to cauterize, consider this.	Those suffering from elephantiasis are sometimes greatly helped by the cautery; especially that kind that arises from corruption of the phlegm and black bile.	0.7381565
If the leprosy is in the early stages, and you have treated it as we described in the section, but it does not spread or subside, and you fear it might affect the entire body, then cauterize him with five cauteries on the head: one in the center of the head at a marked point, a second lower towards the forehead at the hairline, two on either side of the temples, and one at the nape of the neck.	When you wish to use the cautery, first look, and if the elephantiasis be in the early stage and you treat it with those remedies advised in the section but it does not abate and is not arrested, and you fear lest the corruption spread over the patient's whole constitution, then give him five cauterizations on the head: the well-known one in the middle of the head; the second one lower than that, toward the forehead, about the edge of the hair; and two at the temples; and one behind, on the nape of the neck.	0.84757483
Hold your hand with the cautery for a brief moment, until it leaves a small mark on the bone and the scabs peel off, to ease the release of thick vapors from there; also cauterize over the spleen, as previously mentioned.	And maintain the application of the cautery a little while till a slight mark is impressed on the bone and the outer table is removed from it, that there be an easy exit for the thick vapours. Burn him also one cauterization over the spleen itself in the manner described earlier.	0.8207154
Be cautious of the nerves located at the back of the heel, so as not to burn them.	Be careful not to burn the posterior tendons of his heels.	0.7321184
Sometimes, cauterize over the pubic bone, another over the stomach, and another over the liver.	He may also be cauterized once on the pubic bone; another on the cardia of the stomach; and another on the liver.	0.78758276
Know that the more cautery you apply, the more it will aid and contribute to healing.	You should know that the more you cauterize the more beneficial and effective it will be.	0.74256134
And know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as healthy people do, because his body is already numbed.	You should know also that the patient will not find the cautery painful as a sound man would, since his body is benumbed.	0.81205744
The cauteries should be sized according to the limbs and joints, as was previously mentioned regarding the types of instruments.	The cauteries should be of the types of instrument mentioned earlier, larger or smaller in proportion to the size of the limb or joint.	0.7447464
Then treat the cauterized area with an herbal flour mixed with honey and follow the remaining treatment until it heals.	Then treat the cauterization with powder of bitter vetch with honey, together with the other treatments, till healed.	0.7836237

chapter-1-subchapter-48.txt
On the method of cauterizing for numbness.	On cauterization for numbness.	0.7969738
When a limb is numb and has been treated with medicines, oils, and poultices without healing, then cauterize the numb limb with cauteries according to its size, whether large or small.	When some limb is affected with numbness and it is treated with drugs and ointments and plasters, but is not cured, burn the benumbed limb itself with cauterizations proportionate to its bigness or smallness.	0.7880981
Let your cautery penetrate slightly into the thickness of the skin. Then treat it with ointment until it heals.	Let the cauterization somewhat penetrate the thickness of the skin; then dress with ointments till healed.	0.8948363
Sometimes numbness in the hand or foot is treated by cauterizing at the vertebrae of the back, near the exit points of the nerves that control that limb, and the numbness is relieved.	For numbness that occurs in the hand or foot it is possible to cauterize over the dorsal vertebrae at the exit of the nerve activating that part; and the numbness will go.	0.7119441
However, only those who are knowledgeable in the anatomy of the body and the pathways of nerves controlling movement should attempt this.	This should not be attempted except by one who has a good knowledge of the anatomy of the limbs and of the exits of the nerves that move the body.	0.7625206

chapter-1-subchapter-49.txt
Chapter 51.	CHAPTER FORTY-NINE.	0.54053676
When vitiligo has persisted and no medical treatments have been effective, then cauterize the area with a slightly deep cautery, according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed and the color changes.	When leprosy is of long standing and no device of medicine has any effect upon it, make a cauterization over it to a slight depth according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness has gone and the colour of the skin altered.	0.79896283
Then treat it with an ointment made from herbal flour, lentils with rose oil, plantain leaves, dove's blood, and swallow's blood; take an equal part of each, mix them together, spread them on a cloth, and apply it to the area until it heals.	Then treat with lentil flour, oil of roses, arnoglossa leaves, and pigeons' or swallows' blood, of each equal parts mixed all together and spread on lint; let this stick to the place till healed.	0.88610405

chapter-1-subchapter-50.txt
On the method of cauterizing for cancer.	On cauterization for cancer.	0.86697716
When cancer is beginning, and you want to halt it, then cauterize around it with a circular cautery, following its circumference.	When the cancer is in its initial stage and you wish to arrest it, burn all round the circumference of the cancer with the circular cautery.	0.8497126
The wise have said that it should be cauterized with a final cautery in the center.	Some doctors have said that it may be cauterized with one extensive cauterization in the middle.	0.54262245
However, this does not seem advisable to me, as I fear it may ulcerate, and I have seen this happen several times.	This hardly seems right to me, for I should expect it to ulcerate out; which I have several times seen.	0.73357224
It is better to cauterize around it with a circular cautery as we mentioned, or with multiple cauteries.	So it is correct to burn around the circumference with a circular cautery as we have said, or with multiple cauterizations.	0.8575859

chapter-1-subchapter-51.txt
On the method of cauterizing an abscess or boil.	On cauterization of boils.	0.46444958
When someone has an abscess (Adubelati) that is slow to mature, either due to excess humor causing it, the patient's advanced age and low blood volume, or the season, and you wish to hasten its maturation, then apply multiple small cauterizations around its circumference by making tiny pricks. Then leave it as it is. This will cause it to mature more quickly.	When a person gets a boil which is slow in coming to a head, either because of the superfluity causing it, or because of the patient's age if he be an elderly man lacking in blood, or because of the season, and you wish to hasten the ripening of the boil, then make a punctate burn around it with multiple small cauterizations, and then let be; it will speedily come to a head.	0.7839507
If you wish to lance it with a cautery, then heat the cautery, shaped as described.	If you wish to perforate it with cauterization, heat the cautery of this type.	0.7111703
Apply it in the center of the abscess until it pierces the skin, and it should be done in a way that allows the pus to drain, relieving the patient.	Apply it to the middle of the boil till it has pierced the skin. The cauterization should go right to the bottom to facilitate the flow of pus.	0.70837367
Then treat the area until it heals.	Then dress till cured.	0.6780009

chapter-1-subchapter-52.txt
Chapter 54.	CHAPTER FIFTY-TWO.	0.5445134
A corroding sore is essentially decay spreading through the flesh, eating it away like fire devours dry wood.	Gangrene is a creeping corruption of a limb, consuming it as fire consumes dry wood.	0.685675
If you see a corroding sore in an area that can tolerate fire cautery, then apply several cauteries, both small and large, depending on the area affected by the sore.	If you see gangrene in a part which can tolerate the actual cautery, heat a number of claviform cauteries, small or large to suit the site of the gangrene.	0.68156445
Then cauterize it thoroughly from all sides until all the decayed tissue is eradicated, leaving no trace of it whatsoever.	Then cauterize it all over till the whole corruption is eradicated and none remains.	0.7402082
Leave the area for three days, and apply powdered sulfur mixed with oil over the cauterized spots, until all the scabs and decay are removed.	Then let be for three days, applying to the cauterized site sulphur beaten up with oil, until the whole eschar comes away, and all the corruption.	0.8114802
Afterward, treat the area with ointments that promote new flesh growth.	Then treat with stimulating ointments.	0.59385717
If, after three days, you see healthy new flesh growing without any decay, it is a good sign.	If after three days you see the flesh growing healthily and no corruption in it, good.	0.84537935
If not, then repeat the cauterization on any remaining decayed areas.	Otherwise repeat the cauterization over whatever corrupt parts are left.	0.8356427
Sometimes, corroding sores are treated with strong medicines instead of cauterization. Such a treatment acts in place of cautery.	Gangrene is also sometimes cured with caustic, for that takes the place of fire; but the actual cautery acts more speedily.	0.604114
However, fire cautery provides faster relief; I have already described the use of strong medicines in another section. Refer to it when you need that information.	I have already spoken of the treatment of it by caustic in its section, so take it from there when you have need of it.	0.51707405

chapter-1-subchapter-53.txt
Chapter 55.	CHAPTER FIFTY-THREE.	0.56694454
This condition often affects the lower parts of the feet and consists of thick, hardened growths that harm the foot.	This disease, which is something hard paining the foot, very often occurs in the soles of the feet.	0.6332027
There are two methods for treating them: cauterization with fire or with hot water.	The cauterization in this case is twofold, actual or caustic.	0.4895646
For fire cauterization, use a hollow cautery resembling a vulture's feather, made of iron, and sized to fit around the corn on all sides, with fine edges.	The actual cautery is to heat a hollow cautery like a vulture's quill, made of iron, narrow of edge, of such a size as to surround the corn all round.	0.70038533
Then place the heated cautery over the corn. Rotate the cautery around the corn, allowing it to penetrate deeply; leave it for three days until it begins to discharge pus. Then apply a poultice of wild mallow crushed with salt and leave it on overnight. This will cause it to be uprooted from its roots.	Then put it, hot, on the corn and rotate it till the cautery reaches the root of the corn; and let be for three days to draw the pus; then apply a plaster of wild mallows ground up with salt, and leave the plaster on one night; then it may be drawn out with its root.	0.8921491
Afterward, treat the area with an ointment that encourages flesh growth until it heals.	Then treat the site of the wound with stimulating salve till it heals.	0.8049335
If the corns or warts are not recessed and occur on the body’s surface, particularly on the hands and feet, then apply cauterization with hot water. Use a metal tube made of bronze, iron, or a vulture’s feather, and place it over the corn or wart. Pour a small amount of hot water into the tube, press it down and turn it slightly so that the tube’s edge presses into the root of the corn, allowing the hot water to reach the corn’s depth. Let the patient bear the hot water’s sensation for about an hour.	If the corns are not inverted, which usually happens on the surface of the body and particularly on the hands and feet, you should take a cannula made of bronze or iron or made of a vulture's quill, and place it on the corn or wart; then pour into the cannula a small quantity of caustic solution; keep your hand on it and rotate it, keeping up a slight pressure so that the edge of the cannula impresses a mark at the root of the corn and the caustic makes its way to the root of the corn.	0.85065854
Afterward, release it, as the corn will be uprooted from its roots.	Let the patient endure the action of the caustic for a while, then remove it; for the corn may be drawn out with its root.	0.47462747
Proceed in this way, one by one, until you treat all the corns on the body.	Treat them in this manner one after another till you have accounted for all of them.	0.70100176
Then, once removed, treat the areas with an ointment that promotes flesh growth.	Then treat the site of them, after eradication, with stimulating ointments.	0.7287779

chapter-1-subchapter-54.txt
On the method of cauterizing for tremor.	On cauterization for tremor.	0.80235946
When someone experiences tremor due to cold affecting the nerves, quartan fever, or another cause, then apply four or five cauteries along the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra, one on the chest, and one on the stomach.	When someone has a tremor, either from chill in a nerve or quartan fever, or from some other cause, you should cauterize him four or five times over the vertebrae of the back, one between each vertebra, and one on his breast and one on his stomach, with an olivary cautery.	0.9134218
Tremor is calmed by olive oil cauterization, and recovery from the cold illness is hastened.	Thus the tremor will be stilled and the dispersal of the cold distemper will be hastened.	0.5034896

chapter-1-subchapter-55.txt
Chapter 57.	CHAPTER FIFTY-FIVE.	0.603632
Sometimes foul pustules, known as Albathir, appear on the body, caused by corrupted, thick humors.	Foul pustules sometimes arise on the body, caused by heavy corrupt frigid matter.	0.73411846
It is necessary, when they first appear, to cauterize the top of each pustule with a fine cautery, such as a myrtle twig with a fire-heated tip. Alternatively, use the root of long Aristolochia (birthwort). Or, you may use a lenticular-shaped cautery.	When they first appear you should cauterize the head of each one lightly with myrtle wood whose tip has been lighted in the fire; or with the root of the long birthwort; or with the lenticular cautery.	0.7591369
Sometimes, early cauterization of these pustules, following this method, prevents them from enlarging, breaks up the excess humor causing them, and brings about healing.	Sometimes furuncles also are cauterized in the same manner when they first arise; then they get no bigger and the superfluity originating them is dispersed and the patient is cured of them.	0.59160185
However, this procedure should be carried out after purging through bloodletting.	But before you cauterize these, the patient must be depleted by bleeding.	0.6546997

chapter-1-subchapter-56.txt
On the method of cauterizing arterial bleeding from a wound.	On cauterization in haemorrhage arising from a cut artery.	0.7605546
Arterial bleeding often occurs from an artery cut by an external wound, the incision of an abscess, a limb cauterization, or similar injuries; stopping it can be very difficult.	Very often there occurs bleeding from an artery which has been cut either by an external wound or in opening an abscess or in cauterizing a part of the body and so on, and it is difficult to stem.	0.8169086
When this happens, quickly place your index finger over the artery’s opening, press down firmly, and hold to stop blood from escaping.	When this happens to anyone, quickly apply your hand to the mouth of the artery, putting your forefinger to it and closing it properly till the bleeding ceases under your fingers and nothing comes out.	0.7654941
Then place several olive-sized cauteries, both small and large, in the fire and fan them until they are extremely hot.	Then put in the fire several olivary cauteries, small and large, and blow on them to make them very hot.	0.926755
Choose a cautery that suits the size and location of the wound, place it over the artery after quickly lifting your finger, and hold it in place until the bleeding stops.	Then take one, small or large according to the size of the wound and the site of the opening of the artery, and bring the cautery down right on the artery itself, after promptly removing your finger, and hold the cautery upon it till the blood ceases.	0.805895
If bleeding resumes when you lift your finger or extinguish the cautery, immediately use another cautery from those prepared in the fire.	But if it bursts out after you have removed your finger from the mouth of the artery, and the cautery has cooled, promptly take another of the cauteries which you have ready in the fire.	0.73004234
Continue using cauteries one after another until the bleeding is stopped.	Continue doing this, with one after another, till the haemorrhage is stanched.	0.71407425
Take care not to burn any nearby nerve, as this could cause additional harm to the patient.	Mind you do not burn any nerve which may be there, so that another calamity afflicts the patient.	0.7998723
Know that arterial bleeding, especially from a large artery, cannot be controlled except by one of four methods: With cautery, as described. By extraction, if it has not yet been removed. When it is extracted, the ends contract, stopping the bleeding.	You should know that when there is arterial haemorrhage it is impossible to stop it, especially when the vessel is big, except in one of four ways, to wit: by the cautery as we have said; or by division of the vessel when it is not completely divided, for when it is cut through the ends of it contract and the bleeding is stopped; or by a strong thread ligature; or by the application of styptics with tight bandaging.	0.8004358
Or apply medicines with properties to halt bleeding, combined with firm compression using a suitable cushion. Using ligatures, cloth pressure, or applying burning substances seldom offers lasting relief and may not be effective.	But those who try to stop bleeding with ligatures or cloths, or by the application of caustics and the like, never stanch it by these means, or at least very rarely.	0.6186576
If a person is alone without a physician or medical supplies, they should place their index finger over the artery’s opening, pressing firmly to prevent blood flow from the wound above and the artery itself, as previously described. Do not remove the finger, but continuously pour very cold water over the area to thicken and freeze the blood, stopping the bleeding.	And if this happen to anyone and there are available neither doctor nor remedies, let him at once apply his forefinger to the mouth of the vessel as we have bidden and close it firmly till the blood is stanched; and pour over the wound and over the artery, without removing the finger, water as cold as possible till the blood thickens and congeals and ceases to flow.	0.7404818
During this process, assess whether further treatment with cautery or medicine is needed.	And meanwhile one should be considering what kind of cautery or medicine is indicated.	0.6451788

chapter-2.txt
On Incision, Perforation, and Bloodletting in wounds, and such matters.	ON INCISION, PERFORATION, AND VENESECTION, AND WOUNDS AND THE LIKE	0.6619898
We have already discussed in the First Chapter, every condition in which cautery with fire and burning medicine is suitable, and its reasons, causes, instruments, and forms of cauteries.	IN the first book I spoke of all those diseases for which cauterization is of value, either the actual cautery or that done with caustic medicines; and of their reasons and causes; also the instruments and the shapes of the cauteries.	0.7467972
And I arranged there the chapters from head to foot.	This I set out in chapters, from head to heel.	0.6438903
And I will proceed in this chapter by the same method: so that the inquiry may be made easier for the seeker.	In this book I shall proceed along the same route so that it will be easy for the inquirer to find what he is looking for.	0.73062444
And before I begin it, it is necessary for you to learn, my sons, that in this chapter there is as much terror as there is in the first chapter on cauterization.	But before I begin this you ought first to know, my sons, that in this book there is more risk than in the first, which treats of cauterization.	0.79479825
And because of this, caution must be greater in it, since in the operation described in this chapter, there often occurs an evacuation with blood, upon which life depends in the opening of a vein, or the incision over a swelling, or the opening of an abscess, or the treatment of a wound, or the extraction of an arrow, or the incision over a stone, and similar actions: from all of which are associated tremor, fear, and in many cases, death.	Wherefore in this matter there should be greater circumspection. For in the course of the work of which this book treats there often occurs an effusion of the blood upon which life depends, in the opening of a blood-vessel or the incision of a tumour or the perforation of an abscess or the treatment of a wound or the extraction of an arrow, or in the incising for a calculus or similar cases; all of which are accompanied by uncertainty and fear; and in most death will supervene.	0.87940794
And I advise you, lest that which involves hesitation fall upon you, for sometimes types of people come to you in this art with various kinds of sicknesses. For among them is one who becomes angry with his illness, and death seems of little concern to him, due to the severity of what he experiences from his sickness and its prolonged malice.	So I warn you against undertaking any case in which there is any element of doubt to you; for in the exercise of the art you will be mobbed by all kinds of persons with all manner of afflictions; some being so weary of their sickness that death itself is a relief on account of the extent of their sufferings and the length of their miseries, their illness being so settled as to presage death.	0.81751615
And among them is one who offers you his support and enriches you with it, hoping for healing, and his sickness is dangerous.	Some will lavish their wealth on you and enrich you, in the hope that they may be curable, when their disease is mortal.	0.64476794
Therefore, you should not agree with one of those who come to you in this way, whose nature is such. And let your caution be greater than your greed and your rapacity. And do not presume upon any of this, except after certain knowledge, which verifies to you that which achieves a commendable outcome.	You should not assist any of this kind who approach you; let your caution be stronger than your greed and desire for gain; and do not embark upon anything of this kind unless you have positive knowledge, which you judge adequate, about the way of bringing the patient a good outcome.	0.74169385
And in the treatment of all your patients, use prognosis and guidance concerning what is most suitable for their health.	In treating every patient be prescient and foretell the means whereby health may be restored to him.	0.67853117
For in this lies for you help toward the acquisition of fame and glory, and memory and praise.	That will help you to obtain renown, glory, fame, and praise.	0.7854253
May God inspire in you, my sons, His understanding, and may He not take away from you direction and inspiration, for that is in His hand.	May God inspire you, my sons, with His guidance, and grant that you hit the mark and succeed; for it is in His hand; there is no God but He.	0.8092524
And indeed, I have arranged this Chapter by dividing it into sections, as was done in the chapter on Cautery, from the neck to the feet: so that what you seek from it, and what you need, may be made easier for you.	I have arranged this book in sections as I did with the previous book on cauterizations, from head to heel; so you will the easier find in it what you seek.	0.74456036

chapter-2-subchapter-1.txt
Chapter I.	CHAPTER ONE.	0.70441496
Know that this condition often occurs in children at birth: or when the midwife presses the child’s head too harshly.	This disease occurs most commonly in infants upon delivery when the midwife grasps the child's head roughly.	0.6844766
And sometimes it also occurs from a hidden cause which is not known.	It also sometimes happens from some hidden and unknown cause.	0.89028096
And indeed, I have not seen this illness in anyone other than children: and for each one I saw, death came quickly: because of this, it seemed to me best to avoid operating on it.	I have never seen this disease except in very small children; and death very quickly overtook all those that I have seen; therefore I have preferred not to undertake operation in these cases.	0.8335507
And I indeed saw a child among them, whose head was filled with water, and the head increased in size each day, until he could no longer sit up because of the size of his head: and the moisture continued to increase, until he died.	I have seen a child whose head was filled with fluid and daily growing in size, until the child could not sit upright on account of the size of his head, and the humidity increased till he died.	0.8598703
And this moisture indeed either gathers between the skin and the bone, or gathers under the bone over the membrane.	Now this humidity sometimes collects between the skin and the bone; sometimes it collects beneath the bone and over the membrane.	0.8609401
And the procedure in this case, if the moisture is between the skin and the bone and the swelling is small, is to make one incision in the middle of the head across: and let the length of the incision be about two knots, until the moisture flows out.	The operation is thus: when the humidity is between the skin and the bone and the swelling is small, an incision should be made in the middle of the head, transversely. The length of the incision should be about two thumb-joints, so that the humidity may flow out.	0.78043604
And this is the form of the spatula.	This is the form of the scalpel.	0.78356934
If the moisture is more increased, and the swelling is larger, then make two incisions, according to this form.	If the humidity is more copious and the swelling greater, make two intersecting incisions to this pattern.	0.86276335
And if the moisture is under the bone, the sign of it is that you see the sutures of the head open on every side: and the water is displaced when you press it inward with your hand, and it does not hide from you: then you must make three incisions in the middle of the head, in this manner.	But if the humidity is beneath the bone—and the sign of that is that you will see the sutures of the skull gaping on all sides, the water manifestly yielding when you press in with your fingers—you should make three incisions in the middle of the head, in this pattern.	0.81419843
And after the incision, remove all the moisture. Then bind the incisions with cloths and compresses. Then bathe it from above with wine and oil until the fifth day.	After incising, draw out all the humidity; then bind up the incisions with pads and bandages; and over the bandages foment with wine and oil till the fifth day.	0.8845488
Then loosen the bandage, and treat the wound with ointments and compresses.	Then loose the bandage and dress the wound with lint and ointments.	0.8957634
And do not stop binding the head evenly. And feed the patient only dry food with little moisture, until the part is strengthened and healed.	And do not forget to bandage the head lightly; and feed the patient with a dry diet with little fluid, until the part is strengthened and healed.	0.82497
And another method of incision is to observe where the swelling is most prominent and where the water has collected.	Another pattern of incision is to see where the tumefaction and collection of fluid is apparent.	0.78018963
For sometimes it is more in the back of the head, or in the forehead, or on the right side, or on the left side.	For sometimes it is greater in the posterior or anterior part of the head, or to the right or to the left.	0.94149673
Then make the incision where the swelling and fullness of water appear to you: and cut it as far as is possible for you.	Therefore make your incision where the tumefaction and dropsy are apparent; incise that place in whatever way you can.	0.66240233
And be careful not to cut an artery, and a flow of blood occurs, and the patient dies from that flow along with the evacuation of moisture.	Be careful not to cut an artery lest you cause haemorrhage and the patient die of that haemorrhage at the same time that the humidity is evacuated.	0.8589004

chapter-2-subchapter-2.txt
Chapter II.	CHAPTER TWO.	0.7787022
When a person suffers from cataracts affecting the eyes or chest, and it becomes chronic, and medical treatment does not help: then the ultimate treatment is the incision of these two arteries.	When a person gets painful defluxions into the eyes or chest which become chronic, and medical treatment is ineffectual in this case, then section of these arteries will be the most efficacious treatment.	0.7332919
Then rub the area with a rough cloth, so that the arteries become visible. Then the patient should bind his neck with any cloth he has. Then observe where the vein pulses. And the locations of each are the depressed areas behind the ears: and it is rarely hidden, except in certain people.	When you decide on section, you should shave the patient's head with a razor; then rub the place with a rough cloth to show up the artery; then bind the patient's neck with an end of his garment; then you will observe where the artery is pulsating (the sites of both are the depressions behind the ears) for it is uncommon for them to remain hidden, except in a few persons.	0.8067579
Then mark both with ink: and incise each one with a spatula sharpened on both sides, cutting down to the bone: and let it be done across the width of the head.	Then do you mark with ink over both; then cut with a hooked scalpel, cutting down to the bone; the incision should be lateral to the head.	0.85346
And if you wish, insert the spatula under the artery, and cut it upward with the incision.	Or if you prefer, introduce the scalpel beneath the artery and make a thrusting cut up at it.	0.8032109
And let the length of the incision be about two fingers joined together.	The incision should be of about two fingers' breadth.	0.64414054
For when the vein is cut, blood exits in a pulsating flow, which leaps inward with frequent spurting.	When cut, the artery gives out a pulsating jet of blood spurting intermittently.	0.763981
But if the artery is not perceptible to the touch, then you must measure from the ear the space of three fingers. Then mark with ink, and cut down to the bone.	If the artery is not discernible, you should measure three fingers' breadth from the ear, than mark with ink, and cut down to the bone.	0.86100936
And the amount of blood that should be let out is six ounces, though perhaps you may release more or less of it. All of this is according to the quantity you perceive from the strength of the patient and the fullness of his artery.	The quantity of blood that should be let is six ounces on the average, but often more blood, or less, is withdrawn; all in proportion to the strength of the patient and the fullness of the arteries as they appear to you.	0.86116153
Then examine the wound. Then if any membrane remains on the bone, cut it so that a hot swelling does not occur: then bind the wound with strips of linen cloth.	Then examine the wound and if there remains on the bone any part of the membrane cut it off to avoid a haematoma.	0.65792435
Then treat it with ointment until it heals.	Then bind up the wound with a bandage of linen cloth and dress with ointments till healed.	0.6274656

chapter-2-subchapter-3.txt
Chapter III.	CHAPTER THREE.	0.7879033
When a person suffers from chronic hemicrania (migraine), or acute catarrh due to sharp humors, and there is warmth in the muscles of the temples, or they have old and severe conditions like this, and medical treatments do not bring relief: then we have tried in such cases either the extraction of the arteries from the temples or their cauterization, as we have previously described.	When a man has a chronic migraine or acute catarrh, on account of acrid humidities and heat in the temporal muscles, or a violent chronic headache, or the like, and he has been treated with various medical treatments without success, we have sometimes in these diseases tried extraction of the arteries from the temples or cauterization of them, already described.	0.82043576
The procedure for extracting them is as follows: the patient should shave the hair on the temples, then focus on the artery that appears in the temple. This artery will show itself to you by its pulse, and it is rarely hidden except in a few people or due to extreme cold.	The manner of extraction is for the patient to shave the temporal hair; then you press upon the artery appearing on the temple; for it will be manifest to you by its pulsation, and is rarely invisible save in a few people or on account of severe cold.	0.81598276
If the artery is thin, then wrap it with the end of the hook. Then cut off a portion of it to the extent that the ends will retract and contract, and blood flow does not occur. For if it is not incised and if it is not cut off, blood will not fully drain.	But if the artery be thin, twist it with the tip of the hook and cut out enough of it for the two ends to be well separated from one another and contract so that no haemorrhage occurs; for if it is not divided and cut it will not let blood flow at all.	0.8173537
Then evacuate from it about six ounces of blood, down to three.	Then let blood, from six to three ounces.	0.8322567
If the artery is large, then you should tie it in two places with a strong double thread, either silk or cotton threads, so that decay does not reach it before the wound heals, and blood does not flow.	If the artery be large it should be ligated in two places with a strong double thread; the threads should be either silken or lute-string, lest corruption attack them before the wound is healed, and haemorrhage occur.	0.8911843
Then cut the excess portion that lies between the two ligatures. Do this at that moment, or an hour later.	Then cut away what remains between the two ligatures; do that immediately or later.	0.81209254
And if you wish, cauterize it down to the bone with a knife-shaped cautery iron: until the ends are seared, which will hold in place by the same procedure.	If you wish, you may cauterize it down to the bone with an edged cautery so that the ends of the artery be divided; for this will replace that operation.	0.6538031
This is a better procedure, unless the patient has a fever or a hot temperament. For the cautery is among those things that help to stop moistures. Therefore, it is the better assistance.	It is in fact better, as we have said, unless the patient is feverish or of a hot constitution; cauterization is one of the means of eliminating humidities, so it will be of surer efficacy.	0.77449757
And after the extraction of the arteries, the site should be filled with old cotton, and neatly made compresses should be placed over it.	After extraction of the arteries the place must be packed with teased-out cotton wool, and on top of that must be put firm pads.	0.81431276
And after the dressing is removed, it should be treated with dry medicines that promote flesh growth, and with linen cloths, until it heals.	And after loosening the ligature, dress with dry medicaments that encourage growth of flesh, and with bandages,, till it heals.	0.8724851
If during the operation a flow of blood occurs from the artery, quickly stop it with a cautery or fill the area with lint; press your hand until the bleeding stops. If none of these are at hand, place your finger over the area until the blood clots. Then bathe the area with very cold water until the intensity subsides, and bind it as needed.	But if arterial bleeding hinders you in the course of your operation, hasten to stanch it either by cauterization or by filling the place with vitriol, compressing it with your hand till the blood stays; or, if you have nothing of this kind by you, put your finger on it till the blood clots and rinse over the place till the flow dies down; then tie off as you should.	0.8466365
And a simpler and easier alternative to artery extraction is to cauterize the vein with this cautery, which has two blades: the sharpness of both blades should be like almagdatem (almagda stone).	Less serious and easier than excising the artery is to cauterize the vessel with this cautery provided with two blades, having first marked both places with ink.	0.5851057
However, they are far less sharp than two knives. For if they are as sharp as two knives, both become cold quickly and do not cut flesh swiftly.	It should have two sharp blades like two small paring-knives, but they should be much less sharp than a knife, for if they are as sharp as a knife they will quickly lose their heat and the flesh will be slow in cutting.	0.7866493
Since they have some thickness, they retain the heat of the fire and cut flesh swiftly; therefore, this method is better, lighter, and easier than any other.	If they have a certain thickness in them the heat of the fire will be retained in them and they will speedily cut the flesh. This operation is superior to all and less severe and easier.	0.79027337
Let the space between the two blades be about the thickness of a finger, after marking two spots with ink: then place both very hot blades until they reach the bone, cutting the vein in two places, so that it lengthens between the ends.	Let the distance between the two blades be the breadth of a finger.	0.47938368

chapter-2-subchapter-4.txt
On the treatment of continuous, sharp tears from the eyes.	On the treatment of a chronic flux of bitter tears into the eyes.	0.8370127
When there are continuous tears, and their flow comes from the veins that are on the outside of the skull of the head: and no medical treatment is effective with medicines, and you see the face of the patient already reddened, and he feels movement in his forehead, like the movement of ants: and his eyes are weakened, moist, so that the hairs of them are already corroded with erosion: and his eyelids are heated from the sharpness of the tears: then the ancients used this procedure in their treatment, and they called it the treatment "with the Knife."	When lachrymation is chronic and arises from the external vessels on the cranium, nor does treatment by any kind of medical remedy have any effect, and you see the patient's features flushed, and he feels a creeping in his forehead like that of an ant, and his eyes are wasted and moist, and the roots of the lashes itch, and the eyelids are burned by the bitterness of the tears, the Ancients were compelled to treat it by this operation which they called 'treatment by the sword'.	0.80655116
From the incision that is on the side of the temple, up to the second incision: and strip with it all the skin that is between the two incisions, with a tool, which is above the bone.	Beware of cutting the two arteries which are at the sides, and keep your hand away from the mandibular joint; and let there be a distance between each incision as of three fingers joined.	0.5395344
Then do the same also from the middle incision up to the second incision. Then remove this "spatumile," and insert into the first incision again another instrument, which is called the "sharp cutter," sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side. And this is its form.	Then introduce the double-edged scalpel shaped thus through the incision near the temple to the middle incision, and with it pare off all the skin between the two incisions with the periosteum; then do the same from the middle incision to the third one; then draw out this scalpel and introduce into the first incision another instrument which is known as 'the knife-shaped': sharp on one side, smooth and blunt on the other, thus.	0.7148196
And place its sharp side toward the flesh attached to the skin, and its smooth side toward the bone: and push it until it reaches the middle incision: and cut with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes: except that the incision should continue up to what is visible of the skin.	The sharp edge of it should be turned upward to the subcutaneous tissue and the smooth edge toward the bone; then push it on to reach the middle incision and with it cut all the vessels passing from the head down toward the eyes, without letting the incision come through the outer skin.	0.81342643
Then do the same in the middle incision up to the other incision.	Then do the same from the middle incision to the third.	0.8518338
And after an equal quantity of blood flows, squeeze the places of the clots of coagulated blood.	After a moderate quantity of blood has flowed, express the bits of blood-clot from the place and pack into each incision a pad of teased-out cotton wool.	0.650508
Then place in each incision a strip of old cotton, and place over them cushions soaked in wine, oil, or vinegar. And see to it that no hot swelling occurs.	Over all put a pad soaked in wine and oil, or vinegar and oil, lest an effusion occur.	0.73089457
And on the third day, loosen the bandage, and apply a generous infusion with warm water. Then treat it with basilicon ointment and the other things by which wounds are treated: until it heals.	On the third day loosen the bandage and rinse with plenty of tepid water and afterwards dress with balm of basilicon with rose-ointment and other treatments for wounds, until healed.	0.85190773

chapter-2-subchapter-5.txt
On the treatment of sharp tears and catarrhs to the eyes from the inner parts of the head.	On the treatment of tears and defluxions in the eyes arising from within the head.	0.7683265
When sharp, intense, continuous catarrhs happen to someone: and you see his eyes weakened, small, and already their vision has been impaired: and the eyelids are ulcerated, and hairs fall from them, and in the depth of the head there is a sharp, damaging pain, and subsequent sneezing: then you may conclude from these symptoms, that these matters, and catarrhs, come only from many veins.	When anyone has a quantity of painful defluxions, acrid and continuous, and you see the eyes wasted and sunken and their sight is weakened and the eyelids are ulcerated and lose their eyelashes; while deep in the head there may be a vehement and grievous pain with incessant sneezing, then you may know from these occurrences that those humours and catarrhs arise from many deep blood-vessels.	0.849944
And the best treatment for them is this. And it is, that you instruct the patient to shave his forehead. Then make a single incision in the middle of the forehead, or slightly on one side, across the width, and begin the incision from the left temple to the right temple: and let the incision go down to the bone: and keep your hand away from the muscles of the temples, which move during chewing: until when the bone is revealed: and you will dry all the blood with a sponge.	The best treatment in this case is that which follows: you bid the patient shave his forehead; then you make one incision in the middle of his forehead or a little above, crosswise (begin the incision from the left temple going toward the right temple; the incision should be down to bone; and avoid the temporal muscles that move during mastication) until the bone is laid bare.	0.8313583
Then separate the two edges of the incision with old cotton, or with linen strips. Then compress from above with cushions: and soak the cushions with wine and oil, so that hot swelling does not occur.	Wipe away all the blood with a sponge and separate the edges of the incision with teased-out cotton wool or with rolls of linen; then bind up with pads over; the pads should be soaked in wine and oil to guard against an effusion.	0.72351325
And when you loosen it, and you see that the hot swelling is already reduced: then it is necessary to rub the bone, until flesh begins to grow on it.	When you undo it, if you see that an effusion has erupted, you should scrape the bone until a growth of flesh begins in it; then treat with a drying treatment which generates flesh.	0.7248753
Then treat it with a drying regimen that makes flesh grow, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, and prepare a plaster from them, and apply it to stimulate flesh growth in these wounds.	For example, two parts of wheat flour are taken and of colophonia four parts, and of them a salve is made which may be used to encourage the growth of flesh in wounds of this sort.	0.81400806

chapter-2-subchapter-6.txt
On the treatment of something that falls into the ear.	On the treatment of things that fall into the ear.	0.9331241
Everything that falls into the ear is one of four types: either a mineral stone, or something similar to a stone, like iron and glass; or it is from a plant, like chickpea and beans; or it is a flowing substance, like water, and vinegar, and similar things; or it is some kind of animal.	All that falls into the ear comes under four categories: mineral stone, or what resembles stone, such as iron or glass; vegetable grain such as pea or date-stone or the like; or liquid such as water or vinegar; or animal.	0.91535056
When a stone or a type of stone that does not dissolve or grow in the ear falls into the ear, expose the ear to sunlight; if you then see the stone, drip some violet oil or sesame oil into the ear. Then administer its extraction, and make the person sneeze with condisi, and plug the nostrils at the moment of the sneeze, after placing pieces of cloth or wool around the ear, and pull the ear upwards.	When a stone or something of that sort that does not grow gets into the ear, turn the ear toward the sun. If you see the stone, pour upon it a little oil of violets or sesame; then try to get it out by moving the head or by inducing sneezing with ptarmica and keeping the nose closed at the onset of sneezing, having first made round the ear a circle of pieces of cloth or wool and drawn the ear upwards.	0.8744384
For it often comes out with this treatment.	This treatment will usually bring it out.	0.7484293
If it does not come out, then administer its extraction with Gesti, that is, with fine tweezers: their shape is this.	But if it does not come out, try to get it out with a fine pair of tweezers shaped thus.	0.58740336
If it then comes out with the tweezers, it is good.	If it comes out with the tweezers, good.	0.9274513
And if not, then administer its extraction with a fine, blunt hook with a slight bend.	But if not, try to extract it with a fine blunt hook slightly curved.	0.8133754
If it does not come out with this, then make a tube of brass, and insert the end of the tube deep into the ear canal, and seal the area around the tube with wax softened with oil, so that no air passes except through the tube; then use your breath to extract it with a strong suction.	And if this does not bring it out, make a bronze tube and introduce the end of the tube well into the meatus of the ear and fill in round with wax softened with oil so that there may be no outlet save through the tube; then suck it out with all your breath; it will often come out with this.	0.9053351
For it often comes out with this procedure we have described. If it does not come out this way, then take a little bit of helkalimbat or birdlime, that is, prepared glue with which birds are caught; place it on the end of a rod after you wrap it with a cloth nicely arranged around it; then insert it gently into the ear after drying the ear from moisture.	But if it does not come out with these means we have described, take turpentine resin or bird-lime, a very little; twist some compact cotton wool on the end of a probe and put this on the tip; then introduce it gently into the ear after you have dried out all the moisture from the ear.	0.7180643
If it does not come out with all the methods we have described, then proceed to cutting, before a warm abscess or spasm occurs.	But if your treatment so far is unavailing, then be quick and incise before an abscess or spasm supervene.	0.7075872
The method of incision is to first perform phlebotomy on the patient in the cephalic vein and remove an amount of blood according to his strength. Then make the patient sit between your hands, turn his ear upwards, and make a small incision at the base of the ear near the fat in the recessed area there; let the incision be in a crescent shape until you reach the stone; then remove it with whatever instruments you have available.	Now this is the way to incise: first, the patient's cephalic vein should be cut and blood drawn, in proportion to his strength; then seat the patient in front of you and turn his ear upwards; make a small incision at the lobule of the ear in the depression there (the incision should be crescent-shaped) until you reach the stone; then extract it with whatever instrument you may.	0.86242425
Then sew up the incision as soon as possible and treat it until it heals.	Immediately afterwards sew up the incision and dress it till healed.	0.8046979
If the object that fell into the ear is one of the seeds that grow and swell, then administer its extraction.	If the object that falls into the ear is one of those grains that grow or swell, then try to extract it by the means already mentioned.	0.72725403
If it does not respond to exit, then take a fine, thin spatumile in this shape.	If it does not respond to your efforts to get it out, take a fine narrow scalpel like this and with it attempt to cut out whatever kind of grain has entered the ear.	0.5552534
And use it to cut away that kind of seed that falls into the ear, but do not do this if you think the seed has already become moist from the ear’s vapor, until you divide it into many pieces; then extract them with hooks, or with fine tweezers, or with suction as we described, for the extraction becomes easier.	You should not do this except when you are sure that this grain has become moist by reason of the vapours of the ear, so that you may cut up the grain into several small pieces. Then you may extract them with a blunt hook or fine-headed tweezers, or by suction, as we have mentioned; for their extraction will be easy.	0.8419092
As for water that enters the ear, the patient should first use sneezing induced by condisi, and then fill his ear with a bit of old cotton; he should lie on the ear in which the water is. If it comes out by this, it is good.	As for water getting into the ear, the patient should first employ sneezing excited by ptarmica, his ear having been plugged with a piece of teased-out cotton; he should lie upon that ear in which the water is; and if it so come out, well and good.	0.838674
If it does not, then take several stones, finger-length, thin, smooth, and heat them briefly with fire, and let the patient insert one into the ear opening; he should jump on the foot on that side and strike with another stone on the stone that is in the ear. He should continue doing this with stone after stone until all the water comes out.	But if not, take a number of small stones about a finger's length, thin and smooth, and warm them a little in the fire; and have the patient put one of them into the meatus of the ear and let him hop on that one foot on that side; and, with another stone, tap upon the one put into the ear; he should keep this up with stone after stone till all the water has come out.	0.8930713
The water can also come out by taking a piece of papyrus or reed, inserting one end into the ear, and lighting the other end with fire, until most of it burns. Then repeat with another reed, and do this many times until all the water comes out; and extract it with a tube as described earlier with the stone.	Sometimes the water is extracted by taking a reed or quill and introducing one end into the ear; then the other end is set alight till the greater part of it is burnt; then repeat time after time with more quills till all the water is got out. Or else suck it out with a cannula as described for a stone.	0.8603342
In the extraction of an animal that has entered the ear, if it is small in body, like a flea or something similar, treat it as I described in the section on divisions.	As for the extraction of a creature getting into the ear, look to see if it is small of body, such as a flea or the like, in which case treat by those means mentioned in the section.	0.82990074
But if it is of large body, such that it can be sensed, then administer its extraction with tweezers and hooks: and its removal is easier than all other objects lodged in the ear.	But if it has a large body, conspicuous to the touch, try to get it out with tweezers and hooks; for of all things that stick in the ear this is the easiest to extract.	0.8479371
In the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it as we mentioned in the division and in the section on distillations, and your treatment does not help, then you must examine the ear in the sunlight. If something appears there from the worms, then extract it with tweezers or with fine hooks.	As for the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you have unavailingly treated it by those methods mentioned in the section in the treatise on instillations, you will need to examine the ear in the sunlight; and if you can see any worms, extract with tweezers or fine hooks.	0.8698536
If nothing appears there, then take a tube shaped with a narrow lower end and a wide upper end: insert the thin end into the ear as much as the patient can tolerate, then use it to perform strong suction. Do this many times until all the worms come out.	But if you cannot see any, then take a cannula of this form narrow in its lower part, broad above; and introduce the narrow part into the ear as far as the patient can bear it; then make strong suction through it, repeatedly, till all the worms are extracted.	0.77279687
If they do not respond to exit, then seal the area around the tube with wax, as I described in the case of the stone.	But if they do not come out in response to your treatment, plug all round the cannula with wax as bidden in treating for a stone.	0.69964355
If they do not come out with what we have described, then administer distillations that the ancients already tested for killing worms; you will find this in the section on distillations.	If nothing will bring them out, employ the instillations which I mentioned as having been tried by the Ancients for killing worms; you will find that in the treatise on instillations.	0.82426107
And let your infusion of oils and medicines into the ear be done with this instrument, whose shape is depicted here. As you see, make it of silver or brass, narrow at the bottom with a small hole, wide at the top.	The instillation of oils or drugs should be done with an instrument like this, as you will see; you make it of silver or bronze, narrow at its lower end, with a small perforation, and wide at its upper part.	0.83232343
Let the plunger that goes into the hollow of the tube be properly made of brass. And if you wish, take a rod and wrap a piece of cotton neatly around its end; then pour oil, juice, or any of the medicines you wish into the tube, which should be in the ear: then insert the rod with the cotton on top, and press it with your hand with gentle compression, until the oil is pushed into the ear canal, and the patient feels it inside: and what is poured into the ear should be slightly warmed with fire; and beware that the substance you distill into it is not too cold, as the medicines do not tolerate it.	If you wish, you may make the obturator which goes in the cannula of strong bronze; or, if you like, take a probe and wrap cotton wool tightly round its tip; then pour into the cannula oil, juices, or whatever of these remedies you want, with the cannula in the ear. Then introduce the probe with cotton wool on it and press moderately until the oil is ejected into the meatus and the patient feels it enter. Let that which you put into the ear first be slightly warmed at the fire; and be careful that it be neither very hot nor very cold, for the ear is not suited to bear that.	0.9304029

chapter-2-subchapter-7.txt
On the treatment of blockage occurring in the ear.	On the treatment of obstructions in the ear.	0.91616344
Sometimes certain infants come forth from the wombs of their mothers without having open ear canals.	Infants sometimes are born with an imperforated auditory meatus.	0.64290893
And it also happens that some people develop a blockage in the ear canal from a wound or flesh that grows there.	Some people also get an obstruction in the passage of the ear, either from an injury or from flesh growing in it.	0.81324655
And this blockage sometimes occurs deep in the ear canal, which cannot be seen; and sometimes it happens near the outer opening, and it can be seen.	Sometimes this obstruction is at the bottom of the ear out of sight, but sometimes it occurs a little outside the passage and is invisible.	0.76718324
Thus, the one that occurs deep in the ear and cannot be reached by sight is, in most cases, difficult to cure.	The sort which occurs in the depths of the ear and is invisible is, in general, difficult to cure.	0.7934388
And in the one that can be seen, you should place the patient’s ear in the sunlight, and examine it: then if you see an apparent blockage, open it with a fine spatula, whose form is as follows, with an end that has a slight width, one part of which is sharp: and let the rest of the spatula have two smooth sides, so as not to harm the ear.	As for that which is within sight, set the patient's ear in the sun and examine it; and if you see that the object is something external you should make an opening with a fine scalpel like this. Let its extremity be slightly broad, with a sharp point; while the rest of the scalpel should be smooth on both sides so as not to harm the ear.	0.81002307
If the blockage is from flesh that has grown in the ear canal, then hold it with a fine hook, and cut it carefully but forcefully, until all the flesh is removed.	But if the obstruction be from flesh growing in the auditory meatus, catch it with a fine hook and cut it, with the utmost gentleness, till all the flesh is gone.	0.8139239
But if the blockage is deep in the ear, then take a fine, smooth rod, and heat it briefly with fire; then insert it into the ear canal.	If the obstruction be in the depth of the ear, take a fine smooth probe and warm it a little in the fire; then push it into the meatus.	0.8212218
If you then feel the blockage with it, and the patient experiences impaired hearing, attempt to open it gently; and be careful not to injure the ear nerves.	If you feel the obstruction (what time the patient will experience hardness of hearing), seek to perforate it gently, being careful not to injure the nerve of the ear.	0.7894453
Then place a small wick in the ear, according to the width of the opening, which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment: do this for several days until you are sure of the wound's healing.	Then put in a plug the width of the meatus, which you will have anointed with Egyptian ointment; do this for some days till you are sure that the wound is healing.	0.8251339
Or take a wick, soak it in rose water, sprinkle finely ground sage on it, and use it.	Or take a plug and dip it into water and sprinkle it with powdered vitriol and use that.	0.71947587
If you see the ear beginning to abscess, then you must remove the wick and replace it with another wick, which you wrap in a poultice made with rose oil, until the warm abscess subsides: then treat it until it heals.	If you perceive the ear swelling with an abscess you should remove the plug and put in its place another previously prepared by soaking in wax made with oil of roses, till the abscess has subsided; then dress till it is healed.	0.843884
If bleeding occurs, then soak a sponge or cloths in cold water, and place it over the ear: and use the other treatments mentioned in the section on distillations to stop the bleeding.	If a haemorrhage occur, dip a sponge or piece of material in cold water and put it on the ear, and apply the rest of the treatment to stop haemorrhage mentioned in the treatise on instillations.	0.8032838

chapter-2-subchapter-8.txt
Chapter VIII.	CHAPTER EIGHT.	0.78149456
The "Altheli" that occur on the eyelids sometimes are moist, and sometimes they are dry.	These warts which occur on the eyelids are sometimes humid, sometimes dry.	0.57806075
Therefore, you should hold them with tweezers or a hook and cut them out with a spatula from their roots. Then apply finely ground sage to the affected areas.	You should hold them with forceps or a hook, and cut them away from the roots with a scalpel; then put powdered vitriol on the place.	0.73559207
If they bleed, then cauterize them with a fine lenticular cautery.	If there is bleeding from them, cauterize them with a fine lenticular cautery.	0.9303219
It is better to cauterize them after incision. For they often return when some of their roots remain. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned, and they do not return.	Cauterization of them after excision is best, for they often return when a part of their roots is left behind; but when they are cauterized the roots are burnt and they will not come back.	0.9301313

chapter-2-subchapter-9.txt
Chapter IX.	CHAPTER NINE.	0.73919296
Often something occurs on the eyelids that resembles a "Grando" in its hardness and strength, and because of this, it is named "Grando"; it is an accumulation of thick moisture in the upper or lower eyelid.	There often occurs in the eyelids a thing resembling a hailstone in its strength and hardness, and therefore called 'hail'. It is actually a collection of thick humours in the upper or lower lid.	0.6773577
The procedure, therefore, is to examine if the Grando has emerged such that it is visible on the eyelid, and can move in every direction, in which case, the treatment is simple.	The operative treatment for it is thus: examine; and if the stone is external on the outer aspect of the lid, and mobile in all directions, dealing with it is simple.	0.54569733
Make an incision across it horizontally. Then peel it from all sides gently until it is removed. Next, lift it with a hook and cut it out.	You make above it a transverse incision; then scrape gently around it till it is free; then catch it up with a hook and cut it away.	0.8232449
If you cannot fully prepare it for excision without cutting slightly into the eyelid, then it may cause some discomfort to the patient.	If it is in such a position that you cannot excise it without cutting through the lid, that will not harm the patient at all.	0.6298746
If the incision is large, then close it with a suture and care for it until it heals.	If the incision be big, gather it up with a suture and dress it till it heals.	0.8585709
If it is small, no harm will come from it. An ointment will restore it and help it to heal.	If it be small, it will be no trouble, for ointment will restore it and heal it.	0.85994494
If the Grando is inclined inward toward the inner surface of the eyelid, then invert the eyelid, lift the Grando with a hook without needing to incise, and press it from all sides.	If the stone is rather toward the inner aspect of the eyelid, then invert the lid and catch up the stone with a hook—you will not need to incise the lid—and cut it all round.	0.6822319
If the eyelid stretches due to the incision, it does not harm it in any way.	If the lid is pierced in the cutting, it will do no harm at all.	0.75476325
Then wash the eye after the incision of the Grando with saltwater, and treat the area with something that promotes healing until the patient is cured.	Then, after cutting away the stone, wash the eye with salt water; then treat with cicatrizing medicines till healed.	0.6976527

chapter-2-subchapter-10.txt
Chapter X.	CHAPTER TEN.	0.6836418
"Axirnath" is a type of fat that develops in the membranes of the upper eyelid. It often occurs in children, weighing on their eyes, causing morning discharge, making them unable to look at sunlight, and inducing tears to flow, due to which they frequently lie on their faces and sleep on them. Their eyelids are moist under their eyebrows, covered by swelling, and the swelling of the Axirnath is visible, and when you press on the area with your fingers, you can feel the Axirnath between them.	Hydatid is fat which arises in the folds of the upper lid. It is a disease chiefly occurring in children, irritating their eyes, giving them morning catarrh; they are unable to look full into the light of the sun, since they get an immediate secretion of tears. And for that reason you will find them lying always on their faces, and they also sleep on their faces; and the eyelids below the eyebrows are moist and covered with swellings, while the hydatid stands out prominently; and when you press upon the place with your finger you can feel the fat beneath it.	0.76243174
The procedure is for the patient to place their head in your lap.	The manner of operating is for the patient to let his head rest in your lap.	0.860929
Then take a linen cloth, prepare a small bandage in it, and make a ring from this bandage according to the size that covers the Axirnath on all sides. Place it over the area, and press with your fingers from all sides so that the Axirnath is gathered in the middle of the ring.	Then you take a scrap of linen and prepare a pad of it. Make it into a circle of sufficient size to enclose the whole of the hydatid on all sides, then place it on it and squeeze with your fingers on all sides, so as to gather up the hydatid in the centre of the circle.	0.8462512
Then make a shallow cut across the middle of that moist area with a spatula, creating small incisions horizontally, no deeper than a vein incision.	Then in the middle of this humidity make a crosswise incision with a lancet, but do not let the incision be larger than that made for a venesection.	0.6651082
Or you may need to cut through the entire skin until you reach the Axirnath, as in many cases, the Axirnath will come out from the incision in the form of a piece of white fat.	As to the depth, the skin should be incised right through till you come to the hydatid, which in most cases will come out from the incision, in the shape of a white piece of fat.	0.58762825
Then extract it with a cloth, which you hold between your fingers toward the outside; turn your hand to the right and left until it comes loose; and be careful not to deepen the incision, so that you do not reach the eye with the spatula and injure it.	Draw it out with a cloth rolled between your fingers, turning your hand to right and to left till it is separated. Be careful not to go so deep with your scalpel that it sticks in the eye and injures it.	0.8679606
If the Axirnath does not appear at the start of the incision, slightly deepen the incision gently until the Axirnath emerges. Then extract it as we have described.	If you do not see the hydatid at the first incision, you must gently cut a little deeper till it comes forth, then draw it out as described.	0.738123
Then soak cloths in vinegar and water, place them over the area, and bind it with compresses.	Then dip some cloth in vinegar and water, apply to the place and bind it up with pads.	0.8765892
Some people grind salt and place it in the hollow of the incision, so that any remaining moisture is dissolved.	There are some who grind up salt and put it in the hollow of the incision to liquefy thereby the remains of the humidity.	0.8901688
Then treat it until it heals.	Then dress till healed.	0.7971039
If a warm abscess forms in the area, then treat it with soothing plasters until it heals.	If an effusion occur in the place, treat with sedative plasters till healed.	0.8026153

chapter-2-subchapter-11.txt
Chapter XI.	CHAPTER ELEVEN.	0.6653321
When additional hairs grow on the eyelids of the eye beyond the usual course under the natural hairs, and they grow in abundance: then they harm the eye, causing various ailments, such as constant tearing, softening of the eyelids, and whiteness, until it becomes a cause of destruction to the eye.	When superfluous lashes grow on the eyelid outside their natural place, below the natural lashes, and continue, they injure the eye and give rise to many kinds of disease, such as chronic lachrymation, dropping of the eyelids (ptosis), and whiteness and opacity, eventually resulting in the destruction of the eye.	0.7698885
Either by cautery with fire. Or with a sharp medicine, as mentioned previously in the chapter on cautery. Or Ataxmir is treated by incision and suture. Or by means of reeds, as I shall explain.	The plastic operation on the eye is carried out in four ways: by the actual cautery; by caustic in the way mentioned above in the book on cauterization; by incision and suture; or with canes, as I shall describe.	0.63753724
It is necessary to place the patient's head in your lap. Then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.	You should place the patient's head in your lap, then with your left hand turn out the eyelid.	0.91647327
If it turns, then it is good. If not: insert a needle into it, with a thread from the lower part of the eyelid, and make the needle with the thread penetrate from above, and let it be near the hairs themselves, that is, near the margin of the eyelid where the hairs grow: and pull the thread upwards with the eyelid, and turn it with a rod.	Now if it thus becomes everted, good; otherwise introduce a threaded needle beneath the eyelid and pass the needle up; let that be near the hair itself.	0.7387574
Then make an incision on the inner part of the eyelid under the additional hairs with a thin blade, cutting from the greater lacrimal duct to the lesser lacrimal duct.	Then draw the thread up with the lid and invert the lid with a probe; then make an incision on the inside of the lid below the superfluous lashes with the lancet, from the greater to the lesser angle.	0.72565913
Then remove the thread, and place a small cushion of cotton or cloth under the eyelid: then mark on the eyelid with ink a shape like that of a myrtle leaf.	Then draw out the thread and put beneath the lid a small pad of cotton or linen; then mark with ink on the eyelid the shape of a myrtle leaf.	0.87581265
However, it is necessary that the shape corresponds to the size and elevation of the eyelid, as it varies among people.	The shape should be according to the amount you wish to raise the lid, and varies in different people.	0.7098593
Then, with a thin blade, make an incision along the two lines you marked, starting from the greater lacrimal duct to the lesser lacrimal duct, and let there be one cut close to the natural hairs, like the thickness of a rod.	Then with a scalpel incise over the two lines you have marked, beginning at the greater angle and going toward the lesser angle; and let one incision be close to the natural lashes, at a distance of about the breadth of a probe.	0.85377085
Then insert a hook into one of the two corners of the skin. Then remove all of it. Then, join the two edges with a suture, using a needle and fine wool thread: and wipe away the blood, and make the excess thread adhere to the two eyebrows with some adhesive substances if you wish to do so: and if not, do not concern yourself with it.	Then introduce a hook into one angle of the skin and peel it all off; then join the edges with a needle and a fine woollen thread and wipe away the blood; and stick the ends of the threads to the eyebrow with adhesive, if you like; but if you do not it does not matter.	0.86319816
Then leave the suture and thread in place for three or four days: afterwards, treat it.	Then let the suture and the threads remain for about three or four days, then dress.	0.7800323
And if you wish, leave the wound without a suture, and treat it with something that dries and constricts. For the eyelid will elevate upon sealing and joining of the wound: but it will be better in the future.	If you like, you may leave the wound without suture and treat it with drying medicaments and styptics; then the eyelid will be lifted as the wound heals and comes together; but suture is better.	0.7682109
This method of treating Ataxmir was taught by the ancients.	The Ancients mention this method of operating.	0.55773336
However, it requires careful attention to the patient, it is a skilled procedure, and there is no fear in it.	It involves some burden for the patient; but the operation is good and safe.	0.5568988
And there is another method for Ataxmir as well: it is to mark on the eyelid a shape like that of a myrtle leaf, as we have described.	Yet another way of operating is to mark on the eyelid the figure of a myrtle leaf as we have described; then lift the eyelid with three hooks, either separate or joined thus.	0.5781275
Then lift the eyelid with three separate or combined hooks, according to the following shape, then cut the excess with small scissors, following this shape, with equal incision.	Then cut away the superfluous lid with a small pair of scissors with an even incision. The scissors are of this pattern.	0.69199836
But if it is not possible for you to hold the hook, and it does not align, then take a needle with a thread, and insert it into the middle of the shape: and insert another thread near the greater lacrimal duct, and a second thread near the lesser lacrimal duct: and join the threads with equal tension between your fingers.	But if you cannot conveniently hold with the hooks, take a threaded needle and introduce it into the middle of the marking; and put another thread through near the greater canthus, and a third thread near the lesser canthus.	0.84884447
Then raise your hand evenly: and lift the skin on which the mark is made, as we have described.	With your fingers hold the threads evenly and then raise your hand evenly and you will raise up the whole of the marked skin as we have said.	0.67623115
Then join the two edges of the wound with a suture: and treat it until it heals.	Then bring the edges together with a suture and dress till healed.	0.66467094
But if an abscess occurs at your incision or fissure, soothe that abscess with cerate and similar ointments that relieve it.	But if in your incision, or the opening you have made, a swelling arises, then allay the swelling with wax and similar sedatives.	0.8768611
And sometimes it also happens that the hairs of the eyelid turn inward.	Sometimes the lower lid also has the lashes inverted.	0.6604471
Therefore, you should apply to it what we have said regarding incision: but the suture for both is more skillful. On the treatment of Ataxmir with reeds.	For this you should use any of the methods we have mentioned: the incision and suture, and the operation by the actual cautery and by caustic. ( The operation by the actual cautery or caustic) is more effective, and easier on the patient, than incision and suture, (but incision and suture) is more workmanlike in either lid.	0.5665608
And it is that you turn the eyelid and make an incision on the inner side, as I have described. Then skillfully make two reeds or two thin pieces of wood: their length should match the length of the eyelid, and their width should be less than the width of a thin blade: and you have already cut into each end on both sides where you hold the threads.	Trimming the lid by means of canes is done as follows: you invert the eyelid and cut the inner slit as I have described; then you prepare two slender canes or rods of a length equal to that of the eyelid and a breadth less than that of a scalpel; and at either end of each you make a notch to hold the threads.	0.83597434
Then gently place each one over the excess part of the eyelid of the eye, and bind the two reeds tightly on both sides, and leave it for several days. For the tightened skin will die, darken, and decay, until it falls off on its own.	Then gently put them together over the superfluous part of the eyelid and tie them firmly together at both ends and leave for a few days; for the ligated flesh will necrose and turn black and putrefy and eventually fall away spontaneously.	0.8630492
If it takes too long, then cut it with scissors. Then treat it until it heals.	But if it is slow in sloughing, cut off with shears; then dress till healed.	0.64888704
When it has healed, the eyelid is raised: and the hairs no longer prick.	And when it is healed the eyelid will be raised and the lashes will no longer irritate the eye.	0.7306248
And this is the shape of the two reeds, which you will make according to this figure and in this length and width.	Now this is the figure of the canes; you should prepare them exactly in this shape and of this length and breadth.	0.75263405

chapter-2-subchapter-12.txt
On the removal of hairs pricking the eye with a needle.	On the removal with the needle of irritating lashes from the eye.	0.85570276
The procedure is this: take a fine needle and insert a fine, smooth silk thread into it. Then join its ends and knot both very finely: let the length of the threads be one palm.	If it be one or two hairs the operation will be to take a fine needle, thread it with a fine smooth silk, bring the ends together, and knot them with a tiny knot; the thread should be about a span in length.	0.7461821
Then add another fine thread below in Alinxotati, and tie its ends if you wish.	Then in the loop insert another fine thread, shorter than the first, and join the ends with a knot if you wish.	0.6886585
Then let the patient place his head in your lap, near the sunlight to make the operation clear, for it is a delicate or fine procedure.	Then let the patient put his head in your lap in full sunlight, so that the operation may be clearly seen, because it is very fine work.	0.7914624
Then insert the needle with the alinxotati at the root of the eyelid, and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly, until you draw it out above the natural hair.	Then introduce the needle with the loop to the root of the superfluous hair and run it quickly through the eyelid till you make it come out above the natural hair.	0.7978864
Then pull the hair up above the alinxotati: and insert that hair into the alinxotati: if there is one, or two, or three, but not more.	Then draw the thread to the top of the loop and introduce that hair into the loop if it be one, two, or three, but not more.	0.67204094
Then pull your hand with it, until the hair emerges with the alinxotati in the eyelid with the natural hair.	Then draw away your hand with it until the hair emerges with the loop on the eyelid among the natural hair.	0.81600165
If the alinxotati is pulled and the hair does not come out with it, pull the alinxotati downward with the thread you have arranged in it, until the alinxotati exits from the upper opening, and you can see it with your eye: then you will pull the alinxotati and the thread, and remove both, and close the eye: and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair adheres in its place and flesh grows over it.	If you pull the loop and the hair does not come out with it, you draw the loop down by means of the thread which you have previously passed through it, until the loop comes out at the upper perforation. Then put the hair back in and draw them both up; keep on until the hair rises up in the upper perforation and you can see it. Then extract loop and thread and take them both out, and bind the eye and leave it bound for two or three days till the hair be fixed in its place and there is regeneration of flesh over it.	0.83799446
If the hair is short, then either attach to it a long hair from the natural hairs, and it will be raised with it: or leave it until it lengthens over time, and then lift it.	If the hair be short, put with it a long natural hair so that it may be raised together with that; or let the hair grow till it reach a greater length, then raise it.	0.812099

chapter-2-subchapter-13.txt
Chapter XIII.	CHAPTER THIRTEEN.	0.69006693
When this Alxatrati occurs in the eye, it is called Leporina.	On entropion occurring in the upper eyelid. The eye that suffers this inversion of the lid is called 'leporine' (i.e. hareeye).	0.62691206
And this Alxatrati is either natural or accidental.	Now sometimes this inversion is natural, sometimes acquired.	0.4968459
Accidental, then, results from the healing of a wound, or a cut, or cautery, and similar things.	It is acquired either from the cicatrization of an injury, or an incision, or cauterization, or the like.	0.73316056
And the procedure for it is to split that healed area, separate its edges, and place between them a small strip of linen, and bind it until it heals.	The idea of the operation is to excise the scar, separate the edges of the wound, pack linen between them, and bandage up till healed.	0.7292634
And it is not necessary to use drying and constricting substances in its treatment: for if you do so, the Alxatrati will return worse than it was: rather, use softening agents, such as fenugreek: and bathe with water in which althea and flaxseed have been cooked: and dyaquilon ointment, melted with some oil: and wrap with linen, and treat with it.	In the treatment of it you should not use anything styptic or drying, for if you do the inversion will return worse than ever before. Employ relaxing substances such as fenugreek; and fomentation with water in which mallows and linseed have been boiled; and diachylon plaster which has been previously softened with one of the oils and spread on the packs; and treat it with this.	0.82314086
And the treasure of your treatment is to strive by every skill to ensure it does not heal in the form it was at first.	The main thing in the treatment is to use every device to prevent the healing up of the place as it was before.	0.667364
And indeed, this procedure we have described is only a kind of correction of Alxatrati, so that the form of the place does not return exactly as it was.	This operation which we have described is but some correction of the inversion, not that the appearance of the place will necessarily revert to what it was.	0.6327117

chapter-2-subchapter-14.txt
Chapter XIV.	CHAPTER FOURTEEN.	0.7063277
This Alxatrati, which occurs below, is what is truly called Alxatrati. And it can be either natural or accidental.	This inversion in the lower lid is that which is truly called entropion; and it is either congenital or acquired.	0.54791737
Accidental Alxatrati results from a wound, a cut, cauterization, and similar causes.	It is acquired by injury or incision or cautery or something like that.	0.57875955
The procedure for treating it is to take a needle with a double-thread and insert it into the flesh, passing it from the left tear duct to the right tear duct until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.	This is the method of operating for it: you take a needle through which has been passed a double thread and you run it into the flesh, making it penetrate from the left angle of the eye to the right angle so that the thread is fixed in flesh both ends.	0.8251865
Then, stretch the flesh upward with the needle and make an incision with a broad spatula. If the shape of the eyelid returns to what it should be, this is good.	Then with the needle stretch the flesh upwards and make an incision with a broad scalpel; and if the eyelid returns to its proper shape, well and good.	0.88833
If not, take a thin rod, insert it into the fissure, and rotate the eyelid with it. Then make two slits on the inner side of the eyelid, with the ends of these two slits meeting at the two corners of the incision until they converge to form an angle. When they come together, they should form a shape like the Greek letter lambda.	But if not, take a probe and put it on the site of the incision and with it turn back the lid. Then make two incisions on the inner side of the lid; the two incisions should begin from the angles of the incision already made and run together making an angle so that when they join they are like this. It is the Greek letter lambda.	0.8626625
Then remove that portion of flesh that is beneath the sharp edge of the eyelid. Then bring the separated parts together and sew them with a wool thread.	You remove that flesh in proportion as the angled side is lower than that adjoining the lid; then bring the divided parts together with two sutures made with a woollen thread.	0.74728245
Then treat the area with the softening medicines mentioned before, and with linen strips, until it heals.	Then treat with the relaxing medicaments and dressings we have mentioned, till healed.	0.79690456
If Alxatrati results from a fissure, suture, or cauterization, you should make a shallow incision beneath the eyelashes, as previously described. Then separate the two edges with a linen strip, as we have explained.	But if the inversion is acquired, from incision, suture, or cautery, you should make a simple incision below the eyelashes, as has been described, then bring apart the two edges with a packing, as we have said.	0.79038966
In summary, the treatment of Alxatrati, whether it is above or below, involves a procedure tailored to the shape of the Alxatrati.	The sum of what there is to say about the treatment of inversion, whether it is in the upper or the lower lid, is that you should make your procedure follow the actual lines of the inversion itself ; for this is of varying shape.	0.5990584
For it presents in many different forms, and the skilled practitioner will prepare the technique in whatever way possible to restore the shape to its natural form, or as close as possible, taking into account the patient's specific needs, operation, and the tools available in many different situations.	The experienced practitioner will make use of his skill in any way he can to re-establish the natural form or approximate to it. The disease itself will generally indicate to you the appropriate operation and instruments.	0.62970895

chapter-2-subchapter-15.txt
On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.	On adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.	0.9971329
Sometimes this adhesion occurs in many people, causing the upper eyelid to adhere to the white of the eye, thus preventing it from functioning naturally.	This adhesion happens to many people, the upper lid sticking to the white of the eye and hindering its movement and preventing its natural functions.	0.88267577
Therefore, you should insert the end of a thin rod beneath the eyelid and lift it upward, or stretch it with a hook. Then, cut the adhesion with a fine spatula that should not have a sharp edge but should be slightly blunt so that it does not cause discomfort to the patient during the procedure, and so that the spatula does not damage the eye with its sharpness. Make the incision as if you are gently peeling away the adhesion until the eyelid returns to its natural shape and the adhesion is fully healed.	You should introduce the end of a probe beneath the lid and raise it upward; or stretch it with a hook. Then cut the adhesion with a fine scalpel; it should not be so sharp as a cutting scalpel, but somewhat blunt, lest during the operation the patient should shake, and the scalpel slip, and the edge injure the eye. Let your incision be as if peeling off the adhesion. Wait until the lid regains its natural shape and the adhesions be wholly healed.	0.87708116
Then pour salty water into the eye, rinse it with this water, or instill a solution of sief made from dissolved ziniar.	Then rinse the eye with saline and cleanse it; or instil into it drops of a watery solution of eye-lotion of verdigris.	0.76178384
Next, place a linen strip between the eyelid and the eye, and place over the eye wool soaked in egg white. After the third day, apply sief and consolidating agents until it heals.	Then separate between the eye and the lid with a linen pad and put over the eye a piece of wool moistened with white of egg; and after the third day employ healing eye-lotions till it is better.	0.87003803

chapter-2-subchapter-16.txt
Chapter XVI.	CHAPTER SIXTEEN.	0.6767231
You should know that the ungula (growth) presents in two forms. Either it is fibrous, resembling hard, thin tissue. Or it is non-fibrous, similar to a white, frozen moisture, which, when touched with an instrument or hook, breaks off and does not hold the hook.	Ungula occurs in two forms: either the nervous, which resembles a fine hard membrane; or the non-nervous, like a white congealed humidity; which, when the iron touches it or you try to pick it up with a hook, is cut through and the hook has no hold on it.	0.82789695
Both types typically begin at the larger tear duct and gradually extend until they cover the vision, blocking light and eye movement.	Both kinds grow from the greater angle of the eye, whence they spread little by little until they cover the pupil and block both the vision and the movements of the eye.	0.84181494
The procedure for incising it is to have the patient rest their head on your lap. Then, open their eyes and lift the eyelid with your hand. Next, grasp the growth with a hook that has a slight curve, and lift it upwards. Then take a needle, and insert a strong thread made of horsehair, ox, or cow hair. Bend the tip of the needle slightly, then embed it in the center of the ungula. Push the needle through the ungula, then secure the thread around it and stretch it upwards. Use the thread to scrape along the side of the ungula nearest to the pupil, as though you were sawing it with the thread until reaching its end.	This is the method of incision: the patient places his head in your lap and opens his eyes; then you raise the lid with your hand; then with a gently curved hook pick up the ungula and pull it upward; then take a needle threaded with a horse hair or an ox hair, and a strong thread; slightly curve the end of the needle; then thrust it into the middle of the ungula, piercing it with the needle; and tie the ungula with the thread and pull upwards; and, with the hair, peel the side of the ungula adjoining the pupil, and divide it with a sawing motion right through.	0.90872264
Next, cut away the remainder near the tear duct’s root using a fine spatula or small scissors, preserving the natural flesh around the tear duct to prevent a continuous flow of tears.	Then what is left in the root of the angle cut out with a fine scalpel, or with small scissors; and leave the natural caruncle in the canthus lest, in cutting it away, a chronic flux of tears occur.	0.6995849
Sometimes the ungula can be extended with only the hook or the thread, as previously described. Then, scrape it off gently with a soft spatula, shaped as described.	The ungula may be drawn out with the hook alone or with the thread as we have said, and scraped away with the smoothtipped scalpel of this form.	0.7601216
Be careful not to let the spatula touch the corneal layer, as it could rupture and puncture the pupil.	But beware lest the scalpel touch the corneal covering and cause a fissure in it and the pupil protrude.	0.81069386
After the incision, apply crushed salt or a solution made from ziniar (possibly a type of mineral or medicinal compound) to the eye, and leave it until the next day. Then treat it with the appropriate remedies until it heals.	Then after the incision put into the eye a little powdered salt or an eye-lotion of verdigris, and leave it till the following day; then treat as may be necessary till it heals.	0.7722844
If the ungula is non-fibrous and neither the needle nor the hook can hold onto it, this type is often treated with medicines and heals as described previously.	If the ungula is non-nervous in origin and you cannot transfix it with a needle nor get a hook to hold fast in it, this sort is often successfully treated by medical means. So treat as described in the section.	0.83236516
If you wish to cut it, open the patient’s eye and take a fine, smooth spatula with a slight edge, shaped as indicated. Gently shave off the ungula from the top with precise scraping. If you observe that the ungula is thinning and fragmenting, and the scraping is effective, then apply a few drops of your solution made from ziniar or red sief, or crushed salt, and cover the eye until the next day.	But if you prefer to cut it, open the patient's eye, and take a fine smooth scalpel, rather blunt, like this and with this gently scrape away the ungula from above; and if you see that it is crumbling away and breaking down under the scraping, then immediately instil into the eye some eye-lotion of verdigris, or the red eye-lotion, or a little powdered salt, and bind the eye up till next day.	0.86047155
Then repeat the procedure on it until the entire ungula is removed. Unless you are faced with a warm abscess in the eye; in that case, leave the ungula alone and treat the abscess until it heals.	Then repeat the operation on it till you have removed it all, unless an abscess forms in the eye, in which case cease the operation and treat the abscess till cured.	0.85990727
Then repeat the procedure with the scraping until it heals.	Then repeat the treatment with the same scraping till healed.	0.8967948
If the fleshy prominence near the tear duct causes significant discomfort in the eye, lift it with a hook and cut away a portion of it, but avoid excessive cutting to prevent continuous tearing.	As for a protuberance of flesh in the angle, if it causes great hurt pick it up with a hook and cut part of it away, with not too big an incision lest there be a flux of tears.	0.7501956
Then apply red sief or a ziniar-based solution to the tear duct until it heals.	Then into the canthus instil red eye-lotion or lotion of verdigris till healed.	0.79058725

chapter-2-subchapter-17.txt
Chapter 17.	CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.	0.65278906
Sometimes, in certain people's eyes, a reddish flesh grows or accumulates until it covers the pupil or approaches, or presses upon the eyelids, and it may even turn the eyelids outward; and it resembles the pomegranate flower.	Sometimes in the eye of certain people a red granulation grows up and increases so as to block the pupil or nearly so; or it grows over the eyelids and often turns the lids outward, and it resembles the blossom of the pomegranate.	0.896808
And the procedure for this is also for the patient to place his head in your lap. Then open his eyes, and gather all that flesh with hooks suitable for it: and hold it with one forceps, or fingers.	You operate for this by having the patient put his head in your lap; then he opens his eyes and you gather up the granulation whole, with suitable hooks, or hold it with tweezers or forceps.	0.8111552
Then cut into the flesh at first, until it is fully removed with the scalpel. And beware of the eye, so that you do not injure it during the operation: and make your incision, either with the spatumili, as we described in the incision of the nail, or with small scissors, with which asebel is gathered, as will be explained in the following chapter.	Then you cut away the first bit of flesh and then the next, until you have cut it all away; and beware of damaging the eye in the course of operation. Your incision should be made with the scalpel which we described for the incision of pterygium; or with small scissors like those with which one gathers up pannus, as shown in the chapter after this.	0.8603678
When your incision is complete and the entire alguardenici is removed, then fill the eye with crushed salt, or sprinkle it with red powder, or similar corrosive medicines; and place a cotton pad over the eye with egg white, so that it is protected from a hot swelling.	And when you have finished your incision and removed all the chemosis, fill the eye with powdered salt or instil the red powder or similar corrosive; and apply to the outside of the eye cotton wool with white of egg to ward off an abscess.	0.83971405
If anything remains of the alguardenici, and warm blood overpowers you, and you fear a hot swelling, then leave the eye, and treat it with what calms the swelling.	If there is any chemosis left and blood is getting the better of you and you fear an abscess, then desist and treat the eye with those means for settling a tumour.	0.68880713
Then repeat the procedure on it until it is healed.	Thereafter return to your operation till cured.	0.78881425
And do likewise with any additional flesh that grows in the eye of this kind.	So must you do with superfluous flesh that arises in the eye.	0.68175244
However, it is necessary that you avoid treatment of any weak eye by natural or incidental means when operating with a blade: and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you see that the part is able to withstand that procedure.	But you must avoid treating surgically any eye that is weak, whether congenitally or by acquired disease. Never set your hand to an operation of this kind till you have seen if the organ can endure such an operation.	0.7762886

chapter-2-subchapter-18.txt
Chapter 18.	CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.	0.6776911
Sebel are red veins that cover the eye and obstruct its vision: and they weaken the eye over time.	Pannus is a network of blood-vessels spreading over the eye so as to interfere with the function of sight and, in the course of time, weakening the eye.	0.54964924
It is therefore necessary for you, first of all, to consider if the eye in which the Sebel is present is strong and has no other illness besides the Sebel: then remove its Sebel.	You must first examine, and if the eye with the pannus be strong, with no fault other than the pannus, then the pannus should be gathered up.	0.6243179
And instruct the patient to place his head in your lap.	This is done by bidding the patient put his head in your lap; then, as skilfully as you may, pick up those blood-vessels with one or two hooks.	0.47271693
Then raise those veins with one hook, or two, according to your judgment: and let the hook be fine and double-pointed, in this form, or let there be two hooks arranged on one body, in this form.	The hooks should be of a gentle curve, like this. Or there can be two hooks joined together on one handle, thus.	0.6461121
Then gather those veins delicately with fine scissors, and wipe away the blood from time to time, until you see those veins are removed from the eye, and they dissolve: and beware not to harm the eye with the tips of the spatumili.	Then take up the blood-vessels gently with the fine scissors, and wipe away the blood constantly, till you see all those blood-vessels removed from the eye, and the blood wells forth. But be careful of the eye lest you damage it with the points of the scissors.	0.85764164
Let your operation be at midday in the presence of sunlight, and be very steady in your work: so that you do not cut anything except those veins.	Let your work be done in broad sunlight at midday; and be very steady in your action so as to cut nothing beside the bloodvessels.	0.8650532
And when you are finished, then sprinkle the eye with green powder, or red, so that its sharpness may corrode what remains of the sebel.	When you have finished, instil the red or green lotion into the eye to destroy by its caustic action the remnants of the pannus.	0.6885101
If it is not possible for you to remove all of it in that time, then apply a plaster to the eye with something that soothes its pain: and leave it for several days, until its pain subsides and it is protected from a hot swelling: then repeat the procedure in the same way until it is healed.	If you are unable to gather it all up at that one time, apply a plaster to the eye such as will allay the pain, and leave him* for a few days till* the pain be eased and there is no danger of an abscess. Then repeat the operation in the same manner till it is healed.	0.83893967
And this is the form of the scissors.	This is a figure of the scissors. [	0.5863622

chapter-2-subchapter-19.txt
Chapter 19.	CHAPTER NINETEEN.	0.6587144
The physicians call Arissati a fistula, which you treat with cautery, or with a sharp, burning medicine, as was previously described.	Doctors give the name 'fistula' to what laymen call 'a quill'.	0.45160937
And if it does not heal, then there is no further recourse except to cut open the swelling at its origin and extract all the moisture and pus within it, until the bone is exposed.	When you have treated it with the cautery or with caustic according to the instructions given previously, and it is not healed, there is no clear method of treatment except to cut down on the tumour at its ripening and let out all the humidity or pus therein, till you reach the bone.	0.6203122
When the bone is thus exposed, and you see decay or blackening on it, then scrape it with a tool of this shape.	When bone is reached and you see necrosis or blackness, scrape it with an instrument like this.	0.81977534
It is called Asperi capitis.	It is called 'rough-head' and is made of Indian iron.	0.42498285
It should be made of Indian iron, and its head should be round like azir, marked with fine notches made by a file or by a precise aliskilfer marking, and place it on the decayed part of the bone.	Its head is round like a button but is engraved with markings finely engraved, like those of a file or a rasp.	0.48563564
Then rotate it between your fingers, and press your hand lightly, until you know that the decay has been scraped away; do this several times.	Place it on the site of the diseased bone and spin it between your fingers, pressing down a little with your hand, till you are sure all the diseased bone has been scraped away. Do this several times.	0.746441
Then restore the area with drying, astringent medicines.	Then let the place be dressed with stanching and styptic remedies.	0.64006436
If the area thus heals, flesh grows in it, and the discharge stops; if it remains for forty days without recurrence, swelling, or complications, then you know it is healed.	And if the place heals and flesh is generated there and the flow of sanies is stayed and there is no return after leaving for forty days, and there is no swelling, and nothing emerges, you may know it is perfectly healed.	0.79759204
If not, then there is no remedy except to redirect the fistula to the nasal opening, following this procedure.	But if not, there is no other means for it but to turn the fistula into the cavity of the nose, in this style, namely, that you lay bare the bone a second time, either by an instrument or by caustic; and when the bone is uncovered, then take a drill like this.	0.6565251
And it is done by exposing the secondary bone with a blade or sharp medicine; and when the bone is exposed, take a drill in this shape, with a triangular iron end, and its wooden handle tapered to a point, as you see.	Its extremity, which is of iron, should be triangular; and its wooden handle should be conical in shape, and, as you see, tapering to the extremity.	0.6466623
Then place it on the bone itself, near the lacrimal gland; and extend your hand slightly away from the eye. Then rotate your hand with the drill until it penetrates the bone, and the patient can feel it, as he notices air escaping from it when he holds his hand over his nose.	Then put it to the bone itself near the canthus; but keep your hand a little away from the eye; then with your hand rotate the drill till the bone is perforated; and the patient will have the sensation of this, since, if he holds his hands over his nose he will find the breath coming out through the hole.	0.90673965
Then restore the area with drying, astringent medicines, as I have taught you.	And then dress the place with styptic and stanching remedies as I have taught you.	0.7557988
When flesh thus grows, and the area hardens, then the matter that was discharging externally will return to the nose; this will be easier for the patient.	And when the flesh begins to grow and the place gets hard, the matter which before was coming outward will be turned into the nose; and this will be easier for the patient.	0.8755642

chapter-2-subchapter-20.txt
Chapter 20.	CHAPTER TWENTY.	0.7026258
When the eye protrudes fully, and there is no damage to vision or decrease in it, then it is necessary to calm the patient, then bleed him, and next place cups on his neck without incisions, but with suction.	When the whole eye is prominent and there is no reduction or impairment of vision, you should get the patient's bowels open.	0.6694835
Then place a liniment on the eye made from acacia, aloe, frankincense, and sarcocolla. Then compress the eye with multiple cloth pads over the poultice.	Then venesect him in the cephalic vein; then apply cupping vessels to his neck without scarification and draw off by gentle suction; then put to the eye a poultice made of acacia and aloes and olibanum and sarcocolla; then bandage the eye over the application with many pads.	0.7706717
The method for the pads is this: take many soft cloths and fold each one in four; make many of them, then place them one on top of the other, according to the size needed for the eye; then press firmly over them with a strong, coarse cloth.	The way to make pads is to take a number of soft rags and fold each into four thicknesses. Prepare a good many. Then put them one on top of the other as the eye requires; then bind on stiff bandages over these, tying them firmly.	0.907519
And repeat the cupping with suction, without incisions.	Repeat the cupping with suction and without scarification.	0.84187543
Then remove the cups, and leave the eye bound day and night.	Then take away the cupping vessel and leave the eye bandaged a day and a night.	0.8716121
If the bandage becomes loose again, then it must be tightened greatly; then remove the bandage after a day and a night, as we have said.	If the bandaging slackens during that time, it must be tied properly. Then remove the bandaging after a day and a night, as we have said.	0.84351957
If you see that the eye has now returned to the layer of the uvea, it is good; if not, then repeat the poultice, pads, compression, and cupping until it is healed.	If you see that the eye has receded, good. Otherwise repeat the applications and pads and bandages and the cupping till it does recede.	0.79042363

chapter-2-subchapter-21.txt
Chapter 21.	CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE.	0.5666032
When a rupture occurs in the uveal layer, then it protrudes and extends outside the eyelids like a grape, disfiguring the person's appearance because of it, and if you wish to cut it: the procedure is as follows, as I describe: insert a needle into the root of the uvea from the lower to the upper part.	When a rupture befalls the uveal membrane so that it swells and protrudes outside the eyelids looking like a grape, and on this account the man's features are disfigured; if you intend to cut it away the operation will be as I am about to describe.	0.75963867
Then insert another needle with a double thread on the side of the lacrimal gland, and make it penetrate: and leave the first needle in its place.	You introduce a needle to the root of the uvea from the lower to the upper segment; then you introduce another needle threaded with a double thread, from the region of the canthus major where you will perforate it; and leave the first needle in its place.	0.65662813
Next, cut at the spot of the double thread, and tie with it the part of the uvea around the needle: and tighten it firmly.	Then cut the place of doubling of the doubled thread, and with it ligature that part of the excrescence around the needle and tie it well.	0.7671973
Then remove the needle, and place wool soaked in egg white on the eye: and leave it, until the thread falls off with the uvea.	Then remove the needle and apply to the eye wool moistened with egg-white; and leave till the thread falls away with the growth.	0.83458674
Then treat the eye with something that strengthens it, until the wound heals.	Then treat the eye with fortifying dressings till the wound be healed.	0.8551961
And sometimes the uvea is compressed all around with a cloth band, until the eye gains a large prominence.	Sometimes the uvea is tied all round with a circle of material so that the prominence of the eye is greatly increased.	0.8222879
Then it should be pierced with a fine spatula that reaches the depth of the eye, allowing the whitish fluid to flow, and the eye will lower and immediately return inside: then compress it, until it heals.	Then you perforate it with a fine scalpel going to the depth of the eye; and an albuminous humour will flow out and the eye will shrink and return at once. Then bandage till healed.	0.777406

chapter-2-subchapter-22.txt
Chapter 22.	CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO.	0.61042476
This condition called Alcomnati is merely pus that collects in the eye, resembling descending water, but it is not actually that.	This disease which is called 'hypopyon' is a collection of pus in the eye which resembles cataract but is not so.	0.64189863
And the method of treating it is to have the patient sit on a prepared or straightened seat.	The method of operating in this disease is to make the patient sit upright on a chair before you.	0.61486655
Then take his head in your hands from both sides, and move it until you see the pus descending to the lower part before your eyes. Then let it settle, and not descend further, and the vision will clear: and the patient will see things as he saw them before: if it does not descend downward, know that it is water.	Take his head on either side with your hands and shake it about till you can see the pus come down; then it will be fixed and not move; and the light will pass and the patient will see things as he was before. But if it does not come down, we know it is cataract.	0.8058953
If, however, the descent of the pus is not achieved with the method we mentioned, then have the patient sit between your hands. Then take a fine spatula, and make a small incision with it above the corneal membrane near the junction of the conjunctiva with the corneal layer at the top, until the pus flows out.	But if the pus is not ready to be brought down by this method, then seat the patient in front of you; then take a fine scalpel and cut a little above the corneal tunic near the coronal junction of conjunctiva and cornea, till the pus comes out.	0.8513898
When it flows out, then instill in the eye warm water mixed with honey: or water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey: then treat it with the remaining treatment until it is healed.	When it comes out, instil warm water mixed with honey, or water boiled with fenugreek and honey. Then treat as usual till healed.	0.7862328

chapter-2-subchapter-23.txt
Chapter 23.	CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE.	0.6081629
We have already explained the types of water in the division, and what is suitable for perforation with explanatory words, so take that same understanding according to its health benefit.	We have already mentioned in the appropriate section the varieties of cataract and those in which depression is useful, in full detail; so you may take it accurately from there.	0.6471127
Then you should make the patient sit squarely between your hands, facing the light, near the sun: and bind his healthy eye, tightening it firmly: then hold the eyelid of his eye with your right hand if the eye with water is the left eye, or with your left hand if it is the right eye.	You should cause the patient to sit down cross-legged before you, facing the light in full sun, and firmly bind up his sound eye. Then lift up his eyelid with your left hand, if it be the left eye in which the humour is; or with the right hand if it be the right eye.	0.8633137
Then take the almagda in your right hand if it is the left eye, or in your left hand if it is the right eye.	Then take the couching needle in your right hand if it be the left eye; or in your left hand if it be the right eye.	0.8652218
Then place the end of the almagda near the coronal area by the thickness of the radius in the white of the eye visible in the lesser lacrimal region: then press the almagda forcefully, rotating your hand along with it until it penetrates into the white of the eye: and you feel that the almagda has reached an empty space.	Then put the tip of the needle near the corona, about the thickness of a probe away, onto the white of the eye itself, on the side of the lesser canthus. Then thrust the needle firmly in, at the same time rotating it with your hand, until it penetrates the white of the eye, and you feel that the needle has reached something empty.	0.75490475
And the depth reached by the almagda should be the same measure as the space from the pupil to the edge of the dark area: which is the coronal area of the eye. For you will see it in the pupil itself with the vision of the eye, due to the clarity of the corneal layer.	The depth the needle goes in should measure as the distance from the pupil to the edge of the iris, which is the corona of the eye; you will see the metal in the pupil itself because of the transparency of the corneal tunic.	0.7473361
Then place the almagda to the spot where the water is located. Then press it downward repeatedly, one time after another.	Then put the needle up to the place containing the humour; then press the point downwards time after time.	0.7241896
If the water descends immediately, then the patient will immediately see what he opens his sight to, and the almagda in his eye.	If the humour comes down at once, the patient will at once see whatever his vision is opened upon while the needle is still in his eye.	0.77397823
Then rest briefly. If the water descends, then lower it a second time, except for removing the almagda.	Then let him rest a little while; and if the humour goes back up again depress it a second time without taking the needle out.	0.69585645
When it is fixed and does not rise up: then extract the almagda carefully, while gradually rotating your hand.	When it stays down firmly and does not come back again, gently draw the needle out, twisting it ever so slowly with your hand.	0.693951
Then dissolve some clear rock salt in water: and wash the eye internally with it. Then place over the entire eye some tow or wool soaked in rose oil and egg white: and bind it over the healthy eye.	Then dissolve a little pure rock-salt in water and wash the eyeball with the solution; then apply all over the outer aspect of the eye carded linen or wool moistened with oil of roses and egg-white, and bandage it up together with the sound eye.	0.8890872
However, we and those of our time place ground cumin with egg white over it.	Now we and our contemporaries apply pounded cumin with the egg-white.	0.7648701
If the almagda does not enter the eye because of its hardness, as there are people whose eye is very hard: then you must take a spatula called the Alberid, which has this form.	But if the couching needle does not serve, failing to enter the eye on account of its hardness (for there are some whose eyes are hard indeed), you should take the scalpel called al-baridl figured thus.	0.7191534
Therefore, pierce only the conjunctiva with it, and do not push your hand deeply into the hole: this is only to create a path for the almagda in a narrow area.	With this make a perforation in the conjunctiva only, not piercing any further; for that is only to make a little entrance for the needle.	0.7283779
Then insert the almagda as we have described.	And then thrust in the needle as we said before.	0.6719494
At the completion of your procedure, prepare a properly arranged sleeping area for the patient, where he will lie on his back in a dark room: and he should be prohibited from all movements, and from coughing: provide food that calms his nature: and he should not move his head to the right or left at all.	At the end of your operation, prepare a solidly-built bed on which the patient may lie on his back, in a dark room; and keep him from all movement or coughing. And prescribe such a diet for him as will relax his system; neither let him move his head to right or to left.	0.84504277
And let the bandage remain in place until the third day.	Let the bandage remain in the same position till the third day.	0.87468284
Then remove it in that dark room, and test his vision: and let him see things. Then reapply the bandage until the seventh day.	Then loosen it in the same dark room and make trial of his sight, putting before him objects to be seen; then replace the bandage till the seventh day.	0.9070907
And he should not do it at the time of treatment, nor immediately after the incision: rather, you should remove it, because the water ascends quickly with intense vision.	You should not do this at the time of treatment nor immediately after the perforation by the needle; but on the contrary you should avoid it, for intensive use of the eye causes a rapid ascent of the humour.	0.7530988
If a warm abscess appears: then you should release the eye before the seventh day: treat it with something that reduces the abscess, until it subsides: then expose his sight, and place a covering on his face to moderate his vision for several days, while he remains in that dark room.	But if an abscess occur you should unbandage the eye before the seventh day and restore it to health by those methods that allay swelling. When it has subsided, allow him free sight, putting over his face a dark veil beneath which his vision may be exercised for a few days while he is still in the dark room.	0.77523303
Then he may gradually leave the house and move about in his dwelling.	Then let him come out of the room gradually and take up the exercise of his business.	0.66943496
And know that in zaltea a student is not exempt from sight sometimes: then indeed he may dare to proceed with the operation.	But you should know that in the case of a depression of a cataract the student cannot manage without having seen that operation performed several times; then he may perform it himself.	0.5776491
And indeed we have heard from some of those from Alayrach, who said that in Alayrach there was an almagda with a perforation by which the water is drawn.	I have heard that a certain Iraqi has said that in Iraq he makes a hollow needle by which the humour is sucked out.	0.5274228
However, I have not seen anyone in your land who has done this: nor have I read it in any of the ancient books: and it is possible that it is something new.	In our land I have never seen anyone do it in this fashion, nor have I read of it described in any of the books of the Ancients; perhaps it is newly invented.	0.80090994
And these are the forms of the different types of almagda, so that it may be understood by those who are unfamiliar with it.	Here are the figures of some kinds of needle for the information of those who do not know them.	0.47260684
They should be properly made of metal: with their ends finely shaped in a triangular form, and the tip should be sharp.	They are mostly made of brass; and their extremities should be of this very fineness, triangular at the tip and sharp.	0.7242267

chapter-2-subchapter-24.txt
On the treatment of flesh growths in the nose.	On the treatment of nasal polyp.	0.7096102
Sometimes various fleshy growths appear in the nose, some of which resemble a many-legged scorpion, some of which are cancerous, stony, and dark-colored; others are soft flesh, not dark-colored.	Sometimes there arise in the nose various superfluous fleshy growths. One of these is a thing resembling a centipede; another, a cancerous growth, stony, hard, and pale in colour; another again is a soft growth, not pale.	0.88170534
For those growths that are soft, benign, and non-cancerous, have the patient sit between your hands, facing the sun, and open his nostrils. Insert a hook into the growths, then pull them outward and cut away what you have hooked with a slender, sharp spatula on one side until you know that all the flesh has been removed.	Any of these growths that is soft is not malignant or cancerous. You should make the patient sit before you, facing the sun, and dilate his nose and introduce a hook into these polyps and draw them out; then amputate what you can take hold of, with a fine scalpel sharp on one side, till you know that all the growth is gone.	0.8407471
If any remains that cannot be cut, scrape it gently with a fine instrument until nothing is left. If there is excessive bleeding or a hot abscess occurs, then treat it with appropriate measures. If it is one of the malignant abscesses, immediately cauterize it until the bleeding stops, and all flesh is removed.	And if there be anything of them left behind that you cannot cut away, then gently scrape away with any fine instrument till nothing of them remains; and if the bleeding be too much for you, or an abscess occur, then combat it by suitable means. If it be a malignant swelling, then speedily cauterize till the bleeding stops and all the polypi are gone.	0.90432143
Then, after the incision, pour vinegar, water, or wine into the nose. If the nose opens and moisture reaches down to the palate, then you know it is healed.	Then introduce into the nose, after the incision, vinegar and water, or wine; and if the nose be free and fluid flow into the throat from it, then know that he is cured.	0.8812916
However, if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then know that there is flesh growing in the upper bones of the nose, where the instrument cannot reach with incision.	But if fluid does not pass through it as it should, you may know that there is a polyp within in the upper part of the ethmoid bone where the instrument could not reach to make incision.	0.77266484
Then you should insert a linen thread of moderate thickness with multiple knots spaced about a finger's width apart. The patient should inhale in a way that allows one end of the thread to enter his nose using a rod or whatever tool is feasible, as long as it resembles a hook. The patient should continue inhaling until the thread reaches the back of the throat and exits near the throat.	In this case you must take a linen thread, rather thick, and tie many knots in it with a space of a finger's breadth or less between each pair of knots; and let the patient try to get one end of the thread into his nose with a probe or anything he can, after making it into the form of a button; and let him make a full inspiration till it reaches the cartilage and comes out through the throat.	0.8321349
Many times, young students accomplish similar things with small objects in schools, so this is an easy task for someone willing.	Boys at school often do this sort of thing, and it is quite easy for anyone who wishes.	0.7398976
Next, place both ends of the thread—one that comes out over the nose and the other that remains in the nose. Then administer the cutting of flesh with the knots along the thread. Do this until you know that the flesh is held by the knots of the thread.	Then hold together the two ends of the thread, one coming out through the mouth and the other remaining in the nose; then saw off the polyps by means of the knots in the thread ; continue doing this till you are sure that the growth has been cut off by the knotted thread.	0.85478157
Then remove the thread and place in the nose, after the blood is wiped away, a piece of cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment. Do this for three days or more, until the ointment erodes all remaining flesh.	Then take out the thread and, after wiping away the blood, put into the nose a plug dipped in Egyptian ointment. Do this for three days or longer till the ointment has consumed the remnants of the polyp.	0.9328015
Then, as the final step, place a lead tube in the nose for several days until it heals.	Then, last of all, insert a lead tube in the nose for a few days till healed.	0.9165215
If a drying treatment is needed, apply it.	If he need treatment with drying medicaments, use them.	0.7956227
For head-cleansing, to distill oils and other medicines into the nose, make a tool from silver or copper resembling a small lamp, open like a shell, with similar passageways.	This is the figure of the instrument for instillation by which oil or medicines are dropped into the nose. It should be made of silver or bronze like a small lamp, its oil-container open, and with its channel likewise.	0.63912094
And if you wish, make a closed tube, like a reed.	If you like you may make its spout closed like a reed; and the oil-container of the instrument can be made covered over.	0.5503286
And let the shell of the head-cleansing instrument be full and open, with a handle at the back, so that you may hold it when you heat oil or whatever juices or flowing substances you wish in it.	It has a handle at the end, as you see, to hold it when heating the oil or whatever juice or other liquid you wish.	0.6119436

chapter-2-subchapter-25.txt
Chapter 25.	CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE.	0.64279366
Often a small tumor (*thelul*) grows at the tip of the nose, enlarges, and increases over time, eventually becoming unsightly.	On warts growing on the end of the nose. There frequently spring from the end of the nose warts that grow and increase daily till they disfigure the man.	0.44049078
For this reason, you should cut it as soon as it appears and completely remove it from the root. Then apply either cautery or a burning medicine to the area to heal it.	So you should cut them out when they first appear; totally eradicate them and apply to the place cauterization, either actual or by caustic.	0.68541867
If the incision is delayed until it enlarges, then consider if it is stony, hard, dark-colored, and with little sensation. In this case, do not touch it with iron, as it is a cancerous tumor.	But if excision of them has been overlooked till they have grown big, then examine, and if the growth is stone-like, hard, and pale in colour, and with little sensation, do not interfere with it with an instrument, for it is a cancerous tumour.	0.77260953
I have often seen cases where one cuts such a cancerous tumor, leading to great harm to the person who has it.	For I have often seen people cut these tumours, and great affliction resulted to the sufferer.	0.7914142
If the tumor is soft to the touch, not dark-colored, and you see that a complete incision is possible, then drain the patient and cut it without fear or worry. Treat the area with drying and astringent remedies until it heals.	But if the tumour be soft to the touch, not pale coloured, and you see it can be wholly removed, then purge the patient, and cut it off him fearlessly, and treat the place with astringents and styptics till healed.	0.8685012

chapter-2-subchapter-26.txt
On the suturing of the nose, lip, and ear.	On suture of nose, lip, and ear, when there is discontinuity from a wound or the like.	0.6719804
Be aware that when a separation occurs in the continuity of one of these cartilages, treatment is only sometimes effective, depending on the person.	You should know that when discontinuity occurs in one of these cartilages, treatment of them rarely does any good, except in a few people.	0.8017541
Therefore, when an injury like this occurs, assess whether it is a fresh wound with blood present. If so, bring the two edges of the wound together with a suture, and then treat it until it heals.	When such a thing happens to anyone, look carefully, and if the wound be fresh and bleeding, bring the edges of the wound together with a suture, and dress them till they are healed.	0.67612326
If the edges of the wound have already separated and each part has healed, you must abrade each side until it bleeds. Then bring the two edges together with a suture, tighten them, and sprinkle ground dragon’s blood and frankincense onto the wound. Apply a piece of diafinicon plaster or another healing plaster over the powders, and leave it bound for two or three days. Then unbind it and change the medicine; leave it until the stitches fall out on their own. Finally, treat it with ointment until it heals.	If the discontinuity has separated the edges, and both edges have healed, it is necessary to scrape both edges on the external skin till they bleed; then bring the edges together with a suture and dust over it dragon's blood and olibanum; and put over the powder a plaster of Palm ointment or some other of the regenerative ointments, and leave bandaged for two or three days; then unbandage and change the medicine, and let the sutures come away of themselves; and afterward dress with ointment till healed.	0.8905261
The method of suturing is to bring the parts together either with needles, as we described in suturing the abdomen, or with thread, as I have taught you.	Now the manner of suturing is to close the discontinuity, either with a needle, as we describe for suture of the belly, or with a thread as we tell you there.	0.76460445

chapter-2-subchapter-27.txt
On the extraction of nodules from the lips.	On the extraction of nodules occurring on the lip.	0.88085353
Many people develop hard nodules within their lips that resemble small herb seeds, with some larger and others smaller.	A good many people sometimes get little hard swellings inside their lips, some resembling the vetch grain; some larger, some smaller.	0.8252903
You must turn the lip inside out, cut over each nodule, suspend it with a hook, and cut it from all sides.	You should invert the lip, incise all along each nodule, catch it up with a hook, and cut it away all round.	0.90820026
Then fill the incision site with ground alum until the bleeding stops.	Then after incising rub pounded vitriol into the places until the bleeding stops.	0.715399
Afterward, rinse with vinegar and treat the area with a styptic until the wounds heal.	Then let him rinse with vinegar and salt, and dress the place with styptic drugs till the wounds heal.	0.8272842

chapter-2-subchapter-28.txt
On the incision of flesh growing on the gums.	On the excision of superfluous growths on the gum.	0.7878295
Often a fleshy growth, called *abuluss* by the ancients, appears on the gums.	There often grows on the gum superfluous flesh which the Ancients call 'epulis'.	0.77183783
You should suspend it with a hook or hold it with forceps, cut it at its root, and allow pus or blood to flow.	You should take it up with a hook or grasp it with forceps and cut it at its root and let the pus or blood flow out.	0.92861986
Then apply ground alum or other styptic, drying powders to the area.	Then put on the place either pounded vitriol or one of the absorbent styptic powders.	0.7078918
If the growth returns after treatment, as it often does, then cut it again and cauterize it, for it will not return after cauterization.	And if the growth returns after treatment—for they often return—excise a second time and cauterize; it will not come back after cauterization.	0.84580946

chapter-2-subchapter-29.txt
On the scraping of teeth with iron.	On scraping the teeth with an iron instrument.	0.86733496
Sometimes rough, unsightly crusts accumulate on the surfaces of teeth, both on the inner and outer parts, and between the gums. The teeth may become dark, yellow, or green, and this decay can spread to the gums, making the teeth unsightly.	Sometimes there collect upon the inner and outer surface of the teeth and also between the gums, rough scales, ugly, sometimes black or yellow or green, from which corruption is communicated to the gums and thus the teeth become unsightly.	0.89561874
You should have the patient sit between your hands with his head in your lap and scrape the molars and any other teeth where you see crusts or sand-like substances until nothing remains. Do the same for the discoloration—black, green, yellow, and others—until the teeth are clean.	The patient should sit before you, putting his head in your lap; and you should scrape the teeth or molars on which you can discern crusts or gritty substance, till nothing remains; do them all in the like manner, black, green, yellow, and the rest, until they are all gone.	0.87778276
If you remove what is there on the first scraping, that is good. If not, repeat the scraping on another day, a second time and a third, until you achieve the desired result.	If they disappear at the first scraping, good; but if not repeat the scraping on the following day and the second and third until you attain your purpose.	0.8335798
Be aware that teeth require scrapers of various forms and shapes, according to the needs of your work. For instance, the scraper used for the lower part of a tooth differs from that used between teeth, in other forms.	You should know that molars need scraping-tools of many diverse forms and shapes according to the character of your undertaking; for the tool with which the inner surface of the teeth is scraped differs from the tool with which the outer surface is scraped; and that for scraping between the teeth is different again.	0.78817123
And you should have these forms of scrapers prepared and ready, as you can observe.	Here is a number of scrapers, all of which you will have ready by you	0.43122703

chapter-2-subchapter-30.txt
On the Extraction of Tooth Pain.	On the extraction of teeth.	0.77052057
You must treat a painful tooth with every possible means and delay its extraction if possible. Nothing truly substitutes for a tooth once it is extracted, as it is an exalted substance. Therefore, only when there is no alternative should extraction be considered. In that case, confirm thoroughly with the patient that the aching tooth itself is the one requiring extraction.	You should treat toothache with every device and be reluctant to extract; nothing can replace the tooth when it is extracted, for it is a noble substance—until there is no means of avoiding extraction.	0.8249519
Often, pain can deceive the patient, who may mistakenly believe the pain is in a healthy tooth and has it extracted, only for the pain to persist until the actual diseased tooth is removed.	When the patient is determined to have it out, act with deliberation till you are sure which is the painful tooth; for often the pain deceives the patient and he thinks the pain is in a tooth that is sound, so he has that one extracted; but the pain does not abate until the diseased tooth is removed.	0.716529
We have seen this occur frequently in the work of inexperienced phlebotomists.	We have frequently seen this happen in the practice of the barber-surgeons.	0.7674254
Once you have confirmed the aching tooth, it is necessary to scarify around it with a pointed tool possessing adequate strength until the gum loosens completely. Then, gradually move the tooth with your fingers or with fine forceps until you sufficiently shake it.	When you are quite sure which is actually the painful tooth you should cut away all round the tooth with a scalpel having a certain measure of strength, until the gum is separated all round.	0.73355234
Next, position large forceps correctly on the tooth, and place the patient’s head firmly between your knees to hold it steady. Then, pull the tooth straight out to avoid breaking it.	Then, with your fingers, or with a pair of fine forceps, first move the tooth slowly and gently till you stir it; then get a good grip on it with a pair of large forceps, holding the patient's head between your knees so that it does not move. Then draw the tooth straight out so as not to splinter it.	0.76955724
If the tooth does not come out, take one of your tools and gently insert it beneath the tooth on all sides, moving it as you did initially.	And if it will not come out, then take one of these following instruments and gradually introduce it beneath the tooth all round; then try to move it as you did before.	0.8272604
If the tooth is perforated or decayed, you should fill the cavity with a piece of cloth, then secure it with the end of a thin rod to prevent it from breaking when you grip it with forceps.	If the tooth has a hole in it or is decayed, you should plug the hole with a rag, forcing it in with the tip of a fine probe so that it will not break when you grip it with the forceps.	0.88545704
Be diligent in scarifying around the gum on all sides.	You must completely scarify all round the gum.	0.6402126
Control your strength to avoid breaking the tooth and leaving part of it, which could result in complications worse than the initial pain.	Take the utmost care not to splinter the tooth lest a piece should remain behind and arouse the patient's ills afresh, causing greater pain than before.	0.7279008
Be cautious not to act like inexperienced phlebotomists, who in their haste and boldness during extractions, ignore the guidance we have provided.	Take care not to do those things that the ignorant barber-surgeons do in their rashness and haste in dental extraction, neglecting to employ the methods we describe.	0.7066582
For, as we have often observed, they cause patients serious harm, breaking the tooth and leaving its roots or even pulling part of the jawbone.	For they often bring great troubles upon people, the least of which is to break the tooth off short, leaving the whole or part of the root behind; or to remove the tooth together with a piece of the jaw bone, as I have often seen.	0.74511445
After extraction, rinse the site with wine or with vinegar and salt.	Then after the extraction let the patient rinse with wine or vinegar and salt.	0.8387935
If bleeding occurs at the site (which often happens), grind some alum and apply it to the area. If alum is ineffective, cauterize it.	If there occur haemorrhage from the place—a common occurrence—then pound up a little vitriol and stuff the place with it. If the vitriol does not avail, cauterize.	0.77306104
The fine forceps for initially loosening the tooth should have long ends and a short, thick handle, so they do not bend under pressure. The handles should be strong enough to avoid bending or folding when gripped. They should have short, straight ends made from high-quality iron or sturdy steel, with interlocking teeth at the tips for a firm, even grip.	The shape of the fine forceps with which you first move the tooth should be with long jaws and a short handle, thick, lest they bend when you take hold of the tooth.	0.74082625
Sometimes the ends are shaped like the beak of a bird called the stork, providing a very strong grip.	Sometimes the jaws are made like a file, also to give a strong grip.	0.71118927

chapter-2-subchapter-31.txt
On Tooth Extraction and Removal of Fractured Jaw Bones.	On the extraction of roots and of broken pieces of mandible.	0.6800303
If a part of the tooth breaks and remains after extraction, place a poultice with butter on the site for one or two days until it softens. Then, insert a tool, such as an algast or forceps, whose tips resemble the beak of a bird known as the stork. This is the form of the forceps.	When, in extracting a tooth, a broken-off root remains behind, you should apply to the place cotton wool soaked in butter for one or two days to soften it; then insert the tongs or forceps with stork-bill jaws; this is the figure of the forceps.	0.7284863
The tips should have an inner surface like a file or like aliskilfegi (a type of file or rough surface).	The point should be made like a file or rasp on the inside.	0.56540203
If the tooth does not respond and come out with these forceps, then you must carefully work around the root, exposing all surrounding tissue, and insert an instrument known as the “small lever,” which has this form.	If it does not respond to your attempt to extract it with these forceps, you must dig down over the root and remove all the flesh, and then insert the instrument that resembles a small crowbar; this is its figure.	0.71653295
It should have a short, somewhat thick end and should not be too fine, to avoid breaking.	It has a short rather thick extremity, and should not be tempered lest it fracture.	0.8527267
If the root comes out this way, that is ideal. If not, use other tools, which have the following shapes.	If the root comes out, good; if not, get assistance from the other instruments figured here.	0.77050966
The first instrument has a triangular tip with some thickness.	First, with a triangular point, somewhat stout.	0.70470655
Another is a triangular but finer tip.	Another, triangular and slender.	0.7298889
These tools, along with those previously described for tooth scraping, can be of great assistance.	Sometimes also we get help from this forked instrument and beside this, from other instruments and appliances mentioned above under scraping of teeth.	0.53358614
A further helpful tool resembles a large hook with a twisted, triangular tip of substantial thickness to prevent breakage; it should not be too fine.	Sometimes also recourse may be had to this instrument resembling a large hook, figured thus. The hooked extremity is triangular in section, of some thickness lest it break, not tempered.	0.74717736
Know that there are many dental instruments, and countless other tools as well. A skilled practitioner, clever in their craft, often discovers suitable tools themselves based on the needs of the operation and the specific ailments.	You should know that dental instruments are very numerous, as are the other instruments, almost beyond reckoning. And the experienced worker with a knowledge of his craft may devise fresh instruments according as his work on actual cases suggests them to him.	0.79123247
There are some conditions for which the ancients did not provide specific instruments due to the varied nature of such cases.	For there are certain diseases for which the Ancients did not mention any instruments, on account of the variety of them.	0.6926658
If a jaw bone or another bone of the mouth fractures or decays, carefully explore the area with the appropriate instruments and forceps mentioned for root extraction, and use a tool called “gesti,” shaped as follows.	Now if the mandible or one of the bones of the mouth be broken or decayed, explore the site with some instrument that is suitable for it, namely one of the instruments or forceps mentioned for extraction of roots. We also make use of forceps of this form.	0.76788414
The “gesti” should gradually narrow, allowing a firm grip on the bone so it does not slip or move, ensuring complete removal. Then, treat the area with suitable medications.	They are fairly thick, to grip the bone firmly lest it slip before the bone has been got out. Then cicatrize the place with suitable drugs.	0.5839362
If there is minor decay in the bone, scrape away the rot and treat the bone until it heals.	If the bone is only slightly decayed, scrape it clean of its decay and blackness, then dress till healed.	0.72871125

chapter-2-subchapter-32.txt
On Filing Teeth that Protrude Over Others.	On the sawing-down of teeth growing on top of others.	0.7547344
When teeth protrude unnaturally, they mar the appearance, especially in women and girls, particularly those who are in public view.	When teeth grow in other than their natural place the appearance is very bad, specially when it occurs in women or slaves.	0.75988406
Thus, you must consider the approach carefully. If a tooth has emerged behind another and is misaligned, such that neither filing nor grinding is possible, then extract it. If it is attached to another tooth, cut it using this instrument, which has the following shape.	So you should examine; if the tooth has grown out behind another tooth and it is impossible either to saw or file it down, then extract it. But if it be attached to another tooth, cut it down with an instrument of this kind.	0.83671385
It resembles a small beak and is made from Indian iron, with a very sharp tip.	It resembles a small chisel and should be of Indian steel with a well-sharpened end.	0.8482369
Make this cut gradually over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, ensuring it does not disturb adjacent teeth.	You should spread your cutting with it over several days on account of the hardness of the tooth and so as to leave the others undisturbed.	0.6847196
If the protruding tooth can be filed down, use an iron file, shaped as follows.	If the tooth projects in such a way as to make filing possible, use a file of Indian iron, shaped like this.	0.73332703
The file should be entirely of iron, with a handle covered in small points, similar to a file used for making needles. Gradually file down the tooth over several days, working gently to avoid loosening the tooth and causing it to fall out. Finally, smooth the tooth with a fine razor.	It should be wholly manufactured of Indian iron, its handle too, and covered with very fine points to resemble the file used in making needles. You should file the tooth with it very slowly and gently over a period of many days so as not to shift the tooth and cause it to fall out; then finally smooth it and scrape it with one of the scrapers.	0.84687567
If part of a tooth breaks off and injures the tongue, file it down until the roughness is removed, leveling and smoothing it so it no longer harms the tongue or impedes speech.	If it be a tooth of which part has broken off and it hurts the tongue in speaking, file it down till you have disposed of the roughness of the break and the tooth is smooth and neither injures the tongue nor hinders speech.	0.88807434

chapter-2-subchapter-33.txt
On Stabilizing Loose Teeth with Gold Wire.	On interlacing loose teeth with silver or gold wire.	0.6972335
When the front teeth are shaken or loosened due to an impact or fall, and the patient cannot bite down properly without risking tooth loss, and you have attempted to treat them with astringent medications without success, the best approach is to stabilize the teeth using gold wire. This is because silver turns green and corrodes over time, while gold remains unchanged.	When the front teeth are loosened by some blow or fall and the patient cannot bite upon what he is eating lest they fall out, and you have without avail treated them with styptic medicines, the technique in this case is to bind the teeth with gold or silver wire. Gold is the better, for silver oxidizes and corrodes after some days, but gold remains for ever in its state and does not suffer this change.	0.8876565
The wire should be of moderate thickness and fineness, appropriate to fit securely between the teeth.	The wire should be moderate in thickness in accordance with the distance between the teeth.	0.81153184
The procedure for stabilization involves taking the wire, doubling it, and threading it between two healthy teeth. Then, weave the two ends of the wire between the loose teeth—whether one or multiple—until you reach a healthy tooth on the other side. Next, weave the wire back to where you started, tightening it with precision and skill until the loose teeth are entirely stable. The constriction should be close to the roots to prevent movement.	The method is to take the wire and run it doubled between two sound teeth; then with the two ends of the wire you weave between the loose teeth, either one or several, until you bring your weaving to a sound tooth on the other side; then you repeat your weaving back to the side whence you began; tighten it gently and judiciously till they do not move at all. You should tie the wire at the root of the teeth lest it slip.	0.89000547
Cut off the excess ends of the wire with scissors, twist the two ends together with forceps, and conceal them between a healthy tooth and a loose one to avoid irritating the tongue. Then leave it in place until the teeth are secure.	Then with the scissors cut off the two ends of the wire remaining over, and bring them together and twist them with forceps and hide them between a sound tooth and a loose tooth so as to not injure the tongue; then for the future leave them thus bound.	0.8548813
If the wire loosens or breaks, replace it with a new one, and it will hold in place over time.	But if it comes undone or breaks, bind them with another wire; so may he have the use of them all his life.	0.62368953
This is the form and arrangement of the teeth in stabilizing two healthy teeth and two loose teeth, as shown.	This is a figure of the teeth and the manner of interlacing two sound and two loose teeth, as you see.	0.77323836
Sometimes, one or two teeth can return to their original positions after such stabilization and will stay in place, but only a skilled and experienced practitioner can accomplish this.	After one or two teeth have fallen out they may be restored to their place and bound in as instructed, and become permanent. This can be done only by an expert and gentle practitioner.	0.7843762
In some cases, a piece of cow bone may be shaped like a tooth and placed in the gap, securing the tooth as described. This placement is stable and can last a long time.	Sometimes a piece of ox-bone may be carved and made into the shape of a tooth, and placed in the site where a tooth was lost, and fastened as we have said, and it will last and he will get long service from it.	0.79987794

chapter-2-subchapter-34.txt
Chapter 34.	CHAPTER THIRTY-FOUR.	0.7029139
Occasionally, the lingual frenulum (the tissue under the tongue) may either be a congenital condition with which a person is born or arise from a wound that has healed improperly.	On incising the ligament below the tongue which is an impediment to speech. Sometimes this ligament that occurs under the tongue is natural and congenital; or it may be accidental, owing to scarring from an injury.	0.7255553
The procedure involves opening the patient’s mouth with their head resting against your chest, lifting the tongue, and then cutting across the fibrous frenulum until the tongue is freed from its restriction.	The operation for it is to open the patient's mouth, having his head in your lap, and lift his tongue; then cut that sinew-like ligament transversely till the tongue is freed from its hold.	0.8065785
If there is a hardening or nodule caused by scar tissue, insert a small hook and cut across it until the frenulum is divided and the nodule released.	If it is hard and nodular, arising from scarring after an injury, catch it with a hook and slit it transversely until the ligament is severed and the knots undone.	0.62695485
Be careful not to cut too deeply into the tissue to avoid severing an artery, which would result in heavy bleeding.	Beware of making the incision deeply into the flesh, or you may cut an artery there and haemorrhage may occur.	0.8008481
Rinse the incision site with rose water, vinegar, or cold water.	After the cutting, let him rinse with rose-water or vinegar and cold water.	0.6689053
Place a small piece of linen under the tongue, which the patient should hold there each night to prevent reattachment.	Then put under the tongue a pad of linen, which the patient must keep in position at night to prevent the adhesion from forming again.	0.8027055
If the bleeding persists, cauterize the area with a suitable gentle cautery. Then treat the wound with appropriate care until it heals.	If there should be haemorrhage, put pounded vitriol on the place; and if bleeding still prevails burn the spot with a lenticular cautery of suitable size and treat in the usual way till healed.	0.7188989

chapter-2-subchapter-35.txt
Chapter 35.	CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE.	0.6809056
Sometimes, a cyst resembling a small frog (called a *ranula*) forms beneath the tongue, hindering its natural movement and potentially enlarging enough to fill the mouth.	On the removal of 'ranula' beneath the tongue. Sometimes there occurs under the tongue a swelling resembling a small frog, which hinders the natural movements of the tongue; sometimes it grows so as even to fill the mouth.	0.79534733
The procedure requires opening the patient's mouth in good light to examine the cyst.	The operation for it is to open the patient's mouth in the full light of the sun and inspect the tumour.	0.73051983
If it appears dark brown or black, hard, and lacks sensation, do not touch it, as this could indicate cancer.	If you see that it is dark or black, and hard, and the patient has no sensation in it, do not interfere with it, for it is a cancer.	0.82108665
However, if it appears whitish and moist, insert a hook and incise it with a fine scalpel, freeing it from all sides. If bleeding interferes with the procedure, apply powdered *zegi* to control it. Then resume the operation until the cyst is fully removed.	But if it is inclined to be pale and has fluid in it, put a hook in it and incise it with a fine scalpel and free it all round; and if haemorrhage hinders you while operating apply pounded vitriol to it till the bleeding stops.	0.73159814
Afterward, rinse with vinegar and salt, and continue treatment with appropriate aftercare until it heals completely.	Then proceed with your work till all is extracted; then let him rinse his mouth out with vinegar and salt. Then give all the suitable treatment till healed.	0.7623155

chapter-2-subchapter-36.txt
Chapter 36.	CHAPTER THIRTY-six.	0.7128442
Sometimes swellings occur between the throat, that is, the glands, which resemble almonds, which happen externally: and they are called the two tonsils: when you treat them with what we mentioned in the division, and they do not heal, then consider.	Sometimes there occur in the throat buboes called 'tonsils', which resemble the buboes occurring externally.	0.6042522
If, therefore, the abscess is hard, of a dark color, with little sensation: then do not touch it with iron.	When you have employed the remedies described in their own place, without effect, examine, and if the tumour be hard, dark coloured, and devoid of sensation, do not touch it with an instrument.	0.5033688
And if it is red in color, and its root is thick: then do not touch it with iron either, fearing a flow of blood, rather leave it until it matures. And then you will either pierce it, or it will rupture on its own.	If it be of a red colour, with a thick root, do not touch this with an instrument either, for fear of a haemorrhage; but let it be till it come to a head; then you may perforate it or let it burst of its own accord.	0.8184314
And if it is white in color, round, and its root is thin: then it is necessary to incise it.	But if it be pale coloured, round, with a slender pedicle, this is the kind that should be cut.	0.6229413
And the procedure for it is, that you consider before the operation, if its abscess has quietly completed its warm inflammation, or if it has decreased to a certain extent: then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his head should rest in your lap: open his mouth, and let an assistant hold it between his hands, and press down his tongue with an instrument, which has this shape.	The operation for this is first to see, before operating, whether his inflamed tumour has already completely subsided or to some extent diminished. Then make the patient sit down in the full light of the sun with his head in your lap; open his mouth; and have an assistant before you to press back the tongue with an instrument like this.	0.7810483
Let it be made of silver or bronze, and be thin like a small knife.	It should be made of bronze or silver, and slender like a knife.	0.84779656
Then, when you press the tongue down with it, and the abscess is revealed to you, and your gaze falls upon it: then take a hook, and fix it into the tonsil, and pull it outward as much as you can, without pulling with it any of the membranes.	And when the tongue is depressed with its help, the tumour will be made manifest to you and your direct vision will fall upon it. Then take a hook and fix it in one tonsil and pull it forward as far as it will go; but be careful to not pull away with it any of the mucosa.	0.776734
Then cut it with an instrument, which has the following shape. It resembles scissors: however, the ends of it should be curved, so that the opening of each is directly sharp towards the other: take care that it is made of Indian steel, or imbued with alfuled.	Then cut it with an instrument of this form; it is like scissors except that its extremities are curved, the beak of each meeting the other, and very sharp. It should be made of Indian iron or Damascene steel.	0.8193767
If, however, this instrument is not present, then cut it with a spatumil, which has this shape. It should be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.	If you have not this kind of instrument, cut it with a scalpel of this form, on the one side sharp, on the other quite blunt.	0.74701536
And after you cut one tonsil, cut the other according to this same kind of incision.	And when one tonsil has been cut away, remove the other in exactly the same manner.	0.82900053
Then after the incision, let the patient gargle with cold water, or with vinegar and water.	Then after the excision let the patient gargle with cold water or vinegar and water.	0.969098
If, however, there occurs a flow of blood, let him gargle with water in which pomegranate rinds have been boiled, or myrtle leaves, and similar astringents, until the flow of blood stops: then treat it until it heals.	But if there occur a haemorrhage let him gargle with water in which have been boiled pomegranate peel or myrtle leaves or similar styptics till the haemorrhage is stanched; then treat till healed.	0.90268177
And sometimes other abscesses arise in the throat, besides the two tonsils. Therefore cut them according to what I said in the incision of the two tonsils equally.	Sometimes there grow in the fauces tumours other than the tonsils; remove them just as described for tonsils.	0.65228254
And I indeed once treated a woman with an abscess, which had arisen between her throat, which had taken on a dark color, with little sensation, which had almost closed her throat: and the woman breathed with difficulty through a narrow passage, and it had already prevented her from eating and drinking water: and she had already reached the point of death, if she had remained one or two more days.	I once treated a woman for a tumour that had grown in her throat and was rather dark in colour and had little sensation. It had almost blocked the throat and the woman had only a narrow opening to breathe through, and was quite prevented from eating or drinking, so that she was at death's door, if she had so remained for a day or two.	0.8471317
And the abscess had grown so much that it had sent out two branches, which extended over the two nostrils.	From the tumour there arose two offshoots, which had eventually emerged through the nostrils.	0.5414404
So I hurried quickly, and fixed a hook into one of them. Then I pulled it, and a large portion was extracted from it.	So I made the utmost haste and, fixing a hook in one of them, drew it forward, and out came a sizeable piece.	0.886971
Then I cut it off, where it extended from the nasal cavity.	Then I cut it off where I had hold of it near the nostril.	0.7901133
Then I did the same for the one that extended from the other nostril.	Then I did the same with the one projecting from the other nostril.	0.88876504
Then I opened her mouth, pressed down her tongue: and then I fixed the hook into the abscess: then I cut a portion from it, and only a little blood flowed: the woman’s throat was thus freed, and she immediately began to drink water, and then took some food.	Then I opened her mouth and depressed the tongue; then fastened the hook in the tumour itself and cut off a part of it, with only a little haemorrhage; and the woman's pharynx was freed and immediately she had a drink of water, then took some food.	0.9167165
Therefore, I did not cease cutting from that abscess many times over a long period: and the abscess kept returning in the place where I had incised it, until it became very extended with her.	And from time to time, for long after, I continued to cut away this tumour. But fresh growth continually replaced what was excised till we both grew weary of it.	0.65827835
So I took a risk, and cauterized the abscess within the throat.	Then I went about it astutely and cauterized the tumour high up in the throat, and it stopped growing.	0.5595338
Then it ceased to increase: then I departed, and I did not know what God did with her after me.	Then the woman left the district and I do not know what God has done with her since I had charge of her.	0.659279

chapter-2-subchapter-37.txt
Chapter 37.	CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN.	0.6447326
When phlegm descends to the uvula, and it becomes swollen, and is elongated, then it is called a pendant: and if it is thick and round at the lower part, then it is called a grape.	When a flux descends to the uvula and it swells and the uvula becomes white and elongated, then it is called 'columella*. And if it should be swollen below and rounded then it is called 'uva'.	0.7707167
When it is treated with what we mentioned in the division, and the treatment is not effective, and you see that the warm abscess has subsided from it, and it is thin: then it is necessary to incise it.	When it has been treated as mentioned in its section, and the treatment is unavailing, and you see the inflamed tumour subsiding and the uvula becoming thin, you should amputate it.	0.7695688
And if it is gathered, round, without length, and is reddish, dark, or black, and has no sensation: then it is necessary to avoid its incision. For in this there is a risk to the patient.	Now those of them that are bunched up and rounded and not elongated, full of blood, or of a dark colour or black, and without sensation, these you should avoid incising; for this course is dangerous for the patient.	0.74206966
Therefore, when you see it as I have described in whiteness and length, you should make the patient sit facing the sun: press down his tongue with the instrument previously described: then fix a hook in the uvula, pull it downward, and cut it with one of the two instruments I mentioned for the incision of the two tonsils.	But when you see them as I have described, somewhat pale and elongated, get the patient to sit in the sunlight and depress his tongue with the instrument described above; then take hold of the uva with a hook and draw it down and cut it off with one of the two instruments described for excision of the tonsils.	0.7950847
And you should not cut from it except that which exceeds the natural boundary without excess.	You should not cut away more than up to the natural limit.	0.75099725
For if you cut more than that, you will harm the voice and speech.	For if you cut more off you cause injury to the voice and speech.	0.9444283
Then after the incision, use what we mentioned in the incision of the two tonsils: and treat it until it heals.	Then, after excising, carry on the treatment on the lines described under removal of the tonsils, and treat till healed.	0.6544908
But if the patient is frightened of the incision: then it is necessary to use ingenuity in cauterizing it without fear or dread.	But if the patient flinch from operation, then you must contrive to cauterize it, fearlessly and boldly.	0.72474
And the method of cauterization in it is only with sharp water: which is done by placing the patient’s head in your lap. Then press down his tongue with the instrument we mentioned. Then take from the water I mentioned to you in the chapter on cauterization, and prepare with it unslaked lime, and apply it in a way that is not thick nor thin, and fill the hollow of this instrument, whose shape is as follows.	The method is to employ a caustic; you put the patient's head in your lap; then, having depressed the tongue with the instrument described above, take some of the corrosive fluid mentioned in the book on cauterization, make it up with quicklime to a medium consistency, and fill with it the hollow in this instrument, whose form is thus.	0.7986324
Let the end where the medicine is placed be concave, like the concavity of a spoon’s ray.	The end of it where you put the caustic should have a hollow like that of the spoon of a spoonprobe.	0.7246518
And place the instrument with the medicine over the uvula itself: and let the patient lie on his side, so that saliva runs from his mouth due to the internal medicine, so that nothing descends from it to his throat and harms it.	With the patient lying on his side, letting the mucous secretions flow from his gullet out of his mouth so that none of the corrosive may run down his gullet and cause harm, you place the instrument right on the uvula.	0.7572365
Then hold your hand with the medicine. And you should apply it to the uvula for about half an hour, until you see it has turned dark, and the sting of the medicine has subsided.	Then, steadying the hand that is holding the medicament, press it out on to the uvula for the space of half an hour until you see the uvula turn black and the corrosive action cease.	0.8703909
And if you wish, you may take a piece of cotton, wrap it around the tip of a probe, soak the cotton in the medicine, and insert the probe with the cotton into a tube from above, until the cotton adheres to the uvula.	If you wish, you can take some cotton wool twisted on the end of a probe, and, having soaked it in the caustic, apply the probe with the wool, down through a cannula till the wool sticks on the uvula.	0.82173586
Do this many times, until you achieve the desired cauterization of the uvula. Then leave it: for it will dry out and fall off after three or four days.	Do this over and over again till you have done all the cauterization you want, then let be; for it will shrink and fall off in three or four days.	0.80854857
If you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it: and after the cauterization, wipe around the uvula with cotton soaked in butter, and clean with it what is around it from the medicine: and rinse with cold water.	If you need to repeat the treatment, do so. After the cauterization, wipe all round the uvula with wool soaked in butter, and with that mop up all the caustic remaining round about it.	0.77910125
And treat externally with poultices, and internally with gargles, until it heals.	Then let him rinse his mouth out with cold water and do you treat with external embrocations, and gargles within, till he is well.	0.6408793
This method of treatment is therefore safer than incision and more distant from fear.	This kind of treatment is safer than incision and less to be feared.	0.8757652
And sometimes the uvula is treated with something even gentler than cauterization and incision: it is treated with fumigation, in this manner. Take calamint, hyssop, oregano, rue, sseah, chamomile, southernwood, and similar herbs: and combine them all, or some of them in a pot, and submerge them in vinegar, and let them boil: and let the pot be sealed properly with clay: and in the middle of the pot, let there be an opening, over which is placed a hollow instrument in this manner.	Sometimes uva is cured by a method milder than either incision or cautery, namely by means of vapour in the following manner: take pennyroyal and artemisia absinthium and organy and rue and wormwood and chamomile and southernwood and similar herbs and put them all, or some of them, in a pot, cover them with vinegar, and boil them.	0.7833252
Let it be made of silver or bronze: and let the end, which has a perforation, be inserted into the patient’s mouth, until the vapor rises to the uvula over the tube, until the uvula becomes very discolored.	The pot should be luted with clay; and there is to be a hole in the middle of the lid to which is fitted a hollow instrument like this, made of silver or bronze, and the end in which is the protuberance should be put in the patient's mouth so that the vapour passes up the tube to the uvula, which becomes of a very dark colour.	0.7306423
Then repeat over it many times, until it dries out.	Do this repeatedly till it sloughs away.	0.72257614
And beware, do not perform this treatment at the onset of the abscess. For often it will increase the abscess: and you should not do it unless at the decline of its hot abscess.	Be careful not to apply this treatment at the first appearance of the tumour, for often you will aggravate the tumour; but you should do it at the decline of the inflammation.	0.7265606
If, however, you do not have this instrument at hand, then take a reed and place an eggshell at its end, so that the patient's mouth is not burned, for the eggshell prevents the vapor from burning the mouth, and this is a good treatment for healing.	If you do not have this instrument, take a reed and fit an egg-shell on the end so that the patient's mouth is not burned; for the egg-shell will prevent the heat of the vapour from burning the mouth. This is a really good and safe treatment.	0.8982508

chapter-2-subchapter-38.txt
Chapter 38.	CHAPTER THIRTY-EIGHT.	0.6639213
Often, a bone, a fish spine, or something else adheres in the throat.	There often sticks in the throat a bone or fish-bone or something else.	0.8918836
Therefore, it is necessary to extract whatever is visible, upon which your sight falls, after pressing the tongue down with an instrument in the sunlight, and it will become clear to you what is in the throat.	After you have depressed the tongue with the instrument in the full light of the sun, so that what is stuck in the throat is made as conspicuous as possible, you should then remove whatever can be seen and comes into view.	0.74517393
And if something does not appear to you and is hidden in the throat, you must induce the patient to vomit before the food is digested in the stomach. For perhaps the attached object will be expelled by vomiting.	But when it is not visible to you, and lies hidden in the throat, you should make the patient vomit before the food in his stomach is digested, for often the object comes out with vomiting.	0.82434773
Or let the patient swallow a piece of turnip, or a lettuce root, or a small morsel of dry bread; or take a piece of soft, dried sea sponge, tie it with a thread, and then let him swallow it. Then, when it reaches the place where the spines or the bone are, it will be extracted and come out.	Or let him swallow a piece of turnip or a heart of lettuce or a morsel of dry bread; or take a marine sponge, dry, and tie it on a thread; then let him swallow the sponge and when it reaches where the sharp body is then quickly pull on the thread.	0.8826928
If it does not come out with what we have mentioned, then use a lead instrument in this shape.	If it does not come out by the methods described, in this case employ an instrument made of lead, thus.	0.80189186
Let it be slightly thicker than a rod, and at its end, let there be a curve, which is easily inserted into the throat, and let the patient keep his head elevated.	It should be a little thicker than a probe, with a crook at its extremity.	0.5011394
And let him avoid touching his epiglottis to prevent coughing, and let him press with it against the bone or spine, or the physician may insert it with his own hand.	The patient himself should introduce it into his own throat gently; he should raise the head backwards and take care not to touch the larynx lest coughing be aroused. And let him remove therewith the bone or sharp body.	0.6524042
But it is better if the patient inserts it himself, since he knows the location of the attached object, and he should push it downward or pull his hand with the instrument upward, in the amount prepared for him, until it is expelled.	Or else let the doctor introduce it with his hand (although it is better if the patient himself introduce it, since he knows the site of the obstruction) and push it down and then draw up his hand with the instrument; all this according to the way it presents itself to him, till it is removed.	0.7582139

chapter-2-subchapter-39.txt
Chapter 39.	CHAPTER THIRTY-NINE.	0.5955684
When a leech is treated with what I mentioned in the section on medicinal treatments and it does not work, then examine the patient's throat in the sunlight, either directly or by sunlight, after pressing his tongue with the instrument I told you about.	When you treat a leech by the medical means spoken of in the appropriate section, with no effect, then inspect the patient's throat in full sunlight after depressing the tongue with the instrument I have described.	0.85906863
If your sight then falls upon the leech, extract it with a small hook or carefully with fine forceps.	If your gaze falls upon the leech, pull it out at once with a small hook or a fine pair of forceps.	0.8906386
If it is not possible with those, then take a hollow tube, insert it into the patient’s throat near the throat, then insert heated iron with fire into the hollow of the tube. Do this repeatedly, and let the patient abstain from water for the whole day.	But if you cannot get hold of it, take a cannula and introduce it into the patient's mouth near the leech, then pass through the cannula a red-hot iron; do this repeatedly; while the patient must not drink at all that day.	0.8347001
Then let him take a glass full of cold water, open his mouth in it, rinse his mouth with it without swallowing any, and move the water with his hand every hour. For the leech will immediately fall when it senses the water.	Then let him take a vessel full of cold water, open his mouth in it and rinse out with it, but let him not swallow a drop of it; and he should keep the movement of the water going by hand time after time; for the leech straightway falls off when it feels the water.	0.87841636
If it still does not come out with what we have mentioned, then fumigate the patient with bedbugs or with asa using the instrument I described for fumigating the uvula.	If it does not come away by these means, fumigate the patient's throat with urine or with the juice of asafoetida, using the instrument described for fumigating the uvula.	0.7983686
Do this repeatedly, for it will fall.	Do this several times, for then it will fall away.	0.8612639
The method for fumigation is to take a pot containing live coals with fire; let the pot be covered with a lid that has a hole in its center, and place the end of the instrument in that hole.	In fumigating, this is the way to set about it: take a pot containing live coals, fitted with a lid and a hole in the middle of the lid into which is fitted the end of the instrument.	0.81063944
Then, let the fumigation enter, and let the patient place his mouth on the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that the fumigation does not escape, until you know that the fumigation has reached the leech. For the leech will immediately fall.	Then put in the aromatic; and the patient should apply his mouth to the end of the cannula, with his mouth closed to prevent the escape of the vapour, until he knows that the vapour has reached his throat; for the leech will at once come away.	0.89853644
If it does not fall, then repeat the fumigation many times.	But if it does not come away, let the inhalation be repeated many times.	0.8079294
And let the patient endure thirst, eat salty food and garlic, and not drink water.	Let the patient endure his thirst, and eat salty food and garlic and drink no water.	0.93574166
It is thus necessary that it be expelled with this treatment.	It will inevitably be removed by this treatment.	0.7470766
And this is the shape of the instrument with which the leech is extracted from the throat, when it comes into view.	This is the figure of an instrument for extracting the leech from the throat when visible.	0.75736076
It is similar to forceps, as you see, except that it has this curve, which is inserted into the throat. And its end is like the beak of the bird called a stork, with a roughness like a file; when it grasps something, it does not let it go at all.	It resembles forceps, as you see, except that it has this bend for entry into the throat; and the two extremities are shaped like a bird's bill, with the roughness of a file. When they have hold of a thing they do not let go.	0.8541957

chapter-2-subchapter-40.txt
Chapter 40.	CHAPTER FORTY.	0.6848998
There are many types of abscesses, of many kinds, as has been remembered here, namely one by one in this book; and they differ in their perforation and incision according to two methods.	The kinds of tumour are many and various, as will be mentioned in order in this book. They differ in the way they are to be perforated or incised, according to two criteria.	0.8263263
One of these is according to the type of abscess itself and what it holds in terms of humors.	One is the kind of tumour it is in itself and the humidities it contains.	0.6891681
And the second method is according to the location in the body where it occurs.	The other is the part of the body where it occurs.	0.63813627
For an abscess occurring in the head is different from an abscess occurring in the anus; and an abscess occurring in a fleshy place is different from an abscess occurring in the joints, and each one of them has its own treatment according to its procedure.	For the tumour occurring in the head is different from the tumour occurring on the posterior, and a tumour occurring in a fleshy part differs from one on the joints; each having its separate category of operation.	0.8550029
And of the abscesses, there are those that should not be perforated until the pus has matured in them and reached completion, and of these, there are those that must be perforated while they are still raw and do not mature fully.	There are some tumours that should not be opened till after the pus in them is matured and ripe.	0.60250556
Like abscesses that are close to the joints.	But others should be opened when still raw and immature, such as a tumour near the joints.	0.4421285
For when an abscess occurs near a joint and is prolonged until the surrounding tissue rots, the ligaments or nerves of that joint may become damaged, which is a cause of contraction in that limb.	For when a tumour occurring near a joint lasts long enough to putrefy its surroundings, it often breaks down the ligaments or the tendons of the joint and causes paralysis in the limb.	0.8551775
Or the abscess is near a principal organ: for if you delay perforation until it matures, it will harm either that organ or the primary member near it.	Or if the tumour be near a major organ, if you delay the opening of it until it ripens you will damage that major organ.	0.80805004
Or if it is near the anus, perforate it while it is immature; it is not necessary to perforate an immature abscess that has not fully digested except when it is near the anus, so that the depth does not rot and extend to the interior of the anus, creating a fistula or leading to a condition that cannot heal.	In the same way, if it be near the anus you must open it, although unripe for opening. The reason why you must open an abscess near the anus while still unripe, before it is brought to a head, is to prevent it from putrefying the cleft and penetrating to the inner part of the anus and becoming a fistula, and incurable.	0.7748792
You should know the proper time for perforating an abscess that has matured fully, which is when pain subsides, fever decreases, and redness, pulsation, and the sharpness of the abscess's head lessen, along with other signs.	It is necessary too to know the time to open fully mature swellings: it is when the pain of the swelling is lessened, the fever departs, the redness and the throbbing are reduced, and the head of the abscess becomes wrinkled, with other signs.	0.8300806
And you must make this perforation at the lower part of the abscess and the area of greatest prominence; and the perforation should follow the length of the body if the abscesses are in the parts of the hands and feet, and in the places of muscles, tendons, nerves, and arteries, and ultimately in all smooth areas without bends.	The perforation should be made in the lower part of the swelling if possible, so that the pus may more easily drain downwards; or else in the thinnest and most swollen part of the swelling. Your incision should be longitudinal if the swellings are in such places as hands or feet or in the site of joints, tendons, nerves, or arteries; and, in short, in all flat places where there is no curvature.	0.81700337
In those that bend, however, make the perforation according to that limb.	In curved places let the perforation proceed according to the place.	0.5828403
But when an abscess is in fleshy places, then it is better to delay its perforation until its digestion is fully confirmed, as we have mentioned.	But when the swelling is in the fleshy parts it is best to leave the perforation, as we have said, until it is fully matured.	0.81822014
For if you perforate it before this, the flow of fluid will prolong, and there will be much filth and discharge, and perhaps its edges and depth will harden.	For if you perforate it prematurely the sanious discharge will go on longer and will be excessively foul; and often both the edges and the depths of the opening will become indurated.	0.8150013
And certain abscesses are perforated across the width of the body as necessary, or according to the needs of the limb.	Some swellings are perforated latitudinally if necessary, or having regard to the requirement of the part.	0.7138908
And you must administer a small perforation in small abscesses and a large perforation in large abscesses, or make multiple incisions proportional to the size of the abscess.	In small swellings you should use a single perforation; while in large ones you should use wide or multiple perforations according to the size of the swelling.	0.7478641
And there are abscesses where the skin must be hollowed out and incised when it has become like a cloth and has reached a stage where it is dead tissue, as often happens with boils and swellings.	There are also some swellings that need a circular incision of the skin, and should be cut when they have become like a rag, and necrosed —which actually happens often in abscesses and sinuses.	0.7182121
And some of them are cut with an incision having three angles. And some are incised in the shape of a myrtle leaf.	And there are some that should be incised triangularly; and others with an incision of myrtle-leaf form; e.g.	0.7985014
And some have a round incision, a crescent incision, and similar types of cuts.	There are others again to which should be applied circular and lunate and similar incisions.	0.6306853
As for those without a head, such as mild, superficial abscesses, you should perforate them with a superficial or flat perforation only.	Those that have no head, such as the smooth and flat ones, should be incised with only a simple perforation.	0.82927006
And it is necessary, when an abscess is large and has collected much pus, and you perforate it, not to rush and extract all the pus at once; rather, extract part of it. Then cover the abscess until the next day. Then draw out some of the pus again.	When a swelling is large and has collected a large quantity of pus, and you perforate it, do not be in a hurry to get it all out at once; but get some of it out and then bandage it till another day; then again remove part of the pus; and so do, again and again, gradually, till it is all got out.	0.92544127
Do this gradually, repeatedly, until it is expelled, especially if the patient is of weak strength, a pregnant woman, a small child, or an elderly person; for the animal spirit often dissipates with the release of pus, and the patient may die without you realizing it.	This particularly applies if the patient be in a weak state, or a pregnant woman, or a baby, or a decrepit old man; for the animal spirit is very often dissolved with the sudden evacuation of the pus, and the patient dies unexpectedly.	0.83393294
Therefore, handle this matter with great caution.	Be very careful therefore, with this sort.	0.8000141
And after your perforation, with which you pierce these abscesses, it is necessary to clean the wound and observe it. If the wound of the abscess is small, or the incision is flat, then apply lint from linen or old cotton. And if the abscess is large and there are many fissures from the perforation, then you must insert lint into each fissure until they meet each other.	Then, after you have opened the tumour, you should cleanse the wound and consider: if the tumour has only a small opening, or it is one simple incision, employ swabs of lint or cotton wool; but if it is a large tumour with multiple incisions, introduce a swab into each incision so that they meet.	0.80658245
And if you have cut away part of the skin from the abscess or hollowed it out around the edges, then it is necessary to fill it with old cotton, or as cloth is woven, or with lint from linen without moisture; and secure it until the third day.	And if the tumour was such that you cut away a part of the skin, or sliced the tumour, you will need to pack it with cotton wool or plucked linen, dry; and bandage until the third day.	0.8815744
Then remove it, and treat it with the appropriate ointment until it heals.	Then remove it and treat with the needful ointments until healed.	0.91628623
If bleeding occurs during your procedure, then apply cold water and vinegar, after soaking a cloth in them, and place it over the site of the bleeding multiple times.	If a haemorrhage occurs while you are operating, use cold water and vinegar, soaking a lint rag in both and frequently applying it to the place.	0.7942138
If the bleeding persists, then you must apply the regimen, treatment, and powders that I have described in many places in this book and in the separate sections.	And if the bleeding still persists then it is necessary to employ the method and the treatment and the powders that we have prescribed in many parts of this book and in their own sections.	0.83929
If it is in winter and the site of the abscess has many nerves, then it is necessary to soak pads with warm wine and oil and place them on the area.	Now if this should be in winter and the site of the tumour abound in nerves, you should have some pads soaked in hot wine and oil and then apply to the place.	0.8951943
And if it is summer and the areas are fleshy, then you should place pads soaked in water and oil, or in wine and oil, and make sure everything is cool. Until, when the third day comes, as we have said, it is then necessary to loosen the abscess, clean it, and administer treatment appropriate to it until it heals.	But if it be in summer and the parts be fleshy, apply the pads soaked in water and oil, or wine and oil, all being cold, till the third day, as we have said. Then unbandage the tumour and wipe it and give it the treatment suitable to it, until cured.	0.9006479
This is what is necessary for knowledge of the general treatment of abscesses.	This is the information you need about the treatment of tumours in general.	0.77486223
Following the path of distinction, I have already described each abscess, how its treatment proceeds step by step individually.	As for the particulars, I now review the way to treat each tumour, by chapters, in detail.	0.72011125

chapter-2-subchapter-41.txt
On the incision of abscesses that occur on the scalp.	On opening superficial tumours of the scalp.	0.69041777
Small abscesses occur on the scalp, and they are of the types of nodes, which are encased in membranes that act as sacs, as if they were the gizzards of chickens.	Small swellings form in the scalp, which are of the various kinds of cyst, contained within membranes which form a capsule to them like the crop of a chicken.	0.8414042
And there are many types of them.	There are many kinds of these.	0.8064079
Some of them are fatty; some contain moisture like mud; some contain moisture similar to curds and porridge and things like that; and some are stone-hard.	There are fatty ones, there are those containing a liquid resembling black slime, there are those containing a liquid resembling porridge and gruel and the like, while others are stony hard.	0.80131686
And in making incisions in all of them and extracting them, there is no cause for fear, as long as no artery interferes with the incision.	It is not dangerous to open and extract any of them, so long as you do not encounter an artery in excising them.	0.66931355
And the procedure for incising them is that you explore them with an instrument, the shape of which follows here, called the Intromittor, until you know what it contains.	The operation for incising them begins by exploring them with the instrument called an explorer, figured lower down, so as to get to know what sort of contents they have.	0.6943948
For if it is one that contains moisture, then cut it with a superficial incision along its length, in this shape.	If they are the sort that contain fluid, incise them with a simple longitudinal incision, thus.	0.6570981
And begin the incision from line b to line g. When the moisture is drained, then strip away the cyst that contains this moisture, and do not leave any part of it behind at all.	Begin your incision at the letter b, to letter g; and when the humidity is emptied dissect away the capsule containing it, whole, not leaving the least remnant.	0.82575226
For it often returns if any of it is left behind.	For often it comes back if any has been left behind.	0.9628918
Then soak a piece of cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is available; if not, in water and salt; and fill the wound with it, and leave it until the next day. For it will erode whatever remains of the cyst.	Then dip some cotton wool in Egyptian ointment if you have some; if not, in saline; and pack it in the wound and leave till next day, for that will destroy the remains of the capsule.	0.8772999
Then repeat the application of the cotton with Egyptian ointment a second and third time, and as needed, until you are confident that nothing remains of the cyst; then treat the wound with ointment until it heals.	Then repeat the cotton wool with Egyptian ointment a second time, or a third if need be, till it is certain there is nothing of the cyst left. Then treat the wound with ointments until healed.	0.9184828
But if the abscess contains a fatty node, then cut it in the shape of a cross, and insert hooks between the two lips of the incision, and peel it away on all sides, and apply your skill in extracting the membrane that encloses it.	If the tumour contains a fatty cyst, incise thus, a cruciform incision; then hook up the edges of the incision, dissect away every direction, and strive to extract the containing capsule.	0.6574261
If an artery obstructs you, then do what I will describe to you later.	If you should come across an artery, deal with it in the manner already described.	0.5691768
And do the same in the case of an abscess if it is stone-hard, with the same incision and treatment as we have described.	Carry out the same manner of incision and treatment for a stony tumour, just as I have described.	0.6220033
And making an incision in a stone-hard abscess is easier, as there is little blood and moisture. And sometimes there are certain abscesses on the scalp in certain people which contain no moisture at all.	It is easier to open a hard tumour, for it has little blood and humidity; and sometimes these tumours on some people's heads have no humidity at all.	0.7987461
For example: I once made an incision on an abscess on the head of an old woman, and I found an abscess like a solid stone, hard, rough, white, which could not be broken, and if someone were struck by it when thrown, it would injure them.	I myself cut down upon a tumour in the head of an elderly woman and I found the tumour as hard as a stone, rough and white, which it was impossible to break, and which if thrown at anyone would have injured him.	0.756716
But in other abscesses that occur on the scalp, aside from these, namely the abscesses that occur on children’s heads and near the roots of the ears, the incision for all of them should be a superficial one.	For all tumours arising in the head other than these, such as those which occur in children's heads and those at the root of the ear, make a simple incision.	0.74793494
Or place the perforation always at the lower part of them, so that the flow of pus is directed downward.	You should always begin your incision from below to allow an easy downward flow for the pus.	0.68771625
Then treat them with the remedy that is suitable for them.	Then treat with suitable after-treatment.	0.79476106

chapter-2-subchapter-42.txt
Chapter 42.	CHAPTER FORTY-TWO.	0.6233381
These abscesses often appear in the neck, under the armpits, and in the groin; sometimes they appear in other parts of the body as well.	Tumours of this kind often occur in the neck and in the axilla and in the groin; and sometimes in other parts of the body.	0.8926222
And among those that appear in the neck, they may be single or multiple and often arise one after another. Each strophula is contained within its own membrane, much like the nodes and abscesses of the scalp, as we have previously described.	Those occurring in the neck are sometimes single and sometimes multiple, one arising from another; and each scrofula is contained in a capsule of its own, like the cysts and tumours of the head that we have described.	0.85853404
And there are many types of these strophulas. Some of them are stone-hard; others contain fluid; still others are malignant and resist treatment.	There are many kinds of these glands; some are stony, some contain humidities, some are malignant and do not respond to treatment.	0.77691185
For those among them that appear to have a healthy constitution when touched—clearly close to the color of the skin, mobile in all directions, and not attached to the neck’s nerves, major blood vessels, or arteries, and not deeply embedded—you should incise it superficially from the upper part to the lower part of the body along line b to line g. Strip it away completely, and use hooks or multiple hooks, as needed, to pull back the edges of the skin as we described in the case of scalp abscesses, and gradually extract it.	But those that you find by touch to be benign and are of a colour not greatly differing from the skin, freely movable in any direction, not adherent to the nerves of the neck nor to a jugular vein, nor to an artery, and are not deep-lying; these should be incised with a simple incision from above downwards, from line g to line b and dissect away all round and draw the edges of the skin apart with one or two hooks or with several if necessary, as we said on the subject of tumours of the head, and draw them out very slowly.	0.82932866
And take extra care not to cut any vein or nerve.	Be most careful not to cut a blood-vessel or nerve.	0.81878245
Use a rounded, not too sharp spatula so that it does not add pressure with your hand during the incision, or cause unnecessary discomfort to the patient, nor lead you to cut beyond what is necessary.	The scalpel should not be over sharp lest you make the incision too big, or the patient flinches and so you cut open that which does not need cutting.	0.7545119
If you cut a vein or artery or it obstructs your work, then apply powdered alum (zegi) or some other styptic powders to the wound to staunch the bleeding, bandage the wound, and leave it alone until the swelling of the abscess subsides, and the wound softens or starts to suppurate.	If you cut a vein or artery and be thus hindered in your operating, apply powdered vitriol or some styptic powder to the wound, and bandage the wound and let be till the worst of the swelling has subsided and the opening is relaxed and threatens to turn purulent; for then the bleeding will stop.	0.7791048
Once the bleeding stops, return to your work and continue until the procedure is complete.	Then return to your operation and finish it.	0.6263093
Then, use your index finger to check if any small strophulas remain; if so, incise and clean them.	Then feel with your forefinger to see if there are any small glands left, in which case dissect and clean them away.	0.8583977
If a large vein is present at the root of the strophula, you should not cut the strophula from its root; instead, tie it off with a strong, doubled thread and leave it to fall off on its own without causing harm.	If there is a large blood-vessel at the root of the gland, then you should not cut that gland at its root but should ligature it with a strong double ligature and leave it till it sloughs away of its own accord without harm.	0.8322407
Then fill the wound with old cotton that you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment. Then tend to it.	Then pack the wound with cotton wool previously soaked in Egyptian ointment; then continue dressing.	0.8664905
If the entire strophula is incised, then you should bring the two edges of the wound together and suture it immediately, as soon as you are certain that there is no remaining excess.	If you excise the whole gland, you should at once draw together the two edges of the wound and suture them, when you are absolutely certain there is nothing of it left.	0.790624
If you see that some excess remains due to the size of the strophula, then you must focus on cutting its root and extracting it, and then apply the sutures as we discussed.	But if you see that, on account of the size of the scrofula, there is still some superfluity left behind, you should carry the incision to the root and base of it, and employ suturing and the rest of the remedies mentioned.	0.73049974
For those strophulas that contain fluid, make a superficial incision to reveal the location of its ripening, and place the incision at the lower part to allow drainage downward, as we have described.	The glands that contain humidities you should open with a single perforation where they seem to have matured; make your perforation from below, as we have said.	0.61037266
Then, after the incision, apply lint with ointment or similar substances to corrode any remaining infection until you see that the wound is thoroughly cleansed. At that point, treat it with a flesh-regenerating ointment until it heals.	Then after opening use swabs soaked in Egyptian and similar ointments to do away with the unhealthy remains, till you see that the wound is clean; then dress with nourishing ointments until healed.	0.76797515

chapter-2-subchapter-43.txt
On the cutting of the epiglottis from an abscess occurring within the throat.	On incising the larynx for a tumour arising in the throat.	0.6836562
The ancients mentioned this incision in the epiglottis, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has done it: and this is the written account of their discourse.	The Ancients mentioned this laryngeal incision, but I have not seen anyone in our parts who has done it. Now here is the gist of what they say.	0.7238497
In those with quinsy, the cutting of the epiglottis should be avoided: since no benefit comes from it, because all the veins and the lung are weak.	Incision should be avoided in those suffering from quinsy, for they will not benefit from it, since all the passages and the lung will be diseased.	0.7636424
In those, however, who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or throat, or on both tonsils, when there is no disease in the channel, the cutting of the epiglottis should be used to avoid the harm that results from choking.	But in those with an abscess in the mouth, throat, or tonsils, and when there is no disease in the windpipe itself, you must employ laryngotomy to avoid the mischief of suffocation.	0.73876274
Therefore, when we wish to perform this, we should cut the epiglottis under three or four circles of the epiglottis, making a small transverse cut in the area between two circles, so that the cut is in the membrane, not in the cartilage: and indeed this place is suitable for cutting, since it is devoid of flesh, and the blood vessels are distant from it.	Now when we wish to undertake this we should incise the larynx under the third or fourth ring of the windpipe with a small incision transversely between two rings, so that the incision may be through the membrane, not the cartilage. This spot is suitable for incision, for it is deficient in flesh, and there are no blood-vessels near.	0.7829102
If the physician is fearful, then the skin of the throat should be stretched with a hook. Then let him split the skin until he reaches the channel: avoid any blood vessels if any are seen.	If the practitioner be nervous, he must stretch the skin of the throat with a hook, then cut down through the skin till he reach the windpipe, and avoid blood-vessels if he see any.	0.81211543
Then let him cut the membrane as we described: and over the cut of the channel there appears phlegm that comes out from it, along with its rupture, and loss of voice.	Then let him incise the membrane which we have spoken of. You can be certain of having opened the trachea by the emission of phlegm when it is pierced, and by the loss of voice.	0.67558604
And leave the wound open for a time.	Then leave the wound open for some while.	0.84825885
Then, when the time of feared choking has passed, join the two lips of the skin wound and sew it alone without the cartilage.	When the danger of suffocation is passed, bring the two lips of the wound together by the skin, which alone must be sutured, without the cartilage.	0.7664931
Then administer medicines that help flesh to grow, until it heals.	Then use medicaments stimulating granulation till healed.	0.72799826
Albucasis says. The essence of this discourse which we have narrated is not intended, except when they see that one of these abscesses has already blocked the throat of the patient, and the patient is elevated near death, and desires for his breath to be interrupted: they proceed to cut the epiglottis, so that the patient may breathe over the site of the wound with a certain respiration, and be saved from death: and for this reason, they ordered to leave the wound open until the evil of the illness is consumed, which takes three days, approximately: then they ordered to sew the wound, and treat it, until it heals.	The author of this book says, the interpretation of this account that we have given is this: when they see that one of the tumours that they mention has obstructed the patient's throat and he is approaching death and is anxious himself to be incised, they resort to laryngotomy so that the patient may breathe somewhat through the wound and his life be saved. They bid leaving the wound open till the worst of the disease abates; its height will last about three days; then they bid sew up the wound and dress till healed.	0.8447648
And what I myself saw is that a servant girl took a knife and put it in her throat, and cut with it part of her lung’s channel.	My own experience was this: a slave-girl seized a knife and buried it in her throat and cut part of the trachea; and I was called to attend her.	0.77760047
I was called to her treatment, and I found her groaning, like the groaning of the dying.	I found her bellowing like a sacrifice that has had its throat cut.	0.62117684
Therefore, I examined the wound, and I found little blood that had come out from the wound. I was confident, therefore, that she had not cut a vein, nor harmed herself seriously: and air was coming out from the wound.	So I laid the wound bare and found that only a little haemorrhage had come from it; and I assured myself that neither the jugular vein nor an artery had been cut, but air passed out through the wound.	0.85152984
I hurried, therefore, and sewed the wound, and treated it until it healed: and nothing happened to the servant girl except hoarseness in her voice: and after some days she returned to a better state of health.	So I hurriedly sutured the wound and dressed it until healed. And no ill befell the maid except for a hoarseness in the voice, but nothing more; and after some days she was restored to the best of health.	0.9281966
Hence, I say that in the cutting of the epiglottis there is no fear.	Hence we may say that laryngotomy is not dangerous.	0.52651393

chapter-2-subchapter-44.txt
Chapter 44.	CHAPTER FORTY-FOUR.	0.68437034
This abscess called a throat hernia is a large abscess, matching the color of the body: and it is found much in women.	This tumour which is called 'Elephant of the throat' is a large tumour of the colour of the body; it commonly occurs in women.	0.73669755
And it occurs in two types: it is either natural or accidental.	It is of two kinds, congenital and acquired.	0.6252979
Certainly, in the natural type there is no remedy.	As to the congenital, there is no treatment for it.	0.58989424

chapter-2-subchapter-45.txt
On the cutting of various types of nodes.	On incision for various kinds of cyst.	0.7907024
There are many types of nodes, and I have already described all their types in the division: and it is fitting to relate here the difference between a node and an exudation, as it causes confusion.	There are various kinds of cyst. We have already mentioned all their varieties in the proper place. But we need here to set forth the difference between a cyst and an abscess, for it is complicated.	0.6825737
I say, therefore, that with an exudation, there is heat, fever, and intense pain, until the boiling of excess fluid subsides and putrefaction is complete: then, the fever and heat subside.	The abscess will be accompanied by heat and fever and fearsome pain, until the boiling-up of the superfluous matter settles down and the suppurating process is completed: then will the fever and intensity subside.	0.77215254
With a node, however, there is no heat, nor fever, nor pain, and they are contained in a membrane, which is their own sac, and is the color of the body: and they begin the size of a chickpea and grow like a watermelon, both larger and smaller.	But with a cyst there is neither heat nor fever nor pains, and a membranous capsule encloses it, its own particular covering.	0.6219448
And they are of two types: either fatty or containing fluid. And the colors of the fluid are various, as I mentioned in the division.	The cyst is flesh-coloured, and it begins like a pea and becomes like a melon, more or less; and is of two kinds: either fatty or containing humidity; and the colours of the humidities are several, as we mentioned in the appropriate section.	0.6902719
Therefore, when you come to treat a node, you must examine it, and first investigate it with the instrument called an intromissum, according to the method that will appear in the chapter that follows this.	When you come to treat the cyst, you should first sound it and examine it with the instrument called the explorer, which is figured in the next chapter.	0.7054703
And the method of examining abscesses and all nodes is that you take this instrument and insert it into the wetter area you find in the abscess: and you move your fingers with it gradually, until you know that the instrument has penetrated the skin. Then measure the extent of your hand according to the size of the abscess.	The way to examine all tumours and cysts is to take this instrument and press it in at the spot where the tumour is softest, and revolve it gently with your fingers till you know you have pierced the skin; then press it in proportionately to the size of the tumour.	0.7854859
Then remove the intromissum, and observe what comes out in its trace.	Then remove the explorer and see what comes out after it.	0.7881556
If a flowing fluid emerges, whatever its color: then cut it with a superficial incision, as I have described in the other abscesses.	If a humidity should flow, whatever the colour, make a simple incision, as I said for the other tumours.	0.66791236
And if no fluid comes out at the trace of the intromissum, then know that it is fatty: therefore, cut it with an incision in the shape of a cross, following this shape, as I have taught you: suspend it with hooks, and peel the skin from all sides gently: and if possible, preserve the sac around it so that you may remove it intact with the node.	But if no humidity come out along the track of the explorer you know at once that it is fatty. Therefore make a cruciform incision upon it in this shape, as I have told you, and attach hooks and dissect away the skin gently from all sides. Be careful with the capsule; if you can, get it out whole, together with the cyst.	0.7801269
However, if the sac bursts during the operation and it is not possible to remove it intact, as often happens, then extract it piece by piece, until none of it remains.	But if the capsule is torn in the course of the operation, and you cannot get it out whole, which frequently happens, remove it bit by bit until there is none of it left.	0.896137
For if any amount of it, large or small, remains, the node will usually return.	For if a part of it is left behind, either great or small, the cyst will generally return.	0.86551225
But if you are defeated and a small part remains: then fill the wound upon completion with certain sharp corrosive powders: and close the wound, and apply over it a warm abscess dressing, and treat it with the remaining steps of the treatment until it heals.	If it defeats you and some little piece of it remain, pack the wound, when you have done all you can, with some caustic powder and bandage it and put on it something to ease the inflamed tumour, and treat in the usual way until healed.	0.703421
If the node is large, then sew its two lips, and treat it with something that generates flesh.	If the tumour be large, sew the edges of the incision together and treat with stimulants.	0.6421155
If, however, there is a pulsating or non-pulsating vein in your way: then act quickly, and fill the place with powdered zegi, and leave it compressed for two or three days, until the wound putrefies and the bubbling of the blood subsides: then return to cut what remains of the node.	If you should come across a blood-vessel, pulsating or not, and there be haemorrhage, hasten to pack it with pounded vitriol; and leave bandaged for two or three days until the wound becomes purulent and the boiling-up of the blood is allayed; then resume cutting open the rest of the cyst.	0.7886839

chapter-2-subchapter-46.txt
On the external instruments for cutting and perforation.	On the shapes of the instruments used for incising and perforating.	0.7856249
Among them are the shapes of intromissa, and there are three types.	Among these are the various explorers.	0.447572
For among them is a large one, a medium one, and a small one.	There are three varieties of this instrument, large, medium, and small.	0.6449758
They should be made of polished iron with square ends to ease their entry into abscesses.	They should all be made of the best Damascene steel, with quadrangular points, and strong, to assist entry into the tumours.	0.57789856
And these are the forms of Experientia, or perforating tools: one of them is called beris, that is, a perforator, and there are three types.	And this is the shape of the probes; they are also called burud.	0.4897269
For among them is a large, a medium, and a small one.	There are three kinds of this, too: large, medium, and small.	0.73610425
They are suitable for probing abscesses, exudations, fistulas, and buboes in areas where bones are involved.	They are suitable for exploring tumours, wounds, fistulas, and sinuses, to see what is inside them such as bones, etc.	0.68709207
And others are made round, smooth, and polished, like large needles used to stitch cushions, and are made of brass, or copper, or iron, or silver.	They are made round, polished, and smooth, like packing-needles, of Chinese copper or of white copper, or of brass, silver, or iron.	0.7088529
And the best of them are those made from brass.	The best are those made of white copper.	0.78119546
Experientia are also made from black lead, which are suitable for examining fistulas, which, with their curves, allow a gentle retraction.	Sometimes probes are made of black lead, for investigating fistulas whose deeper course is devious; so that by reason of their softness they can adapt themselves to the curves.	0.6872442
And there are again three types. For among them are long, medium, and short ones, according to the width and narrowness of the fistula.	Of these, too, there are three varieties: the long, the medium, and the short, proportioned to the requirement of the depth of every fistula. Their thickness also should be proportioned to the width or narrowness of the fistula.	0.8393699
The form of hooks, and they are of many types.	Figures of hooks. There are many kinds of hook.	0.6932111
For among them are simple ones, that is, with one curve: and they are of three types as you see, large, medium, and small.	For example, there are the simple hooks, that is, having only one prong; there are three kinds of this: large, medium, and small.	0.838128
And among them are blunt hooks: and they are of three types.	And there are the hooks provided with two prongs, of which there are three kinds.	0.7448599
And among them are hooks with two curves, and they are of three types: and among them are hooks with three curves, and they are of three types: and all these are necessary in their respective places.	And there are the bent hooks with two prongs, of which there are three kinds. And there are the hooks provided with three prongs, of which there are three kinds. All of these kinds are necessary in their place.	0.9083623
And these are the forms of scalpels, with which nodes and abscesses are cut and scraped: and there are three types: among them are large, medium, and small.	These are the figures of the scarifying scalpels with which you incise and dissect away cysts and tumours. They too are of three kinds: large, medium, and small.	0.77108765
Their ends for cutting are sharp, while the other ends are not sharp: and they are designed this way to assist in scraping nodes when there is a risk of cutting a vein or nerve: and so that the patient may heal and find some relief from the cauterization encountered during the scraping of an abscess.	The cutting edges should be sharp, and the other ends blunt. The reason for making them like this is so that they can be utilized in dissecting away cysts where there is a fear of cutting a vein or nerve, and also that the patient may console himself thereby and find some small relief from the pain involved in the dissection of a tumour.	0.81749547
They are made of copper, and they resemble a probe, with which alcohol is made: and at the broad end, there is a hidden pointed Spatumilis: and it moves inward and outward when you wish, as you see.	They are made of brass and resemble the rod for instilling eye-salve. At one end there is the likeness of a broad spoon made of two plates, in the extremity of which is the point of a hidden scalpel; thus the knife is masked like a bird's tongue, moving in and out at will, as you see.	0.66669583
The form of Spatumilia that are hidden between the fingers during the perforation of abscesses: and the patients do not notice them: and there are three types, large, medium, and small.	Figures of the scalpels which are hidden between the fingers when tumours are to be opened, so that they are not noticed by the patient. They are of three varieties: large, medium, and small.	0.71436113
The forms of cups used for cutting off the flow of blood: and there are three types, large, medium, and small.	Figures of the cupping vessels with which haemorrhage is stanched. There are three kinds: large, medium, and small.	0.81921047
They are made of brass or copper, round, slightly elongated, as you see: and they should be delicate.	They are made of bronze or of Chinese alloy, round but slightly elongated, as you see, and also rather thin.	0.69990385
And it is necessary for you to have these types of cups, both large and small: so that you may quickly cut off the blood flow in an emergency, and when medicine is not present.	You should have these kinds by you, large and small, so that haemorrhage may be quickly stopped in an emergency and when you have no medicine.	0.76096356
However, do not use them for cutting blood flow in every part of the body, and use them only in fleshy areas: such as the calves, thighs, arms, breasts, abdomen, and groin, and similar areas, which are fleshy and moist.	But they are not to be used for suppressing haemorrhage in all parts of the body, but only in the fleshy parts such as the calf and thigh muscles, the arm muscles, the breasts, belly, and groin, and other similar fleshy soft parts.	0.87578785
And sometimes they are made as small instruments, similar to the shape of pistachio shells: by which blood is cut off when it flows from a place of phlebotomy, or at the incision of a vein or artery: and sometimes they are made round in this shape.	Sometimes of this class small instruments, like nutshells, are made, like this. Haemorrhage from a venesection is stopped by these; or in the case of a cut artery or vein. Sometimes round ones are made, like this.	0.7375573

chapter-2-subchapter-47.txt
On the treatment of men's nipples that resemble women's breasts.	On the treatment of the male breast when it resembles the female.	0.861179
Sometimes the nipples of certain men become swollen at the end of sleep (that is, when they begin to be affected in sleep), until they resemble women's breasts, and they remain disgustingly infected.	The breasts of some males may swell on attaining puberty so as to resemble the female breast, and they remain permanently swollen and ugly.	0.61252445
Therefore, he who detests this must cut over the nipples with a crescent-shaped incision, in the form from line b. to line g. Then scrape off all the fat. Next, fill the wound with healing medication. Then bring together the two edges of the wound with a suture, and care for it until it heals.	If this is abhorrent, a semicircular incision should be made on the breast, like this figure, from b to g. Then dissect away all the fatty tissue and pack the wound with a cicatrizing compound and sew the lips together and dress until healed.	0.7605611
If, however, the nipple sags downward and becomes softened due to its size, as happens to women: then it must be split on its two upper sides with two incisions similar in shape to a crescent, each one connected to the other at their ends, until the larger line contains the smaller, in the form from line b. to line g. Then, scrape off the skin between the two edges, remove the fat, and apply what we have mentioned about suturing and powders, as necessary for healing, until it recovers.	But if the breast is pendulous and flabby on account of its size, as happens with women, you should make two semicircular incisions on the upper side, the ends joining one another, in such wise that the longer incision encircles the other like this, from b to g. Then dissect away the skin between the two incisions and remove the fat and sew up as we have described; and apply styptic powder and the necessary dressings until healed.	0.87971485
If, however, you do not complete the incision as needed due to the patient’s restlessness or excessive blood flow: then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment, and leave it until it eats away the remaining fat. Then care for it until it heals.	But if you cannot make the incision as full and perfect as it ought to have been, because the patient is restless, or because haemorrhage arises, you should pack the wound with cotton wool soaked in corrosive ointment and leave till it eats away the remainder of the fat; then dress until healed.	0.8920717

chapter-2-subchapter-48.txt
Chapter 48.	CHAPTER FORTY-EIGHT.	0.66966176
These abscesses that occur beneath the Titillicus are of the hard types of Strophulas, which contain cysts, and some of them contain fluids.	These tumours under the armpit are of the type of scrofulous tumours, hard, enclosed in a capsule. Some contain humidity.	0.6666294
Those among them that contain fluids must therefore be cut with a crescent-shaped incision, in this form, from line b. to line g. Then, when everything within the abscess is drained of infection, fill it with old cotton and leave it until the next day.	Those that contain humidity should be opened with a semicircular incision like this, from b to g. When you have removed all the pus that had been in the tumour, pack the wound with teased-out cotton wool and leave till another day.	0.7578448
Then remove the cotton, and treat it with suitable ointment until it heals.	Then remove the cotton wool and dress with a suitable ointment until healed.	0.93052363
But if the abscess is of the type of Strophula nodes, then incise it above, as we have said in the section on Strophulas.	If the tumour be of the nodular scrofulous kind, cut directly down on it just as we prescribed for that kind.	0.61465645
If, however, the wound extends so that it releases pus, then apply cautery to it, as we have discussed previously.	If the wound continue to discharge pus, apply the cautery to it as prescribed before.	0.77173984

chapter-2-subchapter-49.txt
On the incision of an abscess that occurs because of an artery or a vein.	On opening a tumour arising from a bloodvessel, called an aneurysm.	0.6193404
When an artery bursts, and the skin above it heals, an abscess often occurs there; the same also happens to a vein, where an abscess and swelling occur in it.	When an artery is injured and the overlying skin scars, a tumour very often arises from this; the same thing happens to a vein: a swelling and a tumour.	0.8675684
The signs by which it is known that an abscess and swelling are due to an artery or vein are as follows: when an abscess is caused by an artery, it is long and deep within the body; and when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel as though it has a creaking sensation.	And these are the signs by which you may diagnose whether the swelling and tumour arise from an artery or a vein: if it be from an artery the tumour will be a deep and elongated mass; and when you press upon it with your finger there will be a feeling of pulsation.	0.8432567
And that which is due to a vein is round and visible on the body.	But if it arises from a vein the swelling will be circular and superficial.	0.5402154
And an incision on this type of abscess is an error, especially one located under the armpits, in the groin, on the neck, and in many areas of the body, and it is very large. Therefore, treatment with a blade should be avoided, and anything in the extremities or on the head should also be avoided.	It is dangerous to make an incision on tumours of this kind, specially in the axilla, the groin, the neck, and in many other parts of the body; it is indeed highly dangerous, so in these you must avoid treatment by the knife; also in those in the limbs and in the head it must be avoided.	0.8175444
On any of these caused by the swelling of an artery’s opening, make a lengthwise incision in the skin. Then open the incision with hooks, and expose the artery: and free it from its coverings until it is revealed.	But any such that arises from the inflation of the mouth of an artery, you may cut down in the skin over that with a longitudinal incision; then open up your incision with hooks and dissect away the artery, freeing it from the tissues till it is laid bare.	0.82446384
Next, insert a needle beneath it, passing it through to the other side, and tie the artery with double thread in two places, as I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries located in the temples.	Then run a needle beneath the artery to reach the other side, and tie the artery in two places with a double thread, as I showed you for the extraction of the temporal arteries.	0.83791107
Then puncture the area between the two ligatures with a small scalpel until all the blood contained within flows out, and the abscess is relieved.	Then with the scalpel prick the part between the two ligatures to let out all the blood and get the tumour down.	0.8446615
Then administer a treatment that promotes pus formation, until the ligatures fall off: afterward, treat it with suitable ointments until it heals.	Then apply dressings to excite suppuration until the ligatures fall away; then dress with suitable ointments until healed.	0.8236503
But if the abscess is due to the incision of a vein, then you should hold as much of the abscess and skin as possible with your hand. Then insert a needle under the place you held with your hand and make it penetrate, and let it have a double thread until you pull it out from the other side. Then tie the abscess tightly with the thread, as I have told you with the grape ligature, on both sides with the two ends of the thread.	If the swelling be due to a vein that has been penetrated, you should gather up with your hand as much of the tumour as you can, together with the skin; then pass a needle beneath the place which you have grasped in your hand and run it through, threaded with a double thread, until it emerges at the other side; then with it tie a strong ligature round the swelling as I mentioned to you on ligaturing the swollen uvula, from either side, with the ends of the thread.	0.86140466
If you are worried that the thread might come loose, then insert another needle with another thread beneath the entire abscess near the needle’s incision; press and tie your threads in four places.	If you fear that the threads may come loose, pass a second needle and thread beneath the whole tumour to intersect with the passage of the first needle; and tie your threads in four places.	0.8449606
Then cut the abscess in the middle until its contents come out; then remove the excess skin, leaving the tied part.	Then incise the tumour in the centre to extract the contents. Then cut away the superfluous skin and leave what has been ligatured.	0.8651477
Then place on it a small compress soaked in wine and oil. Then apply treatment with linen and ointments until it heals.	Then put on that a pad previously soaked in wine and oil; then apply the treatment with lint and ointments until healed.	0.88657534

chapter-2-subchapter-50.txt
On abscesses that occur from twisting of the nerves.	On the tumour arising from the twisting of a tendon.	0.7487601
Just as abscesses occur in arteries and veins, so too they occur in nerves: caused by a blow, or from excessive labor, or similar reasons; and most commonly they appear in the armpits, or the heel, and in every place where joints move: and it is a serious abscess.	As a tumour arises on an artery or a vein, so may it also come in a tendon when it has been bruised; or it may arise from excessive fatigue, or such causes. This occurs mostly at the wrists, at the heel, and at all sites of articular movement.	0.8373039
Its color resembles that of the surrounding body, and it usually lacks pain; and when pressed hard, the patient feels a numbness similar to stupor.	It is a hard tumour of the same colour as the rest of the body, and is generally painless, and when strong pressure is put upon it the patient has a numb feeling in it.	0.8167821
And it is not a deep-seated abscess within the body; rather, it is beneath the skin, moves in all directions, and does not extend forward or backward.	It is a tumour that does not form in the deeper tissues but is subcutaneous. It is freely movable laterally, but will not go forward or backward.	0.76373565
Therefore, those found in the joints should not be attacked with a blade. For contraction may indeed occur.	Those that are situated on joints should certainly not be tackled with the knife, for that often causes palsy.	0.7275375
In those cases found on the head or forehead, make an incision in the skin with a small scalpel. If it is a small abscess, then hold it with forceps and cut it off at the root.	Incise the skin of those occurring on the head or forehead, and if the tumour be small take hold of it with the forceps and cut it away by the root.	0.774078
And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, scrape it off, then remove it, bring the wound together with sutures, and care for it until it heals.	But if it be large, catch it up with a hook and dissect it away and remove it; and sew up the incision and dress until healed.	0.78941405

chapter-2-subchapter-51.txt
On the incision of abscesses occurring in the abdomen.	On the amputation of warts occurring on the belly.	0.9110391
In the abdomen and elsewhere on their bodies, certain men frequently develop thelils, which are called Fungalia, due to their resemblance to mushrooms.	Some people often get warts on the belly and on the rest of the body, called fungous warts, because of their resemblance to fungi.	0.8028629
Their roots are thin, their heads are thick, and their edges are turned inward. Some are small, and some become quite large.	They have a slender pedicle and a broad head, the edges of which are sometimes inverted ; and some are small, whereas others of them grow very big.	0.8035283
Indeed, I have seen a man with two thelils in his abdomen, which resembled mushrooms more than anything else: there was no difference between them, they were white, with thin roots, and their edges turned inward, were split, and constantly oozed moisture.	I myself once saw a man who had two warts on his belly that looked more like fungi than anything else; they were white and had thin pedicles. Their edges were inverted and had split open, and a humour flowed continually from them.	0.82018054
I incised them, and found one to weigh about eighteen ounces and the other about six ounces. In the procedure for incising them, you must consider whether the patient is of moist constitution and the thelil is white, moist, with a thin root: in that case, incise it with a broad scalpel, and have the cautery ready in the fire.	I amputated them both and weighed them: one came to about eighteen ounces, and the other six ounces. This is the operation for amputating them: examine the patient carefully, and if he be of a humid temperament and the colour of the warts be white, and if they are soft, with a thin stalk, amputate them with a broad scalpel. But you should also have at hand cauteries in a fire; for often in amputating them there is much haemorrhage.	0.86315507
For frequently much blood is expelled upon incision; therefore, act quickly if the bleeding overwhelms you, then cauterize it.	But you should also have at hand cauteries in a fire; for often in amputating them there is much haemorrhage. So, if the bleeding be a hindrance to you, be quick and cauterize them.	0.746411
If the patient appears fearful and anxious about incision with a blade, then take a thread of well-made lead and tie it around the athelul as we described, and leave it for two days.	On the other hand if you see that the patient is frightened and dreads the cutting of them with the scalpel, take a wire of stout lead, and ligature this type of wart and leave for two days.	0.68007827
Then increase the tightness of the lead. Continue tightening the lead each time it presses into the thelil, until it is severed and falls off on its own without effort.	Then increase the stricture by the lead wire and go on doing this as it sinks into the wart, until the wart is cut through and spontaneously falls away with no trouble.	0.81740993
If, however, the thelil has a thick root, then there is indeed some fear and dread in its incision, especially in the abdomen.	But if the warts have stout pedicles there is some risk and fear in the cutting of them, especially those that occur on the belly.	0.7629384
However, it is possible to incise half of it. Then cauterize it to prevent its return.	Sometimes, however, you can cut away the half, or some part, and then cauterize to prevent recurrence.	0.7742017
Then care for it until the wound heals.	Then dress until the wound is healed.	0.84517896
And beware of attempting to incise any thelil that is dark-colored, insensate, and foul-looking, for it is a cancerous abscess, and I shall address Cancer further after this.	But beware of trying to cut away growths that are dark in colour, with little sensation and hideous in appearance, for they are cancerous tumours. I shall soon be mentioning cancer.	0.73635256

chapter-2-subchapter-52.txt
On the treatment of umbilical protrusion.	On the treatment of protruding navel.	0.9149809
An umbilical protrusion can arise from various causes. It may be due to fissures in the abdominal membrane, allowing a part of the intestines or abdominal tissue to push out, as can occur in other types of hernias. Or it may result from blood flowing from a vein or artery, as previously mentioned. Or it could be caused by trapped gas in that area.	The navel becomes prominent from many causes; either from a rupture of the peritoneum over the abdomen, so that omentum or intestine comes through it as in other ruptures; or from blood extravasation from an artery or vein, as we have mentioned; or else from wind trapped in it.	0.8617541
If it’s due to excess moisture, it is soft and does not recede or expand when pressed with your hand.	If it be due to fluid, it will be soft and will not disappear on manual pressure, nor will it grow larger or smaller.	0.7651061
If it’s due to blood, then the abscess appears with dark discoloration in addition to these signs.	If it be due to blood, then in addition to these signs the tumour will appear blackish.	0.90405667
If it’s caused by excess tissue growth, then the abscess is serious, thick, hard, and has a consistent size.	If it arise from a fleshy overgrowth, the tumour will be solid and hard, remaining always constant in bulk.	0.7406963
If it’s due to gas, it has a soft feel to the touch.	If it be due to wind, it will be soft to the touch.	0.7323339
The procedure requires assessing if the umbilical protrusion is due to an arterial or venous blood issue, or to trapped gas; in such cases, you should refrain from attempting treatment. In such cases, fear and danger are involved, as I explained in the chapter on abscesses related to arteries and veins.	The operation for these is to examine, and if the exomphalos be due to arterial or venous blood, or wind, you should withhold treatment since it is dangerous in these cases, with an uncertain outlook, as I taught you in the chapter on tumours arising from an artery or vein.	0.79352397
If the umbilical protrusion is due to the intestine or tissue, instruct the patient to hold their breath and stand up straight. Then mark around the entire umbilicus with ink. Next, instruct the patient to lie down on their back with you supporting them. Then use a broad spatula to press around the umbilicus in the area you marked with ink.	But if it be due to bowel or omentum, bid the patient hold his breath and stand stiffly upright; then make an ink mark all round the umbilicus; then tell him to lie on his back before you; then with a broad scalpel cut all round the umbilicus along the line marked out; then draw up the middle of the tumour with a large hook; then ligature the site of the incision with a strong thread or silk cord, tying it securely with a slip-knot.	0.8329693
Next, open the extended middle of the abscess above the tied area. If you find that it is caught by the ligature, remove the knot, insert your index finger, and push the intestine back into the abdomen. If tissue is present, grasp it with a hook and cut off any excess.	Then open the middle of the tied tumour above the ligature and insert your forefinger and search for the bowel; and if you find it caught in the ligature slacken the slip-knot and push the bowel back into the abdomen. But if you find omentum, stretch it with a hook and cut off what is superfluous.	0.86180365
If you encounter an artery or vein, work carefully around it. Then continue with your procedure. Take two needles threaded with strong thread, and insert them around the abscess in a cross pattern, making sure they penetrate.	And if you come across an artery or vein, tie it securely and go on with your work: take two needles and thread them with two strong threads and insert the two needles into the incision that you have made around the tumour, pushing them in so that they cross one another.	0.81102943
Then, tighten the abscess in four places over the needles. If you wish, remove the needles and leave it until the stretched tissue rots and falls off naturally, or cut it off once it becomes thin and decomposed.	Then ligature the tumour in four places over the needles. If you wish, you may remove the needles and let be until the ligatured tissue necroses and falls away of its own accord; or cut it away when it is thin and necrosing.	0.9119432
Then treat it with the necessary ointments until it heals.	Then dress with the needful ointments until healed.	0.91539586
If the umbilical protrusion is due to excess tissue or moisture, then hollow out the abscess as we have described. And remove any blood or moisture that you find inside.	But if the prominent navel be due to an overgrowth of flesh there or from humidity, you should slice the tumour as we have said and get out all the blood or humidity to be found there.	0.80355597
Then treat it with something that will harden and stabilize the area.	Then dress it with stimulating dressings.	0.4286609

chapter-2-subchapter-53.txt
On the treatment of cancer.	On the treatment of cancer.	1.0000001
We have already discussed the types of cancer, and the way to treat it with medicines: and caution is required in its treatment with the knife, to prevent ulceration: and we spoke of cancer arising in the womb, and the caution in its treatment.	We have spoken, in the relevant section, of the kinds of cancer and of the way in which medical treatment of them is to be attempted; with a warning against treatment by the knife lest they ulcerate. We also mentioned the cancer arising in the uterus and gave a warning against its treatment.	0.84640956
And the ancients said that sometimes cancer is located in a place where it is possible to remove it, as in cancer of the breasts, or the thigh, and similar areas, from parts that allow its complete extraction: especially when it is small in its early stages.	The Ancients said that when a cancer is in a site where total eradication is possible, such as a cancer of the breast or of the thigh, and in similar parts where complete removal is possible, and especially when in the early stage and small, (then surgery was to be tried).	0.8107251
But when it becomes old and large, it is not advisable to approach it.	But when it is of long standing and large you should leave it alone.	0.6406928
For I could not cure anyone of it, nor have I seen anyone before me who succeeded in doing so.	For I myself have never been able to cure any such, nor have I seen anyone else succeed before me.	0.9295758
And the procedure, when it is situated as we mentioned, is to first cleanse the patient several times of black bile. Then perform bloodletting on him if you find him obviously full.	The procedure in a case amenable to treatment, as we have said, is first for the patient to be purged several times from black bile; then bleed him if his veins seem full.	0.90584886
Then prepare the patient with a preparation suitable for the operation.	Then put the patient in the most convenient position for operating.	0.7722427
Then apply hooks to the cancer that suit it. Afterward, hollow it out from every part along with the skin, according to examination, until nothing of its roots remains: and allow the blood to flow, and do not cut it off quickly; rather, press the places and wipe away all thick blood by hand, or with any possible instrument.	Then attach to the tumour hooks suited to it; then make a circular incision all round to include the skin with the utmost thoroughness so that not the least root of it remains; let the blood flow and do not stanch it quickly; but put pressure upon the place and squeeze out all the thick blood, either by hand or with any instrument you can.	0.8730066
But if the flow of thick blood from the incision of an artery or vein causes you trouble, then cauterize the vein until the bleeding stops. Then treat it with the remaining remedies, until it heals.	If in operating you get a very severe haemorrhage from cutting an artery or vein, cauterize the vessel until the bleeding stops; then dress in the usual way until healed.	0.75357103

chapter-2-subchapter-54.txt
On the treatment of dropsy.	On the treatment of dropsy.	1.0
Chapter 54. We have already discussed the types of dropsy, and how water accumulates: the signs of each type, and its treatment with medicines.	We have mentioned in the section the kinds of hydrops, and the manner in which the fluid collects; the signs of each kind; and the medical treatment of them.	0.7965716
And the type that is treated with the knife is only ascites: one does not approach the type tympanites with the knife, nor the type hyposarca at all, for that is fatal.	The only kind which is to be treated by operation is the one called 'ascites'. But neither the kind called 'tympanites' nor general anasarca are to be treated by operation at all, for that would be fatal.	0.66827
When you have already treated this type of dropsy, tympanites, with medicines, and your treatment has not worked, then consider. For if the patient has already become weakened, or if there is another illness along with the dropsy, such as a cough or loose bowels, and similar issues, then beware of treating him with the knife, for there is danger in it.	When you have been trying medical treatment for this kind, for ascites, and your treatment is ineffectual, then consider; and if the patient be in a low state or suffer from other disease beside the ascites, such as cough or diarrhoea or some such, then beware of attempting operative treatment since it will be of uncertain outcome.	0.80905545
But if you see that the patient is of robust strength, and there is no illness with him other than the dropsy alone, and he is neither a child nor an old man, then the method of operation is to lift the patient, standing between your hands, while an assistant behind him presses his abdomen, pushing the water down toward the lower part of the abdomen.	But if you see that the patient has plenty of strength and suffers under no other complaint beside the dropsy, and is of neither tender nor advanced age, then the operative procedure in this case is for you to place the patient, standing, before you, with an assistant behind him to apply manual pressure to his abdomen and push the fluid down into the pelvis.	0.8792727
Then take a pointed spatula, in this form. Let it be of two sharp parts, long, with a sharp point like a spatula. However, let there be some gradual shortness in it, so that you do not go too far with it during the operation, and injure the intestine.	Then take a pointed scalpel of this shape, sharp along both sides, long, and very sharp at the end like a scalpel, but slightly stubby so that in operating you do not reach the intestines and damage them.	0.82532346
Then consider. For if the dropsy is due to an issue with the intestines, then make the incision about three finger-breadths below the navel, in a straight line above the pubic area.	Then consider; and if the dropsy arises from the region of the intestines then you should make an incision three fingers' breadth directly below the umbilicus, above the pubes.	0.89130336
But if the dropsy is caused by a liver condition, then make your incision three finger-breadths to the left of the navel.	If the dropsy arises from disease of the liver, let your incision be three fingers to the left of the umbilicus.	0.85115147
And if it is caused by a spleen condition, then make the incision on the right side: and it is not advisable to make the incision on the side on which the patient prefers to lie, so that discharges do not flow toward that weak area.	If it arises from disease of the spleen, let the incision be three fingers to the right. Moreover, the incision must not be on the side which the patient wishes to lie on, so that the superfluities may not flow to the damaged part.	0.74322563
Then pierce the whole skin with the instrument. Then insert it into the incision, and raise your hand with the spatula between the skin and the membrane, as though you are flaying it: and the amount to be flayed should be the size of a fingernail, or thereabouts.	Then pierce the skin with the instrument, introduce the instrument into that incision, and bring the scalpel up between the skin and the membrane, as if excoriating, over an area about the size of a fingernail.	0.79617333
Then pierce the membrane until the spatula reaches the empty space: which is the location of the water. Then withdraw it, and insert into the hole an instrument of the following form. And it is like a tube: made from silver, or brass, or bronze, smooth, polished: at its lower part, there is a small opening, and on its sides, three holes, two on one side and one on the other: its tip is cut like the shape of a reed, as you see, and at its upper end, there is a small ring.	Then pierce through the membrane till the scalpel reaches a cavity, which will be where the water is; then withdraw the scalpel and put into the opening the instrument shaped like this; it resembles a fine section of reed, made of silver, bronze or white copper; smooth and well polished, with a small opening at the lower end and three at the sides, two on one side and one on the other, as you see. Its extremity may be cut to the shape of a writing reed like this; the upper end of it is supplied with a ring.	0.87874323
For when the instrument reaches the water, it immediately flows down upon the instrument, so empty half of the water at once.	When the instrument reaches the fluid, the fluid will at once pass down into it.	0.7245273
For if you empty more than is appropriate at once, the patient might die immediately from the collapse of his vital spirit, or he may suffer a fainting spell approaching death.	Evacuate at one time only a moderate amount of fluid; for if you evacuate more than you should at a time, the patient may die through a dissolution of his animal spirits, or he will undergo a fainting that is next door to death.	0.819051
But empty it according to his strength, and as the condition of the patient indicates to you, based on the strength of his pulse and his well-being.	But let out such quantity of fluid as is proportionate to his strength and as is indicated to you by the patient's condition: the strength of his pulse and the goodness of his colour.	0.7707648
Then remove the instrument, and retain the water.	Then withdraw the instrument and keep (the rest of) the fluid in.	0.76707786
This is because it is immediately retained by the skin that seals the hole which is over the membrane, about which I have spoken, so that you pierce it in that manner.	For it will be immediately held back by the skin that closes the opening in the peritoneum, which, as I have told you, must be perforated in that manner.	0.75031304
Then repeat the use of the instrument on the following day, if you see that the patient can tolerate it, and also draw off a small amount of water.	Then repeat the use of the instrument another day if you see that the patient can tolerate it, and withdraw again a small quantity of fluid.	0.9299796
Do this for several days without fear, and guard yourself from error, until only a little water remains.	And do this daily, watchful and on guard against error, until there is only a trace of fluid left.	0.69714165
But if you fear for the patient and leave much of the water, then treat him with burial in warm sand, intense sweating in the bath and sun, and let him endure thirst; treat him with drying medicines until he is healed, and cauterize over the stomach, liver, and spleen after the water extraction, as I described previously.	But if you are afraid for the patient and leave a large amount of fluids treat him by burying him in hot sand, and by heavy sweating in the bath and in the sun, and letting him go thirsty; while you treat him with drying medicines, till he is well. He should also be cauterized on the abdomen and on the liver and spleen after the paracentesis, as I have previously described.	0.950564

chapter-2-subchapter-55.txt
Chapter 55.	CHAPTER FIFTY-FIVE.	0.63688886
When one of the infants is born from his mother’s womb, and the head of his penis is unperforated, or the opening is narrow, or in an improper place.	On the treatment of boys born with imperforate urinary meatus; or with the meatus small or not in the proper place. Sometimes a boy is born from his mother's womb with the glans penis not perforate.	0.64404756
It is necessary to assist by making an opening immediately after birth with a very fine spatula, in this form.	So at the moment of his birth you should be quick and make a perforation with a fine scalpel figured thus.	0.61107224
Then place a slender lead nail in the opening and tie it in place, and leave it for three or four days.	Then put in the opening a slender leaden sound, tie it and keep it in for three or four days.	0.9213276
Then, when he wishes to urinate, remove it, and let him urinate. Then reinsert it.	When he wishes to make water, it will be removed and he will do so; then put it back.	0.7409311
And if you do not insert the lead, it is possible that the urine which flows over the area will not allow it to close.	If you do not put in the leaden sound it may be that the urine passing through the place will prevent the wound from healing.	0.72447693
The one whose opening is narrow is treated with lead, as we have described, for many days, until it widens.	The case having too narrow a meatus should be treated with the leaden sound, as we have said, for many days until it is wide enough.	0.7291787
This is because, in some of those who are born, the opening is at the end of the penis head, so he cannot urinate forward until he lifts the penis upward by hand. Nor can he procreate, because semen cannot reach the womb in a straight manner, and it is a very serious defect.	In those cases having a misplaced meatus—for example, there are some born with the opening at the edge of the glans so that they cannot make water forwards until the opening of the penis is lifted up by hand, nor can they beget, since the semen cannot reach directly to the uterus, a disorder which is very ugly.	0.77364707
The procedure for this is to lay the patient on his back. Then stretch the head of his penis with your left hand with a strong extension, and cut the head of the penis at the location of the glans, with a sharp point or a fine spatula: like cutting a reed, or as though you are scraping something, so that the middle forms like the head of the penis, and the hole falls properly in the middle.	The manner of operating in this case is for the patient to lie back; then with your left hand draw out his glans firmly and cut the end of the glans at the place of the meatus with a broad knife or sharp scalpel, as if sharpening a pen, or as if you were whittling something, so that the middle of it protrudes like a glans penis and the opening falls in the middle as it should.	0.9035083
And take care during your procedure to avoid the flow of blood. For this often happens. So counter it with whatever stops bleeding, and treat the wound until it heals.	And beware, in your operating, of haemorrhage, which often happens; meet it with styptics and dress the wound until it heals.	0.7322825

chapter-2-subchapter-56.txt
Chapter 56.	CHAPTER FIFTY-SIX.	0.6074945
Often, these Albather occur on the penis, and it is a growth of foul flesh.	These pustules very frequently occur in the urinary meatus and are excrescences of foul tissue.	0.65552664
And of these, some are malignant, and others are not malignant.	Some are malignant and some are not.	0.76008
Therefore, for the non-malignant one, it is necessary to suspend it with a fine hook and cut it off until you completely remove it. Then place a piece of cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment over it. Then treat it afterward with dyafinicon ointment until it heals.	The nonmalignant you should seize with a fine hook and pare away until they are altogether gone; then apply to the place cotton wool soaked in Egyptian ointment; then afterwards dress with Palm ointment until healed.	0.72818065
But if the Albather is malignant and of foul color, then it is necessary to apply cautery to it after its incision and scraping.	But when the pustules are malignant, of a dirty colour, for these you should employ the cautery after cutting and scraping them.	0.8125346
However, if the Albather is in the foreskin of a captive, not circumcised, and part of the Albather is within the foreskin and part outside: then it is necessary to remove the Albather that is inside first, so that when it heals, then you treat the outside; for if you treat it all at once, the foreskin will not be secured without being perforated.	If the pustules be on the prepuce of an uncircumcized unbeliever and there are some inside the prepuce and some outside, those that are inside should be removed first; and when they are healed over, then treat those outside. For if you deal with both at the same time you are in danger of going through the prepuce.	0.76270854
And discoloration and decay also occur in the testicles and foreskin. Therefore, it is necessary for you to scoop out everything that is discolored and is decaying or has already decayed.	Sometimes there occurs a blackness and necrosis in the testicles and prepuce; then you should scrape away all the black part which looks ready to go necrotic or has already necrosed.	0.6401161
Then rub over it afterward with honey that has been mixed with the flour of pomegranate peels and sifted ground herbs.	Then afterwards smear on the place honey with pounded and sifted pomegranate peel and bitter vetch.	0.7959182
Then treat it with the remaining treatments until it heals.	Then carry on with the usual treatment until healed.	0.79707074
But if bleeding occurs, then apply cautery with a lunar cautery, in this manner.	If haemorrhage set in, cauterize with a lunate cautery figured thus.	0.6887018
Cautery is indeed helpful for two conditions at once, namely, for bleeding and when a wound is decaying.	For the cautery serves a twofold purpose, namely against haemorrhage and for a putrefying wound.	0.6398282
But if the head of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed quickly, then it is necessary to insert a lead tube into the urethra so the patient can urinate through it.	If at any time the penis mortifies and goes entirely, you should pass into the urethra a leaden cannula so that the patient can make water.	0.73304445
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis, and this adhesion occurs only in someone whose foreskin is intact and who does not require circumcision, and sometimes adhesion occurs due to a wound or ulcer: it is therefore necessary to scrape it with a blunt spatula until the connection is released and the head of the penis is freed from all sides.	As to the adhesion of the glans to the prepuce (which occurs in him who has his prepuce intact, being under no obligation to be circumcized; sometimes too adhesion may occur by reason of a wound or an abscess) you should scrape it with a flat-nosed scalpel until the adhesion is divided and the glans penis is freed all round from the prepuce.	0.81275046
If it is difficult to separate them precisely, then it is necessary to scrape a bit from the head of the penis and from the foreskin. This is because when the foreskin is thin, it may easily be perforated due to its delicacy.	But if the complete separation of the two be difficult then you should dissect away a little of the glans and of the prepuce; for the prepuce is thin, and consequently it is often pierced quickly.	0.71457136
Then separate the foreskin and head of the penis with a thin linen cloth that has been soaked in cold water, so they do not adhere again.	Separate then between the glans and the prepuce with a piece of fine linen dipped in cold water to prevent further adhesions.	0.68707997
Then treat it with astringent wine until it is healed.	Then let it be dressed with some styptic wine till it heals over.	0.81053776

chapter-2-subchapter-57.txt
On the cleansing of infants and the treatment of any mishap occurring to them.	On the circumcision of boys; and the correction of their erroneous treatment.	0.68545204
Circumcision is not a breaking of continuity like other wounds; however, since it is done by our action, by our will, and its use is specifically for children, it is necessary for us to designate the best procedure in it, and the easiest way that leads to health.	Circumcision is nothing but a solution of continuity like other wounds: but as it is a result of our deliberate action, and as it is done particularly to boys, we should plan in this case the very best operation, and the easiest way that leads to safety.	0.8490846
I say, therefore, that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books, because they do not practice it in their laws, and it is only something we have acquired through experience.	Now the Ancients made no mention of circumcision in any of their books, since it was not practised in their religion; but it is something we have acquired by experience.	0.8175731
This is because I found that most craftsmen and phlebotomists use cleansing, circumcising with a razor and scissors; and they use compression, and binding with thread, and incision with a claw.	I have myself seen the common run of practitioners and barbers carry it out with razor and with scissors; they use a spindle-whorl, a ligature of thread, and incision by means of the finger-nail.	0.77512336
And indeed, I have tried all these methods, and I found no better cleansing than with scissors and binding with thread.	I have personally tried all these ways and have not found a better than circumcision with scissors and a thread ligature.	0.84053355
For with cleansing done by razor, the skin often escapes. Since the skin of the foreskin has two layers, the upper skin may therefore be cut while the lower layer remains; thus, a further incision to cut the other layer is required, causing future pain. And with the cleansing done by compression, that is, the digital clamp used by suturers, the incision of the tip of the male member is not assured, because it may possibly enter its opening.	For circumcision carried out with the razor is often eluded by the skin; for the skin of the prepuce is of two layers; and often the outer skin is incised and the inner is left intact, so that a second incision is needed, and renewed pain; while when the circumcision is done with a spindle-whorl you are in danger of cutting the tip of the penis, since the tip often goes into the aperture of the whorl.	0.83926105
However, in cleansing with a claw, the instrument may slip and spoil your procedure: and indeed, the skin of a boy is naturally short, and many are born such that they do not need cleansing, as I have already observed.	As for circumcision by the finger-nail, the nail will often slip off the skin and your operation be spoilt; or the boy's foreskin may be naturally short, for many are born thus, not needing circumcision. I have seen this myself.	0.71150786
But the cleansing with scissors and thread binding has shown me good results: for the scissors are proportionate in their incision; therefore, the sharpness that is above is like the sharpness that is below. Thus, when you press your hand, the two sharp edges are aligned and cut as a single action in one moment; and a similar shape of compression occurs, holding the skin of the penis from all sides, with which no error occurs at all.	Experience has taught me the superiority of circumcision with the scissors and the thread ligature. For scissors cut evenly, since the upper edge of the scissors is exactly the same as the lower edge; and so, as you compress your hand, thanks to the correspondence of the two blades you cut equally and simultaneously; and you make the girdle of the thread like a wall all round the skin of the tip of the penis: thus no error can occur.	0.83835846
And the proper procedure is to make the boy believe, especially if he is one who understands a little, that you are only tying thread around his penis; and you leave it until the next day.	The manner of operating is first to make the boy, especially if he is one who understands a little, imagine that all you are going to do is tie a ligature on the tip of the penis and leave it for another day.	0.72744346
Then make him happy and delighted in every way possible, given what his understanding can receive. Then have him stand with his height adjusted between your hands, and not be sitting; and hide the scissors in your sleeve, or under your foot, so that the boy does not see them at all, nor any of the instruments.	Then amuse him and cheer him as much as you can, according to his intelligence; then stand him upright before you, not sitting; and hide the scissors in your sleeve or under your foot and do not let the boy's eye chance upon that or any other instrument.	0.892092
Then place your hand on his penis, blow on the skin, and pull it upward until the head of the penis emerges. Then cleanse it of any dirt that has gathered on it.	Then with your hand take hold of the tip of the penis, blow into the foreskin, and draw it back till the glans penis is exposed; then cleanse from it all unclean matter that has collected.	0.805982
Afterward, tie a second ligature slightly below it. Then hold the place of the lower ligature firmly with your index finger and thumb, and cut between the two ligatures. Then lift the skin upward quickly and expose the head of the penis. Then let the blood flow gradually (for it is better), and apply powder on top; and over the powder, place a cloth spread with egg yolk cooked in rose water, shaken with fresh good rose oil: and leave it on until the next day, and treat it with the remaining remedies until it heals.	Then ligate the indicated place with a double ligature, and a second right round beneath; then take hold at the site of the lower ligature with thumb and forefinger, very firmly, and cut between the ligatures; then quickly push back the skin and draw out the glans penis; then let a little blood flow, for that is all the better and prevents the swelling of the tip of the penis; then wipe it with a piece of soft cloth, then sprinkle on it ashes of dried gourds (this is the best of all that I have tried) or else fine white flour, which is also good; then apply on top of the powders a piece of linen with egg-yolk cooked in rosewater, beaten up with fresh oil of roses of good quality. Leave this on the wound until the following day; then dress it in the usual way till healed.	0.9161725
Now, the form of the scissors for cleansing is as follows.	This is the type of scissors most suitable for circumcizing.	0.428953
The two ends should be blunt and cutting; let there be no branching pin between them, and the length of the two blades should be the same as the length of the two handles.	They should be fiat-nosed, sharp, with no bend in them, and with the pivot tempered ; and the length of the handles should be equal to that of the blades.	0.7331266
The error that occurs in cleansing is this: that perhaps the inner skin may entirely escape, or part of it at the incision.	Now the mistake often occurring in circumcision is for the inner layer of skin, either the whole or the part, to be inverted at the cutting.	0.64616436
Therefore, it is necessary to stretch it immediately with your nail before the formation of an abscess in the area, and cut it evenly.	So you should at the start draw it out with your finger-nail before the place swell; then make an even incision.	0.67679095
If you cannot hold it with your nail, then draw it out with a hook and cut it.	And if you are unable to get a hold with your finger-nail then pick it up with a hook and make your incision.	0.8007993
But if three days have passed, and what is beneath the penis remains swollen, forming an abscess: then leave it until the warm abscess settles, and scrape it gently, and cut it according to what you have prepared for yourself; and take care around the head of the penis. For that will not harm him.	If after three days there still remains some inflation and swelling of the part below the tip of the penis, let it be until the effusion subsides, and then gently peel it away and cut it as best you may. Be careful of the tip of the penis; though if any of the tip is cut away that will do no harm.	0.8001933
Therefore, treat it with something that heals the wound using powders, which we have described in the treatise on powders; and if the cut goes beyond the skin or extends upward, that also will not harm him.	And dress the wound with stimulating medicaments from among the powders that we described in the treatise on powders. Should more of the skin be cut away than necessary and the skin is wrinkled up, that will do no great harm either.	0.76452065
Therefore, treat it with what we have said, until it heals.	Continue such treatment as we have mentioned, until healed.	0.76474965

chapter-2-subchapter-58.txt
On the extraction of urine retained in the bladder.	On the treatment of retention of urine.	0.6732929
Retention of urine in the bladder occurs due to obstruction caused by a stone, congealed blood, pus, flesh growth, and similar conditions among those we have discussed in the methods of treatment in this section.	Retention of the urine is caused by an obstruction, from a stone or a clot of blood or pus or a fleshy tumour, or similar cause.	0.71768665
And if the urine is not released, and you see that its retention is due to a stone lodged in the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be bent over on their knees. Then position his feet upon his back, and let him stretch his belly above his back, and let the patient hold his breath as much as he can. Thus, pressure is applied on the neck of the bladder to force the stone backward, and the urine is released.	When you have carried out treatment in the ways we have prescribed in their place and the urine is not released; and when you see that it is held back by a stone sticking in the neck of the bladder, then you should have the patient down on his knees, squatting; then mount a man on his back to press his abdomen against his back; and let the patient himself hold his breath as tightly as possible; for then pressure will be put on the neck of the bladder to force the stone back and liberate the urine.	0.88472545
But if this method does not work, and the condition is severe for the patient, then extraction must be administered using an instrument called a syringe, the design of which is as follows. It should be made of silver, and be slender, smooth, and hollow like the quill of a bird's feather in thinness, and about one and a half palms in length, with a thin tube at its tip.	But if these measures do not free it and the matter is very urgent with the patient, then you should attempt to bring it out with the instrument called a catheter, of which this is the figure. It is made of silver, slender and smooth and hollow like the quill of a bird's feather; as slender as a probe; about a span and a half in length; and with a tiny funnel at the end.	0.8349602
The method for releasing urine through this instrument is to take a doubled thread, tie wool or cotton securely to its end, and insert the thread’s end into the lower part of the syringe; and if there is excess wool, trim it with scissors, then insert it into the tube with firmness, like an insertion tool.	This is the manner in which you draw off the urine through it: take a double thread and with a strong knot tie a little wool or cotton on the end, introduce the end of the thread into the lower end of the catheter, and trim off with scissors any superfluous wool, so that it will go into the tube and close it like a tassel.	0.81119436
Then anoint the syringe with oil, or with butter, and egg white; and make the patient sit upon a seat, apply warm oils to the bladder and his penis, with olive oil and warm water.	Then smear the catheter with oil or butter or egg-white. Make the patient sit down; then anoint the bladder and the meatus of the penis with humid oils or with olive-oil and warm water.	0.9200442
Then insert the syringe into the penis gently, until it reaches the base of the penis.	Then gently introduce the catheter into the urethra until it reaches the root of the urethra.	0.78460026
Then bend it above towards the direction of the navel.	Then turn the end of the penis upward toward the umbilicus; then push the catheter inwards until the curve of the catheter ends, and push the catheter in until it reaches nearly to the seat.	0.48433805
Then push the syringe further in until it reaches the bladder, and the patient will feel that it has reached an empty space: this is done in this manner only because the passage it travels through has a curve.	Then turn the penis down, with the catheter in it, and push until it reaches the bladder, and the patient now feels that it has entered a hollow. The reason why the operation is done in this manner is that the passage by which the urine is excreted is curved.	0.7357952
Then gradually draw out the thread with the wool. For the urine will follow the wool.	Then withdraw rather firmly the thread with the wool plug attached, for the urine follows the wool; then pull it right out and the urine will pour out.	0.73019636
Then remove it, and allow the urine to flow through the urinary passage; repeat the use of the syringe, and continue doing this until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.	Apply the catheter again and again until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.	0.67132163

chapter-2-subchapter-59.txt
Chapter 59.	CHAPTER FIFTY-NINE.	0.54141736
When an ulcer occurs in the bladder, or blood congeals in it, or pus gathers there, and you wish to instill water and medicines into it, this should be done with an instrument called a clepsydra, and this is its design.	When there occurs an ulcer in the bladder, or there is a clot of blood or a deposit of pus in it, and you wish to instil into it lotions and medicaments, this is done with the help of an instrument called a syringe.	0.81055105
It is deaf, that is, closed. And it has three openings, two on one side, and one on the other, as you see.	It is made of silver or ivory, hollow, with a long fine tube, fine as a probe; entirely hollow except for the end, which is solid with three holes in it: two on one side and one on the other, as you see.	0.60668194
And the hollow chamber, where the plunger is, should be of a size that fits without excess, so that when it is drawn, moisture is sucked in; and when pushed, it expels to a distance, as with the clepsydra used to project naphtha, or "Greek fire," in battles of Mars.	The hollow part containing the plunger is exactly of a size to be closed by it, so that any liquid is drawn up with it when you pull it up; and when you press it down it is driven in a jet, as is done by the projector whereby naphtha is thrown in naval battles.	0.72081566
So when you wish to project moisture into the bladder, insert the end of the clepsydra into the moisture, and draw up with the plunger; the moisture is drawn into the hollow chamber of the clepsydra.	So when you wish to inject fluid into the bladder, dip the end of the syringe into the fluid and draw up the piston, for the fluid will be drawn up into the cavity of the syringe.	0.78191423
Then insert its end into the penis, as we described with the syringe. Then push the moisture with the plunger, so that this moisture reaches the bladder immediately, and the patient feels it.	Then introduce the end into the urethra as we described for catheterization; then expel the fluid by means of the piston; the fluid will immediately flow into the bladder and the patient will have a sense of its entry.	0.8329839
The form of the slender irrigator by which the bladder is irrigated.	This is the illustration of a fine clyster also for irrigation of the bladder.	0.4351162
It should be made of silver or brass, with its head slightly raised like a small bowl, and beneath it, a hollow where a ligature may rest.	It is made of silver or white copper. The upper part of it is like a small funnel and beneath it is a groove where falls the thread of the ligature.	0.754244
Then take a ram’s bladder, and place in it the moisture you wish to use for irrigating the bladder. Then tie it between the two hollows with a strong ligature using double thread, and warm that moisture slightly over a fire.	Then take a camel's bladder and fill it with whatever fluid you wish to wash the bladder out with, and tie it to the syringe with a strong ligature of double thread between the two ridges. Warm the fluid a little over the fire; then introduce the end of the siphon into the end of the urinary meatus.	0.8181343
Then insert the end of the irrigator into the penis, and press your hand on the bladder containing the moisture with moderate pressure, until the patient feels that the moisture has now reached the bladder.	Warm the fluid a little over the fire; then introduce the end of the siphon into the end of the urinary meatus. Then apply strong pressure to the bladder containing the fluid until the patient can feel the fluid has entered his own bladder.	0.7831824
But if you do not have a bladder at hand, then take a piece of parchment, make a circle from it, and perforate it all around its circumference. Then insert a strong thread into those holes, as they go around. Then join the circle, as the "alsofrat" is joined: after you place in it whatever you want from moistures, oils, and waters.	But if you have not a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and cut out a circle; then make holes in the edge all round the circle; then pass a strong ligature through these holes all round and draw the circle in, as a bag is closed with a draw-string, first putting into it whatever fluid, oil, or water, you desire.	0.84948635
Then bind it to the instrument: and use it as you did with the bladder, by squeezing it with your hand, until the moisture reaches the bladder.	Then tie it to the instrument and do with it as with the camel's bladder, squeezing until the fluid reaches the bladder of the patient.	0.732657

chapter-2-subchapter-60.txt
On the extraction of the stone.	On the extraction of the stone.	0.99999994
I have already spoken in detail of the types of stones and their treatment with medicines: and I have explained the difference between a stone formed in the kidneys and one in the bladder, and all its signs: and I have mentioned the stone upon which surgery and incision fall: it is the stone specifically formed in the bladder, and also that which is lodged in the penis: and I am narrating this with a clear explanation and in a concise manner.	We have already in the due place reviewed the different kinds of stone and the medical treatment of them. I mentioned too the difference between stones arising in the kidney and those arising in the bladder, and gave all the symptoms of them. I also mentioned the kind of stone to which manipulation and incision are appropriate. This is in particular the stone arising in the bladder, and the sort impacted in the urethra.	0.84346247
I say, therefore, that a stone formed in the bladder occurs mostly in boys.	Now I say that a vesical calculus most frequently occurs in boys.	0.7587705
And one of its signs is that the urine flows out from the bladder, similar to water in its thinness: white sand appears in it, and the patient rubs his penis, struggles with it, and often it becomes erect. Then it rises, and the anus protrudes with it in many of them.	Among the symptoms is that the urine passed out of the bladder is of a thin consistency like water, and sand appears in it; and the patient keeps on rubbing and playing with his penis; and often it hangs flaccid and then is erected; at the same time many of them get a prolapse of the rectum.	0.84626734
And healing is easy in children, up to the time when they reach fourteen years. And it is difficult in the elderly. In young people, it is intermediate, between the two: and for the one whose stone is larger, treatment is easier; and if it is small, it is the opposite in treatment.	The cure of boys under the age of fourteen years is easy; but the treatment of old people is difficult; and that of young men midway between the two. And the larger the stone the easier the cure; with a small stone the cure is otherwise.	0.9010461
Therefore, when we proceed to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with an enema, which will remove all the feces in his intestines: for sometimes this obstructs the detection of the stone during the examination.	When we undertake treatment the patient must first have an enema to empty his bowel completely; for sometimes the faeces prevent the calculus being found when it is looked for.	0.7709031
Then the patient should be taken by his feet, shaken, and moved downwards: so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, or jumps from a high place at times.	Then the patient should be taken by the feet and jarred to and fro and shaken downwards to bring the calculus down into the neck of the bladder; or else let him jump down from a height a number of times.	0.79962575
Then make him sit, positioned between your hands, with his hands under his hips, so that the entire bladder is inclined downwards.	Then have him sit down upright before you with his hands beneath his thighs, to make the whole bladder incline downwards.	0.8593697
Then examine him, and touch him externally.	Then examine him and palpate him externally.	0.94435215
If then you feel the stone in the space, proceed immediately with the incision upon it.	If you feel the stone in the empty place, immediately hasten and cut down upon it.	0.7818996
But if it does not fall entirely under your touch, then you should anoint the index finger of your left hand with oil if the patient is a boy, or the middle finger if he is a grown youth: and insert it into his anus, and search for the stone, until it is under your finger: and gradually move it towards the neck of the bladder.	But if there is not the slightest sign of it to the touch then you should anoint with oil the forefinger of your left hand if it be a boy, or the middle finger if it be a fully grown young man, and introduce it into the anus and search around for the calculus, until, when it comes under the finger, you can work it slowly towards the neck of the bladder.	0.87977886
Then press on it with your finger, and push it outward toward the area where you wish to make the incision: instruct an assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and instruct another assistant to extend the testicles upwards with his right hand, and with his other hand to pull back the skin below the testicles in the area away from where the incision will be made.	Then press upon it with your finger and push it outwards toward the place where you wish to make your incision. And bid an assistant squeeze the bladder with his hand; and bid another assistant raise the scrotum with his left hand and with the other hand stretch the skin under the testicles away from the place where the incision is going to be.	0.9271804
And make the incision in the area between the anus and the testicles, not in the middle, but to the left side of the buttocks: and let the incision be upon the stone itself, with your finger in the anus: and make a transverse incision, so that the outer part is wide and the inner part is narrow, according to a size that allows the stone to pass through, but no larger.	Then do you take a lancet like this and make your incision in the space between the anus and the testicles, not in the mid-line but on the side of the left buttock; and cut down upon the calculus itself, keeping your finger in the anus and pressing it outwards. The incision should be oblique, wide externally and narrowing inwards down to dimensions allowing the exit of the stone, not larger.	0.8673513
For sometimes the finger, which is in the anus, compresses the stone at the incision, and it exits without difficulty.	Now you may press with the finger that is in the anus upon the stone as you make the incision, and it comes out without difficulty.	0.7215266
And know that some stones have corners and edges, which makes their passage difficult for this reason.	You should know that sometimes there are stones which have angles and edges, on which account their extraction is difficult.	0.8014681
And some stones are smooth, similar to a gland, and round: and their passage is easy.	Some are smooth like acorns and rounded, and these come out easily.	0.6923372
For the one with corners and edges, enlarge the cut.	But in those cases where the stone is rough and angular you should slightly increase the incision.	0.541891
But if it does not exit this way, then you must use ingenuity on it: either press on it appropriately with a tool whose end is shaped like the moon, to grip the stone, so that it does not escape from it; or insert beneath it a slender instrument with a curved end.	Then if it still will not come out you must then resort to a device— namely to catch hold of it with strong forceps having an extremity like a rasp, to get a tight hold of it so it shall not slip out; or else introduce beneath it a narrow instrument with a crooked end.	0.7943745
But if you are still unable to reach it, then enlarge the opening a little. But if some bleeding overwhelms you, cut it with a zegi.	And if you then cannot get the stone out, widen the incision slightly; and if there is any bleeding stanch it with vitriol.	0.6754403
But if there is more than one stone, then first push the larger one towards the mouth of the bladder. Then cut over it. Afterwards, push the smaller one after it: and do the same if there are more than two.	If there should be a number of stones first push the largest of them into the neck of the bladder, then cut down upon it; then push a smaller one down after it; and do the same if there be more than two.	0.8337799
But if it is very large, it is unwise to cut over it with a large incision. For one of two things happens to the patient: either he dies, or he suffers from a constant dribbling of urine, because the place does not heal completely.	But if the stone be very large it is foolish to make a great incision down upon it; for the result is that the patient either dies or has a chronic urinary fistula because the place will not heal at all.	0.7857094
Rather, aid its expulsion until it exits: or use ingenuity in breaking it with forceps, until you extract it piece by piece.	Try rather to manipulate it so that it protrudes; or else attempt to break it up with the forceps so that you can extract it piecemeal.	0.77290165
When you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with frankincense, aloe, and dragon’s blood: bind it, and place over it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rose oil and cold water, to calm the warm swelling.	And when you have completed the operation pack the wound with frankincense and aloes and dragon's blood, and bind it up and apply a pad soaked in olive oil and wine or oil of roses and cold water, to reduce the swelling.	0.86979353
Then lay the patient back on his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day. When you loosen it, then wash the area with water and plenty of oil.	The patient should lie flat on his back and the bindings should not be undone before the third day; and when they are undone foment the place with plenty of oil and water.	0.83477974
Then treat it with dyafinicon ointment and basilicon ointment until it heals.	Then dress it with Palm ointment and basilicon ointment until it heals.	0.8662213
If, however, a hot swelling occurs in the wound, along with corrosion and similar issues: such as when blood clots in the bladder and obstructs the urine: and this is recognized by the passage of blood with the urine. Then insert your finger into the wound, and extract that blood. For if it remains, it causes the bladder to decay and rot.	If an increasing and cankerous abscess occur in the wound, or anything similar such as clotting of blood within the bladder, with stoppage of the urine (which would be signified by the urine being accompanied by blood) pass your finger into the wound and remove the blood; for if it lies in it it will lead to sepsis and necrosis of the bladder.	0.8122041
Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt: and apply every kind of treatment suitable until it is healed.	Then wash out the wound with vinegar and water and salt, and apply whatever treatment is suitable for the case until it heals.	0.84537077
And during all treatment times, you must bind the two thighs and bring them together, to keep the medicines in place over the area.	Also at all times during treatment his hips should be bound and kept together so that the medicaments applied to the place may not be disturbed.	0.77193743
If the stone is small, lodged in the urethra, and blocks the exit of urine, then treat it with what I am telling you before you resort to incision. Many times you can avoid incision by using this treatment, as I have already proven.	Now if the calculus be small and be impacted in the opening of the urinary passage, preventing the exit of the urine, treat it with the means I am about to describe before you go on to make your incision, for often I have found this treatment suffice without incision; I have experience of this.	0.8535732
And it involves taking a perforator made of iron from alfaric, in this form, with a triangular, sharp end fixed in wood.	You take a drill of the finest steel, of this shape. It should be triangular at the point and sharp, with a wooden handle.	0.6462192
Then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone so it does not return to the bladder.	Then take a thread and with it bind the penis beneath the calculus to prevent the stone from returning to the bladder.	0.9008901
Then insert the perforating iron into the penis gently, until the perforator reaches the stone itself: and slowly rotate the perforator on the stone with your hand: and try to perforate it, until you make it pass through to the other side.	Then introduce the iron of the drill gently into the meatus until the drill reaches the stone itself, and then very very gently revolve the drill upon the stone with your hand, and try to perforate it, till you pierce it through to the other side.	0.9029963
Then the urine flows out immediately.	Then the urine will at once be released.	0.890334
Then press your hand over what remains of the stone on the outer part of the penis. For it breaks, exits with the urine, and the patient is healed.	Then, with your hand outside the penis, squeeze the remains of the stone, and they will crumble and be washed out by the urine and the patient will be cured.	0.88940805
But if this treatment cannot be prepared for you due to some obstruction, then tie a thread below the stone and another above it. Then cut over the stone in the penis itself, between the two ties. Then extract it. Afterwards, untie the binding and clean the clotted blood that has formed in the wound.	But if this treatment is not possible for you on account of some impediment, then tie a thread beneath the stone and another above; then make an incision down upon the stone in the penis itself between the two ligatures, extract it, then undo the ligature and clean away the blood that has clotted in the wound.	0.95311654
And the thread binding below the stone is only necessary to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the upper thread binding is only necessary so that when the thread is loosened after the stone’s removal, the skin returns to its place and covers the wound: and for this, it is necessary when you tie the upper thread to lift the skin upward, so that it returns in its completion and covers the wound, as we have said.	The purpose of the ligature beneath the stone is lest it return to the bladder; and the purpose of the one above it is that when you loosen the ligature after removing the stone the skin may fall back into place so as to cover the wound. On this account, when you tie the upper ligature, you will have to raise the skin so that when you have finished operating it may go back and cover the wound as we have said.	0.862388

chapter-2-subchapter-61.txt
On the extraction of the stone in women.	On the extraction of a stone from the female.	0.8855963
A stone rarely forms in women.	It is very uncommon for women to have stone.	0.8254956
But if one of them develops a stone, the treatment is difficult and is hindered for several reasons.	But if it should happen to a woman the treatment is indeed difficult and is hindered by a number of things.	0.7212143
One of these is that the woman may be a virgin.	One is that the woman may be a virgin.	0.9344054
The second is that you may not find a woman willing to expose herself to a doctor if she is chaste or married.	Another is that you will not find a woman who will expose herself to a (male) doctor if she be chaste or married.	0.8237228
The third is that you may not find a woman well-versed in this art, especially in manual procedures.	A third is that you will not find a woman competent in this art, particularly not in surgery.	0.87331355
And the fourth is the distance from the location of the stone, which requires a deep incision, and this carries risks.	Then a fourth is that the place for cutting upon the stone in a woman is a long way from where the stone lies, so the incision has to be deep, which is dangerous.	0.7900861
If necessity calls for it, then you should find a female doctor who is skilled, though such are rare.	If necessity compels you to this kind of case, you should take with you a competent woman doctor.	0.74465644
If you cannot find her, then seek a chaste, skilled doctor, and bring along a midwife well-versed in women's matters, or a woman familiar with this part of the art; make her present and instruct her to follow all your directions in examining the stone.	As these are very uncommon, if you are without one then seek a eunuch doctor as a colleague, or bring a midwife experienced in women's ailments or a woman to whom you may give some instruction in this art. Have her with you and bid her do all that you enjoin; first of all, in searching for the stone.	0.80482507
First, she should determine if the woman is a virgin: if so, she must insert her finger into the anus and search for the stone.	If she perceive that the woman is a virgin she should pass her finger into the anus and palpate for the stone.	0.64116395
If she finds it, she should press it beneath her finger, and then instruct the midwife to insert her finger into the patient’s vulva and examine the stone, after placing her left hand over the bladder and applying firm pressure.	If she finds it and keeps her finger on it, then bid her cut down upon it. But if the patient be not a virgin bid the midwife pass her finger into the vulva and palpate for the stone, after she has placed her left hand upon the bladder and applied a good pressure.	0.82634985
If she finds the stone, she should then gradually move it from the opening of the bladder downward with all her strength, until it reaches the base of the thigh.	If she finds the stone she should gradually push it down from the outlet of the bladder as far as she can until it reaches the bottom of the pelvis.	0.8984296
Then make an incision over it at the midpoint of the vulva near the base of the thigh, on whichever side it is positioned and where she feels the stone: her finger should not move from the stone, pressing under it, and the initial incision should be small. Then she should insert the probe into that incision.	Then she should cut down upon it from about the middle of the pudenda near the root of the hip on whichever side she can conveniently feel it; she must keep her finger on the stone, pressing from below.	0.7549346
Then she should insert the probe into that incision. If she feels the stone, then enlarge the incision by a proportionate amount so that the stone can pass through it.	The incision should start by being small; then let her introduce a sound into the small incision, and when she finds the stone then she will enlarge the incision until she knows that it is big enough for the exit of the stone.	0.70488256
And know that there are many types of stones. Among them are small and large, smooth and rough, long, and round ones with branches.	You should know that there are many kinds of calculus: some are large and some are small; smooth and rough; long, rounded, and pronged.	0.76013684
Therefore, know its type, so that you are better informed on what to expect.	Learn to recognize these types and you will have an indication of what to do.	0.52045333
If bleeding overwhelms you, then apply powdered zegi to the area, and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops.	If you are hindered by a haemorrhage, scatter powdered vitriol on the place and keep it there for a time until the haemorrhage has ceased, and then return to your operating until the stone is out.	0.7093307
Then return to your operation until the stone is extracted: and make sure you have with you the instruments I mentioned for extracting stones in men, so they may aid you in your operation.	See also that you have ready the instruments mentioned for the extraction of stone from the male, to assist you in operating.	0.70174664
But if bleeding overcomes you and you know that the bleeding is from a severed artery, then apply powder to the area, compress it with pads of appropriate tightness, and do not change it: and leave the stone alone, do not extract it. For the sick woman might die. Then treat the wound.	If you are hindered by a haemorrhage and you know, by the spurting of the blood, that it comes from an artery that has been cut, then put styptic powder on the place and bind up tightly with bandages and leave it and do not come back to it; let the stone be and do not extract it, for often that loses the patient; then dress the wound.	0.76112634
When the intensity of the bleeding subsides after a few days, and the area has softened, then return to your operation until the stone exits.	And after some days, when the acute haemorrhage has subsided and suppuration has set in, return to your operating until you get the stone out.	0.8282105

chapter-2-subchapter-62.txt
On the incision for a watery hernia.	On opening a watery hernia.	0.68794084
A watery swelling is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white membrane, which is under the skin of the testicle containing the egg, and it is called "sifac."	A watery hernia is a collection of fluid in the white membrane lying beneath the skin surrounding the testicle, which is called the scrotum.	0.7179714
And sometimes it is in its own membrane, which nature has prepared for it in part of the egg, until it ripens; this is another egg, and the skin of the testicle is between it and the white membrane we mentioned, though this is rare.	Sometimes it has a capsule of its own which nature has formed alongside the testis so that one would think it another testicle; it may also form between the skin of the scrotum and the white membrane which we mentioned; however, this occurs very rarely.	0.7683941
And indeed the generation of this swelling comes from a weakness that happens to the testicles, wherefore this matter is discharged to them. And sometimes it happens from a blow to the testicles.	This hernia arises from a weakness occurring in the testicles and this matter drains into it; sometimes it happens from a blow upon the testicles.	0.76860344
And this moisture has many colors. For its color is either inclined to yellowness, or it is blood-red, or it is muddy black, or it is watery white, and this is the most common.	The fluid is of different colours, sometimes yellowish, sometimes blood-red, sometimes like lees, black, and sometimes the fluid is watery-pale; this actually is the commonest.	0.7887486
And the signs by which the location of the water accumulation is known are as follows. For if it is in the white membrane we mentioned, then the swelling is round and somewhat elongated like the shape of an egg, and the testicle does not appear, because the moisture surrounds it on all sides.	Now these are the signs whereby we know where the fluid is collecting: if it be in the tunica albugínea, as we have said, the tumour will be round and slightly elongated like the shape of an egg. The testis is not apparent since the fluid hems it in all round.	0.8168517
And if the moisture is in its own membrane, then the swelling is round with part of the egg, and for this reason a person thinks it is another egg.	But if the fluid be contained in a capsule of its own the tumour will be round, to one side of the testicle; therefore one imagines that it is another testicle.	0.7097549
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white membrane, then it falls under sensation.	If the fluid be situated between the skin of the scrotum and the tunica albugínea it will be obvious to the touch.	0.6066627
Therefore, when you wish to know the color of the moisture, then test the color of the moisture in the swelling with a square introducer, the form of which was previously described. Thus, according to what appears in the track of the introducer, judge concerning that which is within it.	If you wish to know the colour of the fluid, take a sample from the tumour by means of the four-sided exploring needle which has been figured previously; and by what comes out in the track of the explorer you may know the colour of the contained fluid.	0.6789367
Therefore, when we come to the cure with the knife, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to be bled if possible for him, and you observe that his body is full.	When we begin operative treatment the patient should be told to be venesected, if possible, if you see that he is of a plethoric bodily habit.	0.5326358
Then he should be laid on his back on a somewhat elevated surface, and place many cloths under him.	Then let him lie on his back upon something a little raised, and have a heap of material placed beneath him.	0.78630245
Then sit on his left side, and instruct the assistant to sit on his right side, who will stretch his member to one of the two sides of the skin of the testicles, and towards the part of the abdomen.	Then sit down on his left side, and bid an assistant sit on his right side and draw out his penis toward one side or other of the scrotum and toward the hypogastrium.	0.80550873
Then take a wide spatula and cut the skin of the testicles from the middle along the length, up to near the pubic hair; and let the incision be made in the straight line that divides the skin of the testicles, until it reaches the white membrane encompassing it; and flay it and observe, or take care lest you cut it; and let the flaying by which you strip it be from the part that is more suspended with the egg; and carefully examine with the stripping to the extent that is possible for you.	Then take a broad scalpel and make a longitudinal incision in the scrotum, from the middle almost to the pubes. The incision should be straight, on a parallel with the median raphe of the scrotum, down to the tunica albuginea, and dissect away from it carefully lest you cut it. You should dissect chiefly on the side where the testicle is most adherent, and take your dissection as far as possible.	0.83923745
Then pierce the white membrane full of water with a wide perforation, and draw out all the water.	Then open up the membrane containing the fluid with a wide perforation and draw off all the fluid.	0.8171551
Then separate the two lips of the incision with hooks, and stretch the white membrane upwards, and do not touch the skin enclosing the testicles; and cut the white membrane however it is possible for you to cut it, either in its entirety, or in pieces, especially its thinner side. For if you do not examine closely, security is not achieved in its incision, lest the water returns.	Then with hooks separate the two edges of the incision and draw the membrane upwards but do not touch the skin overlying the testes; then cut away the membrane in whatever way is possible, either as a whole or piecemeal, particularly the side piece; for unless you use the utmost diligence in cutting it away you cannot be certain that the fluid will not come back.	0.8773043
However, if the egg protrudes outward from its skin at the time of your operation, then when you complete the incision of the white membrane, return it. Then join the two lips of the skin of the testicles with a suture.	If the testicle should protrude from its covering of skin while you are operating, return it when you have finished cutting the membrane; then bring together the two edges of your incision with a suture.	0.77153546
Then care for it as with other wounds, until it heals.	Then dress with the usual dressings for wounds until healed.	0.6657609
But if you find the egg corrupted by some blackness, then you must tie the vessels, which are the suspensory structures, fearing the flow of blood.	If you find the testicle corrupted by some other disease, you will have to tie off the vessels which are in the suspensor, for fear of haemorrhage.	0.6865685
Then cut off the testicle with the suspensory, and extract the egg; afterwards treat it with what we have mentioned.	Then cut the testicle from the suspensor and remove it and dress as we said above.	0.7304919
But if the water is accumulated in two parts, then know that there are two swellings; therefore cut the other part as you did the first one, equally.	If the accumulation of fluid be on both sides you may know it to be a double hydrocele; so make another incision on the other side as you did for the first.	0.7286978
And if it is manageable for you to make it one operation, then do it; then wipe away the blood. And insert into the incisions wool soaked in oil or in rose oil; and on the outside, place other wool soaked in wine and oil, and spread it over both testicles and the lower abdomen; and place doubled cloths on top, which are cushions; and bind them above with a bandage, which has six according to this pattern.	If it is convenient for you to make one operation of it, do so. Then wipe away the blood and apply to the incisions wool that has been soaked in olive-oil or oil of roses and on that again more wool that has been soaked in wine and oil, and spread that over the testicles and over the hypogastrium; and over that again folded pieces of linen forming pads and bind them down with a bandage having six heads. Two pieces of cloth should be taken and sewn together and packed in between with carded wool to this pattern.	0.9169555
Then take two cloths, and sew them, and fill them with carded wool, according to this model: and make ends with which it is pressed with cotton or wet wool; and gather them with tightness in the waistband of the trousers; and one end reaches over the anus to the back, and the second reaches to the area of the groin; and two ends over the two thighs below, and the other two ends over the two groins, and the whole tightness is gathered in the waistband of the trousers.	Two pieces of cloth should be taken and sewn together and packed in between with carded wool to this pattern. The ends by means of which it is attached should be made of cotton or soft wool and should be drawn tight at the waist of the breeches. One of the ends you take over the seat toward the back: the second end you take toward the pubes, the two ends round the thighs below, and the remaining two ends over the groin, and the whole is bound up tight with the belt of the breeches.	0.8703469
And, sometimes this swelling is treated artificially with cautery instead of incision with a knife: and it is done by taking a thin knife-like cautery, and cutting the skin of the testicles with it; and it is heated, as we have described: until when the white membrane containing water is exposed; then take the cautery, in this shape.	This rupture may also be treated by cautery instead of surgery. This will mean taking a knife-edged cautery and cutting with it the skin of the testicles; it should be hot, as we told you before, and used until the white membrane covering the hydrocele be exposed.	0.7556198
It resembles a Greek letter.	Then take another cautery of this type, which resembles the Greek letter tau; and with it perforate that membrane.	0.41777283
Then pierce that white membrane with it while it is heated, until all the moisture exits.	It should be hot so as to draw out all the humidity.	0.50084853
Then stretch the white membrane with hooks, and strip it with a fine heated cautery, and cut it as much as is possible for you, until you eradicate it entirely.	Then stretch the membrane with hooks, dissect away the capsule with the cautery and cut it away as best you are able until you have completely removed it.	0.79995584
And be careful of the egg, so that the fire does not touch it.	But be careful that the heat do not touch the testicle.	0.63184965
And know that this operation is safer, and further from blood flow, and better than the operation with incision.	You should know that this operation is safer, further removed from the danger of haemorrhage, and better, than operation by incision.	0.88223755
But if any resistance occurs at the time of incision, or at the time of cautery, a hot swelling, or blood flow, or something else, then it is necessary to treat what resists you with the treatment that is appropriate for it, as was previously mentioned.	If, while operating either with the knife or the cautery, you are hindered by an inflammatory swelling or haemorrhage or anything else, you should deal with all of them by suitable treatment in accordance with what has been said before.	0.7658055
But if the patient is fearful, and cannot endure this operation because of its terrifying nature, then perform the puncture as I describe it: and it is.	If the patient be timid and will not suffer this operation on account of its unpleasantness, then treat by perforation as I shall now describe.	0.759042
When it is confirmed to you by what we have said about the signs, that the swelling is watery, then it is necessary to make the patient sit on an elevated seat.	When by the signs we have mentioned you are certain that the hernia is watery, you should seat the patient on a high chair and pierce the tumour in its lower part with a broad scalpel.	0.7236765
Then pierce the swelling at its lower part with a wide spatula: and make the puncture along the length of the body, and let the opening be wide, until all the water flows out.	The perforation should run in the long axis of the body, and it should be an ample opening to let all the fluid run out.	0.622636
Then place cotton on the area, and bind it, and leave it so that the remaining water flows out: then treat it, until the wound heals.	Then put cotton on the place and bind it on and leave it so as to soak up the rest of the fluid; then dress the wound until it heals.	0.87779367
But if there is resistance to the flow of water at the time when you pierce it, and this is only because the white membrane causes resistance in the wound opening, and prevents the water from exiting, then you must insert a feather into the wound, or an instrument by which water is extracted from dropsical patients, the shape of which was previously described; or modify the wound operation slightly.	But if the fluid fail to flow out when the opening is made, which would be due to the tunica albuginea's obtruding into the opening and preventing the outlet of the fluid, you should then introduce into the wound a goose-quill or an instrument such as is used for ascites, already described; or else the opening should be widened a little.	0.75052905
And know that the water returns, and accumulates after six months, or around that time. When it accumulates again, then it should be pierced in the same way, and the patient will pass his days.	But you should know that after six months or so the fluid may come back and collect again; when it does so, perforate him in exactly the same manner; so will the patient prolong his life.	0.8268615

chapter-2-subchapter-63.txt
On the treatment of fleshy swelling.	On cutting for a fleshy hernia and its treatment.	0.6592032
Know that in cutting for this swelling, there is danger that leads to harm in many cases. Therefore, it seems to me that leaving it alone is safer for it.	You should know that cutting for this kind of hernia has an uncertain outcome and in most cases results in death; and therefore I think it better to let it be and to safeguard the patient.	0.7006153
And I am recalling the operation for it, and the types of swelling.	However, I shall mention the manner of operating for this and all kinds of tumour.	0.7011031
I say, therefore, that many swellings occur in the bodies that make up the testicles, and it happens from many causes, namely.	Now I say that many tumours arise from the bodies composing the testicles; and this from several causes.	0.8396392
Either from an acute or sharp excess, which flows to the testicles. Or from a blow.	It may be from an acrid superfluity running down into the testicles, or from a blow.	0.7431826
And the color of the swelling is like the color of the body, and it is not painful: and it is a hard swelling.	The colour of the tumour will be like that of the rest of the body and there is no water to it.	0.4542477
And perhaps it is a stone-like swelling, whose color is dark, and it has no sensation.	The lump will be solid and often will be stony hard, of a dark colour, and without sensation.	0.5971011
And sometimes it arises from the twisting of the arteries and their swelling, as has already been mentioned, or from the swelling of the veins.	Sometimes also it arises from a knotting and inflation of the arteries, as has been mentioned, or from an inflation of the veins.	0.86877614
Therefore, what comes from the swelling of the arteries is recognized by the appearance of the swelling when you press it with your fingers. And it is not necessary that you touch it at all.	The sort arising from a swelling of the arteries may be recognized by a dispersal of the lump when you press upon it with your fingers; this should not be interfered with at all.	0.75764465
But that which arises from the swelling of the veins does not disperse at all when compressed with the fingers.	The sort arising from a swelling of the vein will not disperse when you press upon it with your fingers.	0.781212
And now it is possible that an incision be made on this type and on the surrounding flesh: and so, you must cut the skin of the testicles. Then, pull the testicle upwards and remove it with a white cloth; free the suspensory ligament from the vessels, tie the vessels, and cut the suspensory ligament after you have freed it from every part of the testicle.	It is sometimes possible to cut down on this kind and also on the other fleshy tumours thus: make an incision in the skin of the testicles; then draw the testicle upward and out of the tunica albuginea, and free the suspensor from the vessels and tie the vessels, and cut the suspensor after you have freed it from all round the testicle.	0.85355985
If, therefore, the testicle is joined with those growing tissues, then it is necessary to draw out the testicle and cut it.	Should it happen that the testicle is adherent to the fleshy growth, you will have to cut away the testicle itself and remove it.	0.71818465
And if there is an adhesion between any part of the membrane or between the vessels, then you must free all that adhesion and cut it with a circular incision.	But should the adhesion have formed somewhere inside the membranes or in the space between the vessels, then you must free the adhesion as a whole and cut it away with a circular incision.	0.8754423
But if there is a growth of flesh at the site of adhesion behind it, then you must cut all of it and remove the testicle as we have described.	If the fleshy growth should be at the site of the junction which is behind, you will have to cut the whole thing away and remove the testicle as we have said.	0.7970629
When your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine; then treat it with the remaining care until it heals.	And when your operation is finished, pack the wound with wool moistened with oil of roses and wine; then dress in the usual manner until healed.	0.8973514

chapter-2-subchapter-64.txt
On the treatment of Varicocele, which occurs with a swelling.	On the treatment of hernia with varix.	0.68908846
The swelling is an abscess enveloped in a certain layer, resembling a cluster of grapes, along with the softening of the testicles, and it makes movement, exercise, and walking difficult for the patient.	A varix is a twisted tumour resembling a cluster of grapes, with relaxation of the testicles, which makes movement and exercise and walking difficult for the patient.	0.8049247
And in the treatment of this condition, there is a need for caution due to what has been previously mentioned.	The treatment of this condition is of uncertain outcome, akin to those conditions just spoken of.	0.4943162
But it is necessary that we describe the operation as the ancients performed it.	Nevertheless we must describe the operation for this condition as it was performed by the Ancients.	0.81137985
I say, therefore, that you must make the patient sit on an elevated seat. Then, push the suspensory ligament of the testicles downward. Then, hold the skin of the testicles with your fingers, along with the vessels near the penis; and another assistant should hold and stretch them with a strong extension.	So I begin by saying that you must have the patient sitting upon a high seat; then push down the suspensor of the testicles and take hold of the skin of the testicles with your fingers together with the blood-vessels near the penis; then let your assistant take hold instead of you and draw out strongly.	0.907678
Then cut with a broad, sharp blade, making a transverse incision in line with the vessels until the vessels are exposed.	Then with a broad sharp scalpel make an oblique incision in the direction of the vessels so that the vessels are laid bare.	0.78322256
Then strip away from every part, as we described to you in the extraction of the arteries in the temples.	Then dissect on all sides in the same way as I told you for extracting the temporal vessels.	0.7295487
Afterwards, insert a needle with a doubled thread into them, and tie it at the first place where the swellings occur, and tie it again at the end of these locations. Then cut them in the middle with a straight incision along the body's length and extract the accumulated foul and corrupted fluids.	Then run through them a needle doubly threaded and tie at the spot where the varix begins and tie it again where the varix ends, then cut through the varix in the middle with an incision at right angles to the length of the body and draw out the turbid corrupt humidity that has gathered in it.	0.8431285
Then treat the wound with the same treatment as for other wounds where you wish to produce suppuration so that the vessels which nourish one of the testicles are severed. For it is not harmful because of this.	Then dress the wound with the wound dressings usual where you wish to encourage suppuration, so that the vessels nourishing the one testicle may perish; there is no harm in that.	0.81685066
But if the swelling affects all the vessels, then it is necessary to remove the testicles along with the vessels, so that the testicle is not deprived of nourishment, which would cause it to waste away, or dry up, and there would be no benefit in keeping them.	But if all the vessels are varicose then you will have to remove one testicle with its vessels lest the testicle be deprived of nourishment through cutting into the vessels; for it will wither and be of no use.	0.78368294

chapter-2-subchapter-65.txt
On the treatment of intestinal rupture.	On the treatment of intestinal hernia.	0.90978134
The occurrence of this rupture is from a cut, which happens in the membrane stretched over the abdomen in the area of the groin from the lower abdomen.	This hernia is due to a split occurring in the membrane stretched from the hypogastrium over the belly in the region of the groin.	0.8044772
Therefore, the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the testicles. And this rupture is either from the membrane or its extension.	Through this opening the bowel descends upon one of the testes; this opening is due to the membrane's splitting or stretching.	0.7648554
And these two types happen for many reasons: either from a blow, a jump, a shout, lifting a heavy object, and similar causes.	And these two kinds occur from a number of causes: from a blow or jumping or shouting, or lifting a heavy weight, or a similar cause.	0.9467846
And the sign, when it is from the extension of the membrane. Is that it happens gradually over a long time, and does not happen suddenly: and it is a swelling equally towards the depth, because the membrane compresses the intestine.	The symptoms of it, when it arises from a stretching of the membrane, are that it is a slow and chronic development and does not happen on a sudden, and the swelling is even and deep down, because the membrane is pressing the bowel.	0.7828257
And the sign of it when it is from a cut in the membrane is that it causes intense pain suddenly from its beginning: and it is a swelling, irregular, appearing close under the skin: and this is due to the exit of the intestine, and its movement to the exterior of the membrane.	When it is due to a split in the membrane, the signs will be that it starts with a sudden severe pain, and the lump varies in consistency, appearing close under the skin; that is due to the emergence of the bowel and its passage outside the membrane.	0.8223345
And sometimes a zirbum comes out with the intestine: and this is called an intestinal rupture and zirbia: and sometimes it occurs with wind.	Sometimes also the omentum comes out with the bowel, and this hernia is called intestinal and omental; sometimes it contains wind.	0.76627606
And sometimes feces move into the intestine and are retained there: and with this is harm to the patient, since it causes severe pain, especially when pressed.	Sometimes also the excrement comes down with the bowel and gets held up there, and this involves the patient's death, for thence arises an intractable pain and borborygmi, specially when pressed upon.	0.72943866
And in the treatment of this type of illness with surgery, there is danger; therefore, it is necessary to be cautious of complications in it.	The treatment of the varieties of this disease with the knife is dangerous; so be cautious of rushing at it.	0.75079095
And the method of operation is that you instruct the patient to return the intestine with his hand to the interior of its cavity, if it will respond to being returned. Then he is to be laid back on his neck between your hands, and his legs are lifted.	The manner of operating is to bid the patient reduce the bowel back into the belly if it be disposed to return, then lie back before you and raise his legs.	0.7903557
Then stretch the skin that follows the skin upwards, and cut the entire skin of the testicles along its length. Then fix hooks into the two lips of the incision, as you need to open the incision with them; and let the incision be to such a size that it is possible for an egg to come out of it.	Then do you stretch upward the skin adjacent to the groin, and cut the whole length of the skin of the testicles; then attach to the edges of the incision as many hooks as are necessary to open the incision. The incision should be sufficiently large to allow the testicle to be drawn out.	0.8890094
Then scrape away the membrane, and what is under the skin of the testicles, until the white membrane is revealed, hard on all sides; then insert your index finger into the area that follows the testicle, in that which is between the white membrane under the skin of the egg and the second membrane, and release with it the adhesion which is on the back part of the egg.	Then dissect away the tissues that lie beneath the skin of the scrotum so that the hard tunica albugínea be exposed all round. Then introduce your forefinger in around the testis in the space between the white membrane beneath the skin of the testicle and the second membrane, and with your forefinger free the attachment at the back of the testicle.	0.87288934
Then move with your right hand the skin of the testicles inward; and with this, extend the white membrane upward with your left hand: and lift the egg with the membrane toward the side of the incision: and instruct your assistant to extend the egg upward: and you release the adhesion, which is at the back, with complete separation.	Then with your right hand explore within the scrotum and fold back the covering of the testicles, at the same time stretching the tunica albugínea upwards with the left hand, and bring the testis with the membrane up into the opening, and bid your assistant to stretch the testis upwards; and do you fully free it from the posterior attachment.	0.8573216
And check with your fingers that there is nothing there from the intestine wrapped in the hard white membrane. If, however, you find anything of it, then push it back towards the lower abdomen.	Feel with your finger that there be no part of the intestine that has got twisted within the tough white membrane; and should you find any push it back into the abdomen.	0.8475708
Then cut in the lower part of the skin of the testicles at the incision, from which blood and serum flow, as we described in what was previously stated.	Then make a counter-incision in the lower part of the skin of the testicles, to let the blood and matter drain away as we bade you before.	0.8075911
Then apply wool soaked in oil, and place it on the wound: and apply the bandage which we described. And sometimes the white membrane, as we said, is cauterized after its incision to prevent blood flow. For it often happens. And leave the bandage until it falls off on its own.	Then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound, and the bandage that we prescribed (sometimes also the white membrane that we spoke about is cauterized after the incision to forestall haemorrhage, for that usually happens) and let the ligatures be until they fall away spontaneously.	0.8599099
If it takes too long to fall off, then bathe it with warm water: and place on it what we said, until it falls.	If they are slow in coming away, then foment with hot water and apply something to sweat them off.	0.5628486
Then treat the wound with the remaining treatment for wounds, until it is healed.	Then dress the wound in the usual manner until it heals.	0.73215556

chapter-2-subchapter-66.txt
On a windy rupture.	On flatulent hernia.	0.6356195
In this rupture, I have not seen anyone who dared to treat it with surgery.	I have not seen anyone pluck up enough courage to attempt the operative treatment of this kind of rupture.	0.7818588
And the first ones indeed said that it is done as we described in the rupture that involves the scrotum. That is, to tie the vessels below the section with ease: then cut in the middle, and finally treat it with what opens it until the vessels fall away: and treat the wound, as we said, until it is healed.	The Ancients indeed said it ought to be done in the same way as hernia with varicocele; namely, to ligate the blood-vessels after cutting down upon them, gently, and lower down. Then make an incision in the middle and apply to the tumour such things as will keep it open until the blood-vessels fall away. And dress the wound in the manner we have already mentioned until it heals.	0.7981033

chapter-2-subchapter-67.txt
On the rupture that occurs in the groin.	On the treatment of the rupture that occurs in the groin.	0.80480456
When a rupture occurs in the groin, as we said, and the area swells, and nothing of the intestines descends to the testicles; and if something descends, it is little, and it returns every hour. But if time is prolonged with it, a tear is added in the membrane, until the intestines descend into the membrane.	Sometimes there occurs a rupture in the groin as we have said, and the part protrudes. No portion of the intestine descends into the scrotum; or if anything it will be only a tiny portion and will reduce at any time. But if it goes on for a long time the rupture in the membrane increases until the bowel and omentum descend into the scrotum.	0.84525275
And this happens from the extension of the membrane, which is in the groin, as we said. That is, because the membrane is stretched: then it softens, the area swells, and it protrudes.	It arises from a stretching of the membrane in the groin, as we said; the membrane stretches and then relaxes and the place swells.	0.8559239
And its treatment is with cautery, as previously narrated.	Its treatment by the cautery is as I have already described.	0.7641187
And sometimes it is treated with surgery, in the following way: that the patient should lie on his back between your hands. Then cut the swollen and protruding rupture site, with an incision across it the width of three fingers.	Sometimes also it is treated with the knife in this manner: With the patient lying back before you, make an incision three fingers wide, transversely across the swelling of the rupture which projects.	0.8183994
Then tie the membrane and what is under the skin, until the white membrane, which is under the skin that follows it, is revealed.	Then perforate the subcutaneous tissues so as to expose the white membrane that lies under the skin alongside the rupture.	0.76034284
Then take a rod, and place it on the protruding area of the membrane, and press it to the depth of the abdomen.	Take a probe and place it upon the projecting part of the fascia and push it back into the depths of the abdomen.	0.7182747
Then sew the two protruding places over the end of the rod from the membrane, and connect one of them with the other using a suture: then withdraw the end of the rod.	Then sew together the two swollen portions of membrane over the end of the probe and suture the one to the other. Then take out the probe.	0.77422065
And do not cut the membrane entirely, nor extend the testicle, nor anything else, as I explained to you in the treatment of intestinal ruptures.	On no account make the incision into the fascia nor touch the testis nor anything else, as I taught you on the subject of treating the intestinal hernia.	0.72266155
So when you cut the threads, clean it, and restore the wound until it is healed.	Then dress the wound, and when the stitches come apart remove them and bandage the wound again until it is healed over.	0.7610128
For the membrane contracts, and the protrusion of the rupture does not increase.	For the membrane will draw together and the rupture will not come out again.	0.7028886
And cautery is better in this location because it is closer to healing.	But the cautery is better at this spot, for it is safer.	0.7100664

chapter-2-subchapter-68.txt
On the softening of the skin of the testicles.	On the loosening of the skin of the scrotum.	0.8907042
Often the skin of the testicles becomes softened in some men, whereby the flesh between them is softened, and its appearance is disfigured.	In some men there often occurs a loosening of the skin of the scrotum without any loosening of the organs within. This has a horrible appearance.	0.6904324
Therefore, it is necessary for the one who is asked to treat it, to have the patient lie on his back, and to cut all the softened skin above the natural skin.	He who desires to treat this condition should make the patient lie on his back; and he should cut away all the loose skin that is over and above the normal.	0.76242834
Then join the two edges with suturing: and if you wish, sew the excess of the softened skin at first with three or four stitches, and secure the suture.	Then he should bring together the two edges of the incision with a suture. Or, if you prefer, first suture the excess of loose skin together, with three or four stitches, and make the suture firm.	0.81998587
Then cut between the sutures.	Then cut away what is taken up between the stitches.	0.8268285
Then treat it with the care for other wounds, until it is healed and the threads fall out.	Then dress the wound with the usual dressings till it heals and the stitches come away.	0.70556915

chapter-2-subchapter-69.txt
On Castration.	On castration.	0.8808355
Know that castration is condemned in our law: and because of that, it would be permissible for me to not mention it in this book of mine: and mentioning it is not necessary, except for two reasons.	Castration is forbidden in our law and I ought therefore to make no mention of it in my book. But I must speak of it for two reasons.	0.8087083
One of which is so that it is in the knowledge of the physician when he is asked about it: and so that he knows the treatment of one to whom it happens.	One reason is that it should be part of the doctor's medical knowledge when asked about it, and that he should know how to treat anyone whom it befalls.	0.7610105
And the other reason is that we often need to castrate certain animals for our benefit through it, such as rams, goats, cats, and similar animals.	Another reason is that often we need to castrate certain animals for the sake of the benefits that accrue from them, such as rams, he-goats and cats, and such animals.	0.92495507
I say, therefore, that castration is done in two ways. Either by rubbing. Or by splitting and cutting.	So I say that castration can be performed in two ways: either by contusion; or by opening up and cutting away.	0.89025164
In that which is done by rubbing, the method of operation is: that we make the animal sit in warm water, until its testicles are softened, relaxed, and hang down: then rub them with your hand, until they are dissolved and do not appear under touch.	The method by contusion is that we make the animal sit in warm water until his testes are relaxed and become soft and pendent; then rub them with your hand until they are so loosened that they are no longer palpable.	0.8409821
In castration by splitting and cutting, however, it is necessary to restrain the animal, and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.	As to castration by open operation and excision, the animal should be held and pressure put upon the scrotum with the left hand.	0.7593936
Then tie a suspensory band, and make one cut over each testicle until both testicles come out: then cut them after you have stripped each one, and leave nothing from the membrane except the thin layer, which is above the vessels.	Then tie the spermatic cord and with one incision cut down upon both testicles so that both are brought up out of the scrotum. After dissecting them away cut them off; do not leave any of the coverings upon them except the thin membrane covering the vessels.	0.85393095
And this method of castration is better than the one done by rubbing: because rubbing may perhaps leave something of the testicles, which causes the animal to desire mating.	This manner of castration is better than the contusion method, for contusion often leaves something of the testicles, and the animal desires to couple.	0.75981134
Then treat the wound until it is healed.	Then dress the wound until healed.	0.90614617

chapter-2-subchapter-70.txt
On the treatment of two types of hermaphroditism.	On the treatment of the hermaphrodite.	0.7778897
Hermaphroditism among males occurs in two forms. One form appears as a space or in the skin of the testicles, between the two testicles, resembling the shape of a woman’s vulva, with hair present; and sometimes urine flows from the area in the skin of the testicles.	There are two kinds of male hermaphrodite: one has the appearance as of female pudenda with hair in the region of the perineum; the other has the same in the skin of the scrotum between the testes. Sometimes also urine is excreted through that which is in the skin of the scrotum.	0.86242104
In women, there is one form where the vulva is located on the pubic area, resembling the small testicles of a male, slightly protruding outward: one part resembles a male penis, and two parts resemble two testicles.	There is also one kind among women, in which there is, above the female pudenda, on the pubes, what resembles the male organs. These are small indeed, but protuberant, one being like the penis and the two others like testicles.	0.7115555
The treatment for these three types—two forms in males and one form in females—is to cut away the excess flesh until its impression disappears. Then, treat them with the usual wound care until healed.	This is the treatment of all three kinds, that is, two male and one female: the superfluous growths must be cut away so that every trace is destroyed; then the usual treatment for wounds should be applied until they are healed.	0.8013344
For the second type in men, where urine flows from the skin of the testicles, there is no operation or treatment whatsoever.	As to the second kind, in man, where the opening is in the scrotum and the urine runs out of it, there is no operation for this, and no cure.	0.8360069

chapter-2-subchapter-71.txt
On the excision of swelling and protruding flesh in the vulvas of women.	On cutting the clitoris and fleshy growths in the female genitalia.	0.77600425
Swelling sometimes enlarges beyond the natural state, becoming disfigured and unsightly; in some women, it may grow to the extent that it expands like a male organ and becomes capable of sexual intercourse.	The clitoris may grow in size above the order of nature so that it gets a horrible deformed appearance; in some women it becomes erect like the male organ and attains to coitus.	0.77444
Therefore, you should hold the excessive swelling with your hand or with a hook and cut it away; however, do not go too deep with the incision, especially at the base, to avoid bleeding.	You must grasp the growth with your hand or a hook and cut it off. Do not cut too deeply, especially at the root of the growth, lest haemorrhage occur.	0.8165401
Then treat the area with regular wound care until it heals.	Then apply the usual dressing for wounds until it is healed.	0.78198755
Overgrown flesh may grow within the opening of the uterus until it fills the space; it may even protrude outward in a tail-like manner. Because of this, some early scholars called this ailment "caudate illness." Thus, we should excise it as we do for swelling, and treat it until it is healed.	As to the fleshy growth, that is, flesh growing in the cervix and filling it, and also often protruding like a tail (on which account some of the Ancients called it 'caudate disease'); this too you should cut away as you do for the clitoris, and dress until healed.	0.7254128

chapter-2-subchapter-72.txt
Chapter 72.	CHAPTER SEVENTY-TWO.	0.6049656
Alratica is a condition where a woman’s vulva is either imperforate or has a very small opening. It is either congenital or acquired.	This condition is when a woman's pudenda have no opening or have only a tiny opening; it may be either congenital or acquired.	0.7182147
The acquired form results from a previous ailment and may occur due to excess flesh growth or a membrane that is thin or thick; it may occur deep within the womb, on its sides, at its upper part, or lower part, and it obstructs intercourse, impregnation, and childbirth, and sometimes even menstruation.	The acquired sort is due to some preceding disease; either to a fleshy growth or to a membrane, thick or thin. It may be in the fundus of the uterus or in its walls or in the upper part or in the lower part; and it prevents intercourse, conception, and delivery; it often also hinders the menses.	0.90375555
Diagnosis is made by a midwife’s examination if the obstruction is visible and close.	This is recognized by inspection by the midwife, if the obstruction be obvious and low.	0.7518134
If it is not visible, then seek it out with your fingers or with a probe.	But if it be not visible she should palpate with her fingers or with a probe.	0.8338375
If the obstruction is due to a thin membrane and is close to the labia, then proceed quickly and rupture it.	And when the obstruction is due to a thin membrane near the labia you should lose no time in breaking it down.	0.64708906
This is done by placing small cushions on both labia.	This is done by applying some sort of pad to the labia; then put both thumbs upon it.	0.69694537
Then place the index fingers of both hands together, while the woman lies on her back with her legs spread. Then extend the two labia firmly until the thin membrane is ruptured and the obstruction is opened.	The woman should be upon her back with her legs spread wide apart; then the labia are to be stretched strongly till the thin membrane is ruptured and the obstruction is laid open.	0.7845705
Next, take some wool, soak it in oil, and place it on the area; let the woman have intercourse daily to prevent the site from sealing again.	Then take wool soaked in oil and apply to the place, and let the woman engage in coitus every day lest the place close over.	0.8202539
If the membrane is thick and dense, then you must cut it with a broad spatula shaped like a myrtle leaf.	If the membrane be thick and strong you should incise it with a broad myrtle-leaf scalpel.	0.86250675
If the obstruction is due to excess flesh growth, suspend it with hooks and cut it away, and have on hand medicines that stop bleeding without causing irritation, such as acacia, dragon’s blood, and frankincense mixed with egg white.	But if the obstruction be due to a growth you should catch hold of it with two hooks and cut it away. And have at hand remedies for allaying haemorrhage without pain, such as acacia and dragon's blood and olibanum, all mixed with egg-white.	0.74338704
Then insert a broad lead tube to prevent the wound from closing too quickly, leaving it in place for a few days; apply a wick made from dry linen, then proceed with usual wound care until it heals.	Then use a cannula of lead to prevent the wound healing up too quickly. She should keep it in position for some days and employ a bandage of dry linen. Then treat with the usual healing dressings until it heals.	0.85993636
Sometimes, new flesh growths arise in the womb. These must be excised as described here, provided there is no cancerous abscess; for a cancerous abscess in the womb, surgery with iron should not be performed at all.	Sometimes other growths of flesh arise in the uterus itself; you should cut away in this manner all except cancerous tumours; for a cancerous tumour arising in the uterus is under no circumstance to be treated with the knife.	0.82465184

chapter-2-subchapter-73.txt
On the treatment of hemorrhoids, athehelil, and red bothor in the vulvae of women.	On the treatment of haemorrhoids and warts and red pustules arising in the female pudenda.	0.7511362
Hemorrhoids are indeed the opening of the orifices of veins, until much blood flows continually from them.	Haemorrhoids are an inflation of the heads of the blood-vessels leading to abundant and constant bleeding.	0.70456064
When hemorrhoids persist, they become thelil; and I have already explained the types of these, and their signs; and I will say here which of them receive treatment, and which do not.	When haemorrhoids are chronic they turn into warts. I have already mentioned in their place the kinds of wart and their symptoms. Now here I shall say which kinds permit of treatment and which do not.	0.8458114
Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids that are in the orifice of the uterus and are not apparent to the senses: then they are not treated with a surgical instrument.	I begin by stating that haemorrhoids and warts in the depths of the uterus that are not palpable are not able to be treated operatively.	0.6269871
However, those that are in the orifice of the uterus and are perceived by touch are the ones that are treated.	Those at the orifice that are palpable you can treat.	0.49399623
Therefore, it is necessary to place the woman in a cool room. Then stretch out the athehelil with scissors, or with a rough cloth, and cut them from their roots.	So you should get the woman into a cool place and then draw on the warts with forceps or catch hold with pieces of rough cloth, and cut them away from the roots.	0.7016738
Then sprinkle over them, where the blood flows, some powders of incision that do not cause stinging: such as acacia, dragon’s blood, frankincense, and similar substances.	Then if that cause a flow of blood sprinkle with one or other of the powders that stop bleeding but are not corrosive, such as acacia or dragon's blood or olibanum or the like.	0.7345096
Then have her press her feet against the wall for one hour. Afterwards, place her in cold water.	Then raise her legs up against the wall for a while and then bring them down into cold water.	0.8310821
If the blood flow persists, then make her sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate rind, galls, and similar ingredients.	And if the haemorrhage persist for a long time make her sit in an infusion of sumac and pomegranate rind and oak-galls and the like.	0.77402776
Then take barley flour, mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it to place on her back.	Then take barley flour and beat it up with honey and vinegar, and apply to the back a plaster made of this.	0.9225426
If the bleeding stops with this, it is good; if not, apply suction cups to her back and breasts, without cutting the skin.	And if the bleeding cease, good; but if not, apply to the loins and breasts cupping-vessels without scarifying.	0.8010447
Then take wool, and soak it in the juice of tarathit, or the juice of plantain, or the juice of alaulat branches, that is, wild rose, with Pontic wine, and apply it to the area.	Then take wool and dip it in the juice of red cynomorium or plantain or wild eglantine, together with syrup of oak galls, and apply to the place.	0.71281826
When the swelling subsides, then treat the area with ointments until it heals.	And when the swelling has subsided treat the place with ointment until it heals.	0.8799502
The red albarth is similar to the heads of alhaasse and has a rough appearance.	Now red pustules resemble the heads of thyme, and are of rough appearance.	0.64650893
Therefore, it is necessary to cut away what appears of it, as I have explained with the thelil, and treat it until it heals.	All that appears on the surface should be cut away in the manner mentioned for treating warts; and dress the wounds until healed.	0.61732084

chapter-2-subchapter-74.txt
On perforation of an ulcer occurring in the uterus.	On the perforation of eruptions occurring in the uterus.	0.93775356
Many types of swellings occur in the uterus, such as cancer, stone-like swellings, ulcers, adubelati, alekilati, that is, herpes, aestiomemus, fistulas, hemorrhoids, fissures, thelil, and hot swellings.	From time to time there occur in the womb various kinds of tumour, such as cancer and the stony tumour and ulcer and abscess and gangrene and fistulae and varicosities and cracks and warts and inflamed tumours; all these diseases I have mentioned, with their varieties and their symptoms, in the appropriate section.	0.6473278
And indeed, I have already discussed all these afflictions, their types, their signs, and their treatments in the division; but it is necessary in this treatise to speak of the hot swelling that occurs in the uterus, when it is one of the swellings that collects pus, and you want to know how its opening is made with a surgical instrument.	But now in this treatise we must mention an inflamed tumour of the kind where there is a collection of pus, and the manner of its opening with the knife.	0.5946321
Therefore, it is necessary for you to observe. Then, if the pain of the swelling is sharp at its beginning, with throbbing, heat, and fever, and you see it redden, and if it is sensitive to the touch, then do not rush to perforate it; treat it with what helps bring it to maturation until the sharpness of the symptoms subsides.	You should inspect it, and if the pain of the tumour is acute from the outset, with pulsation and inflammation and fever, and, if it is visible, you see that it is red, then do not be in a hurry to open, but treat it with applications helpful for suppuration till these symptoms have subsided.	0.8048887
Then it is necessary to make the woman sit on a seat with two benches, and have her lean back or support herself on her back, bringing her feet toward the lower part of her abdomen; her hips should be spread, her arms placed under her knees, and each tied with a suitable binding for this.	Then you should get the patient to sit in a chair having a double seat, lying back. She should put her feet together upon her abdomen, with the thighs apart and the arms joined under the knees and bound together in a suitable manner.	0.8385782
Then the midwife sits on her right side and uses the instrument that opens the orifice of the uterus.	Then the midwife should sit on the right side and employ the instrument for opening the orifice of the womb, which will be described later.	0.8412101
And when you wish to use this instrument, you must affix the end of the probe in the depth of the woman’s uterus, so that what enters from the instrument does not go deeper than the depth of the uterus and harm the patient.	When you are going to use this instrument, you should measure with a probe the depth of the womb so that the instrument be not introduced beyond this measure lest the patient be harmed; if the instrument be longer, pads should be put over the rim of the cervix to prevent the passage of its whole length.	0.7908939
If, however, the instrument is longer than necessary, you must place cushions over the covering of the depth of the uterus, to prevent the instrument from entering fully into the depth of the uterus; and the turning screw, which runs in the instrument, should be on the upper side, so the assistant holds the instrument and turns the screw until the depth of the uterus is opened.	You must put the screw that runs in the instrument, in from the top and hold the instrument while your assistant turns the screw until the entrance of the uterus is opened.	0.6653221
When the ulcer appears, can be touched by hand, and is smooth and soft, it is necessary to cut it at its head with a broad spatula.	When the abscess is exposed, and on manual palpation is found to be thin and soft, you should make an incision at its head with a broad scalpel.	0.8479423
When the pus is thus evacuated, you must place in the wound a linen cloth soaked in rose oil or green oil with a certain astringency; place the linen cloth and draw the section into the depth of the uterus.	And when all the matter is evacuated you should place on the wound a soft wick soaked in oil of roses or green oil with some styptic quality, and let it come outside from the incision into the cervix uteri.	0.71992147
Then place on the outside over the uterus and pubic area clean wool soaked in water in which mallows have been boiled.	Over the area of the uterus and pubes there should be clean wool soaked in an infusion of mallows.	0.6842084
Then, after two days, treat it with an ointment suited to this purpose, until it heals.	Then after two days dress with a suitable ointment until healed.	0.8970138
And at times the uterus and the wound are washed, so that it is rinsed with water and honey; then with water in which lily root or long aristolochia has been boiled; then return to using the ointment.	Sometimes also both the wound and the uterus are washed out with a douche of honey and water, then of a decoction of liquorice root or long aristolochy; then go back to the ointment.	0.88659394
If the wound is hidden within the uterus, then you must refrain from treating it with an instrument; rather, treat it with what we have discussed in the division.	But if the lesion be hidden in the depths of the womb then you will have to abstain from operative treatment but carry out treatment as spoken of in its place.	0.73369277

chapter-2-subchapter-75.txt
Teachings for Midwives, on how to treat live embryos, when they emerge in an unnatural position.	On the training of midwives in how to treat living foetuses when not brought forth in the natural manner.	0.8354486
It is necessary for the midwife first to know the form of natural birth.	To begin with, the midwife must know the manner of normal labour.	0.7229099
Among the signs of this is that when you see the woman bearing down, and she desires to smell fresh air, and the pressure from labor lessens over her, and the embryo's exit hastens, then you know that this birth is according to the natural form, and its exit is head-first with the afterbirth, either attached or hanging from the umbilical cord.	Among the signs of it are these. If you see the woman strain her abdomen and desire to breathe more air, and the pangs come easily to her and she hastens to deliver the child, by this you may know that the labour will follow a natural course and that the presentation will be vertex with the afterbirth, either together with the child or hanging by the umbilical cord.	0.853966
When you see these signs, it is then necessary to press on her abdomen so that the embryo descends quickly.	And when you observe these signs it will be necessary to put pressure upon the abdomen to bring forth the foetus quickly.	0.83463824
For when it descends head-first, the afterbirth descends with it, and it is cleansed of these impurities with good purification.	For when it presents the vertex the afterbirth comes down with it and she is thoroughly cleansed of those superfluities.	0.79569
But any other birth than this is unnatural and unfavorable.	But a delivery that is contrary to this is unnatural and wrong.	0.73318136
For sometimes the fetus emerges feet-first, or its body exits before its head, with one foot or hand, or one foot alone; or its head and hand emerge; or its abdomen appears; and perhaps it turns on its neck, and other such unfavorable presentations.	Sometimes the infant is delivered by its feet; or by its hands before either head or feet; or a single hand or foot; or the head comes out together with a foot. Or it comes out all twisted, often with the nape of the neck first; or in other wrong positions.	0.88074297
Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise, precise in all these matters, and cautious of error and deception; and I am showing every one of these forms and how to manage each, and it shall be explained and demonstrated.	So the midwife must have wisdom and dexterity and be skilled in all these cases and beware of failures and mistakes. I shall explain the technique in these modes of delivery so that she may be instructed and may be acquainted with them all.	0.8303653
When the fetus emerges head-first in its natural exit, and this becomes intense for the woman, and the birth becomes difficult for her, and you see her strength already weakened: then have her sit on a seat, or have other women hold her, and steam her vulva with a fenugreek decoction and moist oils.	When the foetus comes out by the vertex in the normal manner and yet the delivery is with great difficulty for the woman and you see that her strength is getting exhausted, then make her sit on a seat and have her held firmly, and foment her womb in a decoction of fenugreek and in bland oils.	0.8150982
Then let the midwife insert between her fingers a small spatula and split the afterbirth with it, cutting it with her fingernail until the moisture contained within flows out; and press the woman's abdomen until the fetus descends.	Then the midwife should take between two fingers a little scalpel and make an incision in the foetal membrane or open it with the finger nail, to allow the contained waters to flow out; and put pressure upon the woman's abdomen until the foetus comes down.	0.8323722
If it does not descend, then the woman must be given an enema of fenugreek mucilage with sesame oil.	But if it will not come down then the woman should have an enema of mucilage of fenugreek with oil of sesame.	0.904369
Then instruct her after the enema to bear down; and make her sneeze with condiments, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour. The fetus will then emerge immediately.	Then bid her bear down after the enema, and with ptarmica stimulate her to sneeze; and close her mouth and nose for a while and the foetus will quickly come out.	0.82856274
But if the two hands of the fetus emerge first, then it is necessary to gently and gradually push them back. If it does not go back easily, then place the woman on a seat and lift her feet upwards; then shake the seat over the ground, and hold the woman so she does not fall during the shaking.	If the hands of the foetus present, you should slowly and gently push them back; and if they will not go back then place the woman upon a seat, have her feet raised and meanwhile shake the seat; but the woman should be held lest the shaking cause her to fall off.	0.85638523
If, however, the hands do not come out and the fetus dies, then cut them off and extract the rest of the fetus; bind its hand with cloth and draw it out steadily, and it will emerge.	But if the two hands will not go back and the foetus is dead cut them off and draw out the remains. Or tie tapes to the hands and pull on them evenly and it will come out.	0.79885244
When the fetus emerges feet-first, it is necessary to push the feet upward, then gradually turn the fetus, and then adjust its position.	Foot presentation: when the foetus presents feet first you should raise them both; then you should very gently turn the foetus so as to straighten it.	0.72865224
Then take one of its feet and extend it gradually.	Then take one of its feet and stretch it gently.	0.92103374
When the fetus emerges up to the hips, instruct the woman to bear down, and make her sneeze with a condiment; then the fetus will emerge, God willing.	When they come down as far as the hips, bid her bear down, make her sneeze with ptarmica, and it will come out.	0.57482475
If the fetus does not emerge with this approach, then gradually push it back until it is in the natural position. Then it will emerge easily.	But if it will not come out with these means we have described, you should return the foetus gently until you have placed it in the natural position; then it will come out easily.	0.750859
But if it is still prevented from emerging with all that we have described, then take marshmallow mucilage, sesame oil, and dissolved gum; pound everything thoroughly in a mortar, then apply it to the woman’s vulva and lower abdomen. Next, have her sit in warm water until her lower abdomen relaxes.	But if it defies all that we have described, take mucilage of marsh mallow and fenugreek and oil of sesame and dissolved gum, and pound them all well together in the mortar and anoint the woman's pudenda and lower abdomen; then make her sit down in warm water reaching to the costal margin.	0.9035599
When you see that her lower parts are now warmed, then prepare a suppository of myrrh and place it. When she has held the suppository for an hour, then have her sit on a seat. Next, make her sneeze, and gently press her mouth and nose, and apply gentle pressure on her lower abdomen. The fetus will then emerge immediately.	And when you see the lower parts are softened, make a suppository of myrrh and let her introduce it; and when she has had the suppository in for a while make her sneeze, stopping her nose and mouth; and press gently upon the abdomen; then will the foetus immediately emerge.	0.8417255
Carefully attempt to reposition its hand. If this is not possible, then lift the woman and have her walk.	Presentation by the side with one hand hanging down: attempt to manœuvre the hand back again; but if you cannot reduce it then make the woman stand up and walk.	0.7241159
If she cannot walk, then lay her on the bed and shake her legs firmly.	But if she cannot walk then have her lie on a couch, and agitate her feet violently.	0.8739091
Next, apply the liniment prepared from mucilage.	Then employ the ointment which I described among the mucilages.	0.6343893
If labor seizes her, then have her sit on a seat. Then work on repositioning its hand and align the fetus in the natural position, and make the woman sneeze, instructing her to bear down until the fetus emerges.	If parturition begins, make her sit upon a seat and attempt the reduction of the hand and version of the foetus to the natural position, and make the woman sneeze and bear down until the child is born.	0.8190198
_When the fetus emerges head-down, with arms extended, and its face toward the mother's back_ The midwife must hold the fetus’s hand, then turn it gently and adjust it with ease.	Presentation on the back, with hands outstretched and face towards the mother's back: the midwife should take the infant's hand and then turn him very slowly, and gently rectify his position.	0.7053695
When it is properly aligned, then apply the mixture of oil and mucilage on her vulva as we described.	Then when he is in the correct position apply to the maternal passage the oil and mucilage prescribed.	0.72157204
Then instruct her to move gradually. When you have done this, have her sit on a seat and instruct her to lean to her right side. Then instruct her to bear down and make her sneeze with condiments.	Then bid the woman move gently and when she has done so make her sit down upon a seat and bid her lean over to her right side; then bid her bear down, and with ptarmica make her sneeze ; then the foetus will come forth.	0.765373
When the fetus descends to the mouth of the uterus in this manner with the afterbirth, then cut the afterbirth with your fingernail until the moisture is released.	The foetus presenting laterally, doubled up : when it presents at the os in this manner together with the membrane, open the membrane with your finger nail and let out the waters.	0.5388681
If it then hangs over the face and neck of the fetus, cut it from the umbilical cord, so it does not hold it back and cause death.	And if it adhere over the infant's face and neck, cut it away from the umbilicus lest he be strangled and die.	0.8430729
Then push the fetus back inward until it is in the appropriate position, and instruct the woman to bear down several times; then it will emerge with ease.	Then push the foetus back till it is in the proper position, and bid the woman bear down a few times until the foetus comes forth.	0.8688698
The exit of twins, or of many fetuses. Know that twins are often born, and sometimes three or four are born. However, that is unusual and rarely happens.	The birth of twin or multiple foetuses: you should know that it is a common occurrence for twins to be born alive, and sometimes three or four infants, but this is a rarity; while five after this manner is altogether unnatural and they never live.	0.813226
But five is something unnatural, and they do not survive at all; even if they are multiple, they are contained in one membrane, and are separated by a membrane, distinguishing between them a ligament in each of their umbilici.	Although they may be more than one, they are enveloped in a single membrane but separated one from the other by a dividing membrane joined to the umbilicus of each one.	0.71712685
And sometimes they emerge as one fetus does, with a natural, easy exit; and they emerge with a difficult exit, as we have described.	And when they are born they may come in the natural easy manner of a single foetus; or by any abnormal presentation such as we have described.	0.7919131
But if any of them are difficult at birth, and they come to the situation we mentioned with unnatural positions, then care for them as we have described, and let the midwife be skillful, and let her act with ease and patience, and use her ingenuity in every position with what is prepared for her, guided toward safety.	And if one of them be born with difficulty, presenting in some unnatural manner as described, the treatment is also as described. Let the midwife be delicate and do whatever she does gently and calmly, adopting in each case whatever technique it demands that will conduce to a safe result.	0.7602399
Recollection of what is formed in the womb from embryos, and is aborted.	A note on the foetuses that may be formed in the womb and abort.	0.69884133
Sometimes one is formed in the womb, or two, or three, or four, or five, or six, or seven, or more, up to ten; and it has been verified by me that a woman in aborting expelled seven, and another fifteen, all fully formed.	Sometimes in the womb there may form one or two or three or four or five or six or seven or more than ten. And I can vouch that one woman had an abortion of seven foetuses and another woman of fifteen, all of them formed.	0.91002715
Which was accomplished by the measurement of a glorious sage.	This is by the decree of the Almighty, the Wise.	0.45739043
Therefore, all this must be in the knowledge of the midwife. For perhaps something similar to that may come to her; let her, therefore, apply to it whatever is necessary.	And all this should be part of the midwife's knowledge, for one day she may meet such a case and she must deal with it in the proper way.	0.6192782

chapter-2-subchapter-76.txt
On the extraction of a dead fetus.	On the extraction of the dead foetus.	0.9662671
When you treat a dead fetus with what I have discussed in the section on medication, and it does not emerge, and you are forced to use manual intervention, then you must consider.	When you have dealt with a dead foetus by those methods mentioned in their chapter, and it does not come out, and you are compelled to operate, you should examine to see if the woman be in a healthy state and not having any disease on account of which you might entertain a fear for her life.	0.62432986
If the woman is of sound strength and does not have any conditions that would threaten her life, then the woman should be laid on her back on a bed, with her head inclined downward and her legs elevated; an assistant should hold her from both sides, or she should be bound to the bed, so that her body is not pulled during the fetus's extraction.	The woman should lie on her back on a couch, her head tilted back and her legs raised. An assistant on either side should hold her down firmly or she should be bound down to the couch, lest the body be drawn out of position in extracting the foetus.	0.8489634
Then moisten the mouth of the uterus with softening oils made with the mucilage of mallow, fenugreek, and flaxseed.	Then the opening should be anointed with moistening oils and with mucilage of marsh mallow and fenugreek and with linseed.	0.77377266
Then the midwife should anoint her hand with these oils and mucilages, and then insert it into the uterus gently. Then she should look with her hand for a place where she can secure hooks into the fetus, and find suitable locations for this.	Then the midwife should anoint her hand with these oils and mucilages and gently introduce it into the vagina and with it locate a place in the foetus to fix hooks in.	0.9039016
Therefore, if the fetus is positioned to descend head first, then place the hooks in its eyes, or its neck, or its mouth, or its palate, or under its chin, or its breastbone, or in locations near the ribs and under the hypochondria.	The suitable places for that: consider, and if the foetus present the vertex then she should fix the hooks in its eyes or in the neck or in the mouth or palate or beneath the chin, or the collarbone, or about the ribs, or beneath the false ribs.	0.7168885
If, however, it descends feet first, then in its groin and middle ribs.	But if it present the feet let the hooks be fixed in the pubic region or middle ribs.	0.66067064
She should hold the hook with her right hand and place its curve between the fingers of her left hand; then insert it with ease and secure the hook in one of those locations mentioned, until she reaches an empty space.	She should hold the hook in the right hand and put the curved part between the fingers of the left hand, and introduce the hand gently and fix a hook in one of the places before mentioned, driving it in until it comes to a hollow.	0.8632824
Then she should fix another hook opposite it, or a third if needed, so that the pull is even and does not lean to one side.	Then opposite it let her fix another or a third if need be, so as to give even traction, not pulling to one side.	0.89569247
Then pull with equal force, not only in a straight line, but move it in all directions, to ease its exit, as is done with a tooth during extraction.	Then she should pull evenly, not just in a straight line but with the foetus moved from side to side so that its exit may be eased, as is done in extracting a tooth.	0.8457938
If a part is held back, then the midwife should anoint some of her fingers with oil and insert them from the side, to rotate what is being held.	From time to time the tension must be relaxed, and if any part of it be held up the midwife must oil some of her fingers and introduce them to one side to manipulate the retained part.	0.779917
If a part of the fetus emerges, then shift the hooks to a higher location; do this until the entire fetus exits.	And if a part only of the foetus come away she should shift the hooks to other parts a little higher up, and so on, until the whole of the foetus has come out.	0.77033174
If a hand emerges before the others, and it is impossible to push it back due to its restriction, then it should be wrapped in a cloth. Then pull it until it fully exits, and cut it either at the wrist or elbow; do likewise with the other hand and both feet.	If the hand should come out before any other part and it is impossible to reduce it on account of the pressure, then a tape should be wound round it and she should pull on it until it is all out; then it should be cut off at either the carpal or the elbow joint. In the same manner should the other hand be dealt with, and the feet.	0.8798192
If, however, the fetus's head is large, or it is restricted in the exit, or there is fluid accumulated in its head, then it is necessary to insert between the fingers a thorny spatumile, and split the head with it to extract the fluid, or rupture it with an instrument called an Almisdac, the form of which appears with the other instrument forms in the chapter after this one.	If the foetal head be large and it is tightly squeezed in exit, or if there be a collection of fluid in the head, you should introduce between your fingers a spike-shaped scalpel and split the head to let the water out; or you should smash it with the instrument called cephalotribe which will be illustrated, together with figures of the other instruments, in the chapter following.	0.73419964
Similarly, if the fetus has a naturally large head, then it is necessary to cut it with the algengematu or extract it with the misdach, as we have described. Then pull out the bones with forceps.	In the same manner you act if the foetus have a naturally large head: either you should cut the skull open or smash it with the cephalotribe as we said; then you should draw out the bones with forceps.	0.77227867
If the head emerges but becomes restricted at the breastbone, then it should be split until the moisture in the chest is released.	If the head comes out and the foetus is held up at the collar bones, an incision should be made to let out the humidity in the thorax, for the thorax will then shrink.	0.6961727
If it does not fold or permit exit, then cut the head into pieces as much as is possible for you.	But if the thorax does not shrink and is not disposed to emerge then you should cut off pieces in any manner possible.	0.62182355
If there is an abscess in the lower abdomen, or if there is dropsy in it, then it is necessary to pierce it until the fluid flows out.	If the lower belly be swollen or dropsical then you should make an opening to draw out all the fluid.	0.76334584
If the fetus is on its feet, then its extraction is easy, and its direction toward the mouth of the uterus is smooth.	If the foetus present the feet then the extraction will be easy and it will be a simple matter to guide it to the maternal opening.	0.7776354
If it becomes restricted at the abdomen or chest, then it is necessary to extract it with a cloth wrapped around your hand, and split the abdomen or chest until the contents flow out.	If it be stuck about the abdomen or thorax then pull on it with a cloth wound around your hand and cut an opening in the abdomen or thorax to allow the contents to flow out.	0.8660141
If the other limbs have been removed and the head remains, then the midwife should insert her left hand. If the mouth of the uterus is open, then she should insert her hand deep into the uterus, search for the head with it, and draw it toward the mouth of the uterus with her fingers; then insert one hook or two into it and pull it out with them.	If all the limbs are removed but the head is turned backwards and is jammed, the midwife should introduce her left hand and, if the mouth of the womb is open, should put the hand into the cervix of the womb and investigate the head and, with her fingers, draw it down toward the opening and fix a hook or two in it, and extract it with these.	0.88017064
If the mouth of the uterus is restricted due to a warm abscess that has occurred, then it is not necessary to work on it; rather, it is necessary to apply moist, fatty substances, apply poultices, and have her sit in waters that soften and moisten.	If it should be that the mouth of the womb is closed on account of an abscess, then one must not be rough with it but should use in this case instillations of moistening greasy substances; plasters also should be applied; and the woman should sit in a bath of softening and moistening waters.	0.79934454
If the fetus is on its side, then it is possible to straighten it; then apply the same treatment that we discussed for a live fetus.	If the foetus present laterally and it is possible to reposition it, there should be applied the things mentioned for a living child.	0.6879194
If that is not possible, then it should be cut into pieces and extracted.	But if this be not possible then it should be cut away piecemeal and extracted.	0.902099
And it is necessary not to leave any part of the afterbirth inside at all.	It is necessary that not a scrap of the afterbirth be left behind in the womb.	0.76499933
When you have completed your operation, then administer what we mentioned regarding warm abscesses that occur in the uterus.	When you have completed your treatment then also apply those treatments we have mentioned for abscesses occurring in the uterus.	0.8215771
If bleeding occurs, then let her sit in astringent waters and administer the remaining treatment.	If haemorrhage occurs, the woman should be put into styptic fluids and the usual treatment applied.	0.6532501
I myself have seen a woman in whose womb a fetus had died; she then became pregnant again over it, and afterward that fetus also died. After a long time, an abscess developed in her navel, and it swelled until it opened and began to discharge pus.	Now I myself once saw a woman who had become pregnant and the foetus had then died in utero; then again she conceived and the second foetus also died; and after a long while she got a swelling in the umbilicus which grew and eventually it opened and began to produce pus.	0.90936244
I was called to treat her, and I treated her for a long time, but the wound did not heal.	I was called in to attend her, and I treated her for a long while but the wound did not heal up.	0.9286319
So I applied to it some poultices with strong drawing power, and a bone came out of the place. Then, after a few days, another bone emerged. I was amazed at this, since there are no bones in the womb.	So I applied to it certain very strongly drawing ointments, and then a bone came away from the place; then a few days passed and another bone came out; and I was mightily astonished at this, seeing that the abdomen is a place where there are no bones.	0.8961407
So I thought that they were bones of the dead fetus.	I formed the opinion that these were bones from a dead foetus.	0.80113184
I therefore explored the wound and extracted many bones, the woman being in better health, and she continued to live in this condition for a long time, discharging a small amount of pus from the place.	I continued this procedure and got a great number of bones out of her, the woman being in the best of health; indeed she lived for quite a while like that, with a little pus being exuded from that place.	0.842571
I record this unusual case here only because it contains knowledge and assistance for what the skillful physician accomplishes by hand in treatment.	I bring forward this uncommon occurrence here since it gives knowledge and help about the sort of treatment that the doctor who practises surgery may contrive.	0.86215264

chapter-2-subchapter-77.txt
On the forms of instruments necessary for the extraction of the fetus.	On the forms of instruments necessary for extracting the foetus.	0.97518635
Below is the form of the press, by which books are aligned, having two equal pivots at the two ends of two wooden pieces. However, this pivot should be finer than the press and should be made either of ebony or boxwood.	This is the type of instrument with which books are pressed. It has two screws at either end of two pieces of wood; but this instrument should be more slender than a book press, and should be made of ebony or boxwood.	0.89116895
The width of each piece of wood should be about two fingers, with each side margin being about one finger, and the length of each piece is a palm and a half. In the middle of the two wooden pieces are two additional parts made of the same kind of wood, already fixed to each side, with a length of half a palm and slightly more, and the width of each is about two fingers, or a little more.	The width of each piece of wood should be about two fingers' breadth and the thickness about one, and the length a span and a half; and in the middle of both pieces of wood, firmly attached, should be two projections made of the same kind of wood, each half a span long or a little more, and two fingers wide or a little more.	0.929461
These two additional parts are inserted into the mouth of the womb, to open it when you turn the two pivots.	It is these two projections that are to be introduced into the vagina so that it is thereby opened when you turn the screws.	0.77278125
Another form similar to it, finer and lighter.	Another instrument, for the same purpose, but smaller and lighter.	0.68516207
It should be made from ebony or boxwood, in the likeness of forceps. However, at its end should be two additional parts, as you see above; the length of each part is about a palm, and the width of each is two fingers.	It is made of ebony or boxwood in the shape of forceps, but at the end it has two projections as you can see; and the length of each is about a span and the breadth two fingers.	0.84644675
Therefore, when you wish to open the womb with it, have the woman sit on a bed with her feet hanging down and the area between her legs exposed. Then insert the two joined additional parts into the womb, holding the instrument's end below between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument, as you would with scissors, according to the amount you wish to open the mouth of the womb, until the midwife achieves what she wants.	When you wish to open the womb with this, make the woman sit on a couch with her legs hanging down, parted; then introduce the two projections pressed together into the orifice of the womb while you hold the end of the instrument lower down between her thighs; then open your hand in the same way as you would do with forceps, to the extent to which you wish to open the womb, so as to allow the midwife to do what she desires.	0.91090053
The form of another pivot which the ancients called the form of the pusher, with which the fetus is pushed.	Another type of screw speculum mentioned by the Ancients. Figure of the thruster for thrusting the foetus.	0.72524095
The form of the Almisdac, with which a large head is crushed; it resembles forceps with teeth at the end, as you see.	Figure of the cephalotribe for crushing the foetal head. It resembles scissors with toothed jaws, as you see.	0.5970581
And it is sometimes made elongated, like forceps of this form, as you see, with teeth like those of a saw, with which it cuts and crushes.	Sometimes it is made long like forceps, as you see in this illustration, with teeth like the teeth of a saw; and you may either cut or crush with it.	0.8118701
The form of the hook with one spine.	Figure of a hook.	0.52672154
The form of the hook with two spines.	Figure of a doubleheaded hook.	0.71596
The form of the Spatumilis with two ends for cutting off the head.	Figure of two broad scalpels for cutting up the foetus.	0.60417485
The form of two wide Spatumilia.	Figure of a two-ended scalpel.	0.52735555
All these instruments are used, and the more their types are multiplied and prepared by the craftsman, the quicker they are for the operation and more esteemed by people, due to their quantity.	The more types of these instruments the practitioner has ready by him, the more rapidly he operates, and the greater his reputation among men.	0.7082596
Therefore, do not disregard any of these instruments; have them prepared with you. For their necessity is undeniable.	So do not neglect to have ready by you a single one of these instruments, for you will certainly need it.	0.79041773

chapter-2-subchapter-78.txt
On the extraction of the afterbirth.	On extracting the afterbirth.	0.9732866
When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, then you should instruct the patient to hold her breath. Then make her sneeze with a condiment, and press your hand over her mouth and nose. If it comes out as a result, it is good.	When in a confinement the afterbirth is left behind, you should bid the woman hold her breath then make her sneeze with ptarmica, with your hand holding her mouth and nose; and if it come away thus, good.	0.8365194
If not, then take a pot and perforate a hole in the cover, and place in it herbs that open the mouth of the womb, like calamint, rue, dill, chamomile, sseha, cinnamon, and centaury; take all these herbs, or some of them, and submerge them in water, and place them on the fire.	But if not, then take a pot, pierce a hole in the lid, and put in it herbs that will open the womb, such as pennyroyal, rue, anise, chamomile, artemisia, cassia, and centaury, some or all of these remedies, submerge them in water, and place on the fire.	0.8493047
Then place a reed tube over the hole in the cover of the pot, and place the other end in the mouth of the womb; let her hold it until the vapor reaches the cavity of the womb.	Then fix a silver tube to the hole in the cover and bring the other end into the orifice of the womb and hold it in position so that the vapours may reach the body of the uterus.	0.84683645
Then make her sneeze, as we have said. For the afterbirth will come out with ease.	Then let her sneeze, as we said, and the afterbirth will quickly come away.	0.86084133
If it remains after this treatment and does not come out, then instruct the midwife to dip her hand in sesame oil or marshmallow mucilage. Then she should insert her hand into the vulva and search for the afterbirth with it. When she finds it, then she should take hold of it and gently stretch it out little by little.	But if, after this treatment, it still remains and does not come out, then tell the midwife to dip her hand in oil of sesame or mucilage of marshmallow and introduce it into the vulva and search for the afterbirth, and when she has found it, to take hold of it and very gently draw it until she bring it out.	0.8891051
But if it is attached deep within the womb, she should insert her hand, as we have described, until she finds the afterbirth, and pull it out gradually in a straight line, so the womb does not fall due to forceful traction; rather, it should be moved gently to the right and left sides, then more traction may be applied as needed. Then it yields, is freed, and escapes from its adherence.	But if it be adherent to the depths of the uterus, then let her pass her hand in as we described until she find the afterbirth; then let her draw very slowly and gently lest by violent pulling she cause a prolapse; and she should slowly move it from side to side, left and right; then let her increase the traction, for then it gives way to the pull and is freed from its adhesions.	0.9198904
If the mouth of the womb is constricted, as we have already described, treat her with sneezing and the medication from the pot with herbs.	If the uterine opening be narrowed, we have earlier mentioned the treatment by induced sneezing and that of the pot and herbs.	0.76166594
If it does not come out with everything we have described, then be careful not to exhaust her with repeated extractions.	But if it does not come away by all the means we have described, beware of treating her roughly with repeated traction.	0.7979794
Instead, it is proper to tie what comes out at the mouth of the womb to the woman's hip. Then administer a clyster with tetrapharmacon ointment. For this will cause it to decay over days, dissolve, and come out.	Whatever of it comes out of the opening should be tied to the woman's thigh, and then syringe her with Tetrapharmacon ointment; for that will cause putrefaction in a few days and it will loosen and come out.	0.8152633
However, when it decays, a foul odor will rise from it to her stomach and head, harming the patient. Therefore, suitable fumigations should be administered for this.	However, when it necroses foul odours arise from it that ascend to the stomach and head and these cause harm to the patient; so she should have suffumigations appropriate for this.	0.9165095
Some of the ancients have tried fumigations with watercress and dried figs.	One of the Ancients tried suffumigation with nasturtium and dried figs.	0.80739504
The form of the instrument with which a woman is fumigated for retention of the afterbirth and menstruation.	The form of instrument for suffumigating a woman for retention of the menses and of the afterbirth and the like.	0.89293826
It should be made of glass similar to alcama, or from bronze; place the wide end over the fire, and the fumigation is placed on the embers; she should hold it until the fumigation is consumed, and repeat another.	It is made of lead, resembling a funnel, or it may be made of bronze. Its narrow extremity is introduced into the pudenda and the wide end is put over the fire, and the suffumigation is produced on the hot coals. Keep it there until all the fumes are gone, and repeat once.	0.75653994

chapter-2-subchapter-79.txt
On the treatment of an imperforate anus.	On imperforate anus.	0.6488939
Many children are born with their anuses not perforated, which a delicate membrane has obstructed. Therefore, the midwife should perforate that membrane with her finger; if not, she should perforate it with a sharp Spatumili and be careful not to touch the muscle.	Infants are quite often born with the anus imperforate, closed by a fine membrane; then the midwife should perforate the membrane with her finger or pierce it with a sharp scalpel, being careful not to touch the muscle.	0.82522094
Then place wool soaked in wine and oil over it. Then treat it with ointments until it heals.	Then wool dipped in oil and wine should be applied, and treat it with ointments until healed.	0.9000534
If you fear it may become obstructed, place a lead tube in the opening for many days, and remove it when the child wants to evacuate.	If you are afraid it may close up, put into the opening a leaden tube for many days, which will be removed when the child wants to evacuate the bowel.	0.9217591
Sometimes obstruction of the anus also occurs due to wound healing or an abscess. Therefore, that hardened area should be cut, then treated as we described, with healing and lead.	Sometimes also the anus is closed by the scarring of a wound or an abscess; then the scarring should be incised, and then dressed by those methods we have mentioned, including the leaden tube.	0.79705906

chapter-2-subchapter-80.txt
On the treatment of fistulas occurring in the lower part.	On the treatment of fistulae occurring in the lower parts.	0.9884609
Fistulas that occur in the lower area are knotted growths and thicknesses that appear near the outside of the anus or in the space of one of the parts, and there may be one fistula or several.	Fistulae in the lower parts are a knotting and thickening of the tissues occurring externally near the anus or in the perineum to one side. A fistula may be single or multiple.	0.86410767
When this knotty growth becomes old, it opens, and a watery white moisture or thin pus flows from it.	When a thickening of this kind has become chronic it opens and there flows out a white watery humidity or thin pus.	0.89729667
And sometimes these fistulas are penetrating. Penetrating fistulas are recognized by the matter that exits with stools and gas when the patient evacuates; sometimes worms may emerge from them.	These fistulae may be perforating into the rectum or bowel, or non-perforating. The former may be known by faeces or flatus coming out of them when the patient opens the bowel. Often also worms come out of them.	0.7069057
Some fistulas, when they are in a certain position, penetrate as far as the bladder and to the urethra. Some penetrate as far as the hip joint and to the coccygeal junction.	Sometimes also there are fistulae occurring in the perineum which penetrate to the urinary bladder and to the urethra; and some also penetrate to the hip-joint and to the coccyx.	0.8032725
To determine if a fistula penetrates to the anus, as opposed to a non-penetrating one, insert your index finger into the anus and a thin probe of brass or iron into the fistula when it is not twisted.	A fistula penetrating to the anus may also be distinguished from one not so penetrating by introducing the finger into the anus and a fine probe into the fistula, made of either bronze or iron, if there be no bend in the course of the fistula.	0.8344086
If there is a twist in it, then insert a thin lead probe into it, or a strand of horsehair, until you feel the probe or hair with your finger.	But if the course of the fistula be tortuous, then introduce a thin leaden probe or a horse-hair, until you feel the probe or horse-hair come on to your finger.	0.8004975
If you do not feel it at all, nor does anything exit from the opening with stool, nor gas, nor worms as I mentioned, then know that it is non-penetrating; proceed, therefore, with the treatment.	But if you do not feel it at all and if no faeces nor flatus nor worm come out of the opening, as we said, you may know it is not perforating; so hurry on with treatment.	0.8318486
When the fistula penetrates to the bladder or the urinary tract, this is indicated by urine exiting from it, and it will resist healing with medication.	When the fistula penetrates to the bladder or the urinary passages it is signified by the passage of urine and by the fact that medical remedies cannot cure it.	0.83147514
If, however, it penetrates as far as the hip joint or the hip bone, the sign is that the probe reaches there without twisting, pain is felt around the area, pus constantly discharges from it, and it does not respond to medication or heal with ointments.	But if it penetrate to the hip-joint or coccyx, this will be signified by the probe's passing right through to there if it be a straight passage to the bone; and by the pain felt in that part; and by the chronic purulent discharge; and the fact that medical treatment does no good and ointment does not heal it.	0.747241
For all these penetrating fistulas, there is absolutely no cure, and treatment is merely labor and futility at the hands of foolish physicians who attempt it.	There is in these perforating sinuses no cure whatever; and their treatment is labour in vain for all the ignorant doctors who pretend that they understand them.	0.7824299
For a fistula that is non-penetrating and not old, healing may be hoped for with a cautery, as I describe to you, having tested it myself. The patient should lie in your arms on his back, with his legs raised above his hips, and his hips bent toward his abdomen. Then, insert a lead or brass probe if there is twisting in the fistula, so you can determine how far the probe reaches.	But there is hope in operative treatment for those that are not perforating and chronic, as I know from experience and shall now describe. Thus: have the patient lying on his back before you and let both his legs be raised with the thighs flexed back upon his belly; then introduce a probe of bronze, or of lead if the course be tortuous, until you determine where the probe reaches.	0.8099129
If the patient feels it near the anus, then you should insert your index finger into the anus.	Then, if the patient feel the probe somewhere in the region of the anus, put your forefinger into the anus.	0.7970301
If you feel the probe with your finger, penetrating by itself, but sense a membrane or flesh between your finger and it, then know for certain that it is penetrating. Therefore, do not waste effort on it, as there is no cure, as we have said.	If you feel the probe itself with your finger, coming through bare, and you do not feel anything interposing between your finger and the probe, either membrane or flesh, then you may know for certain that it is a perforating fistula; do not spend your energy over it, for, as we have said, there is no cure.	0.8893123
However, it has been said that, in some people, tissue may heal, and a helpful treatment would be to heat a thin cautery to fit the width of the fistula as previously described, and insert the heated cautery into the fistula until it reaches near the anus. Then repeat this process two or three times until you know that all the added, fibrous tissues, which resemble a bird’s feather quill, have been burned.	Yet some have said that it may be cured in certain cases, but rarely. The treatment from which some relief may be hoped is to heat a fine cautery corresponding to the width of the fistula, as we have said before, and pass this, hot, through the fistula to the anus; then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those compact tags of superfluous flesh, which resemble quills, are burnt away.	0.8660054
Then treat it with wicks soaked in butter until the burned tissues are expelled, then treat it with ointments that generate and consolidate new flesh.	Then dress with a pad soaked in oil until the burnt tissue comes away.	0.6128336
If it heals, that is good.	Then treat with healing ointments and, if it heals, well and good.	0.54624426
If it does not heal, then it will never heal with any other treatment.	If not, it will never heal with any other treatment.	0.9258061
If the probe exits but does not reach your finger in the anus, and there is a thick membrane of flesh or a membrane between the probe and your finger, and you see the fistula near the skin's surface, then cut the skin from the fistula's start, cutting alongside the probe in the fistula until the incision reaches the probe’s end, freeing it to fall.	If you introduce the probe and it does not come through to your finger in the anus, and there be between your finger and the probe something firm interposing, either tissue or lining, and you see the fistula to be close under the skin, then cut open the skin at the origin of the fistula and continue your incision, with the probe in the fistula, until you come to the place where the tip of the probe has reached and the probe is freed and falls out.	0.9073771
Then clean out those fibrous tissues that resemble the hollow shaft of a bird’s feather so that nothing remains.	Then clean out all the solid quill-like pieces of tissue and let none remain.	0.71127206
If blood overwhelms you and disrupts your operation to cut away these tissues, then it is better and faster to cauterize it with fire or with a sharp medicine.	If the haemorrhage be too much for you and interferes with your operating when cutting away the tissues, then the best and most speedily efficacious thing you can do is to cauterize, either with fire or with caustics.	0.7959293
For cautery with fire gathers beneficial conditions: burning away the added tissues, stopping bleeding, and drying up moisture.	For cauterizing with fire unites two good characteristics, the burning away of those superfluous tissues, and the stanching of the bleeding, as well as the drying-up of humidity.	0.75464404
Then treat it with wicks soaked in butter or mashed cabbage until the area discharges pus and the burned tissues are expelled as pus.	Then treat with a dressing soaked in butter, or sulphur pounded with oil, until the place putrefies and the burnt tissue comes away in the pus.	0.83511335
Then treat the wound with consolidating ointments that generate firm flesh; these are medicines with astringency and drying properties.	Then treat the wound with salves to encourage healing and the growth of firm flesh, these remedies having also a styptic and drying quality.	0.7649591
For once they are restored, the wound is healed, and you need not fear recurrence.	Then when the wound is healed over it is cured for good and there is no fear of a recurrence.	0.7723454
If the fistula has already reached deep into the anus and extends far within the body, then insert your finger into the anus and examine with it.	If the fistula reaches deep into the anus and is far from the surface of the body, then put your finger into the anus and palpate.	0.85461247
If you feel the probe, and there is a membrane or flesh between you and it, and it is close to penetration, then there is no further operation except to proceed with hope and trust.	If you feel a barrier of flesh or membrane interposed between the probe and your finger, and it be nearly through, then there is nothing to be done except to try a remote hope.	0.8120216
This means that one of three methods can be applied: either cauterize it, as we have said; or cut it until you reach its cavity, making it possible for you to insert wicks and administer treatment closely. Do not proceed too far with the incision, so as not to cut the muscle that holds the anus, which could result in involuntary discharge for the patient. Then treat it with the methods we have described.	There are three methods that you may employ. The first is to cauterize it, as we have said. Or you may cut it open until you reach the termination so as to be able to insert a dressing and bring the medicament into contact with it, but do not extend your incision too far lest you cut into the sphincter muscle and the patient become incontinent of faeces; then dress in the manner we have said and perhaps it may heal.	0.8817328
Perhaps it may heal, or you may cut away this membrane and clean it after making an incision near the anus, as we described, either with a probe or with another instrument with a sharp tip. Then clean out those fibrous tissues that are in the incision, probing as far as you are able.	Or you may perforate the barrier and pierce it through, after incising to the vicinity of the anus, as we have said, either with the probe or with some other sharp-pointed instrument; then clear away the fleshy granulations in the incision as far as you are able; then attempt the repair of the whole wound with the incision and the upper opening, until it heals.	0.85658085
Next, attempt the restoration of the entire wound by keeping the incision and upper opening where it can consolidate, leaving the fistula open in the inner part of the anus, which will ease the burden on the patient.	Let the inner end of the fistula remain open, for this will ease the patient.	0.6386303
Sometimes, the fistula is sutured according to this method: insert a probe into the fistula, which is located along the side of the anus near the body surface with skin and edge of the anus. Then take a probe with a perforated tip, similar to an awl used for leatherworking, shaped as described here. Then insert into it a thread wrapped from five strands, and secure it around the probe. Then insert the probe with the thread into the fistula until it reaches its cavity.	Sometimes also a fistula is cut out in this way: namely, you pass a probe into the fistula; it should be near the circle of the junction of the outer skin with the anal mucosa; then take a probe with an eyed point like a shoemaker's needle; put into it a thread twisted of about five threads, and insert into the fistula until it reaches the end.	0.87918985
If the fistula penetrates close to the inner edge of the anus, then extract the thread from that opening by inserting your finger into the anus and pulling out the end of the thread. Tie the two ends together, tighten them, and leave it for one or two days. As the thread cuts further into the flesh, tighten it well until the tissue between the two ends of the thread is cut through and falls away. Then treat the wound until it is consolidated and healed.	If it has perforated through at the anal margin within, nearby, draw the thread out of that perforation by introducing your finger into the anus. Draw out the end of the thread and tie the two ends together and leave for one or two days. As the thread cuts into the tissues, tighten it up well until those tissues enclosed in the thread are cut through and fall away. Then dress the wound until it be healed and sound.	0.9364119
If the fistula’s opening is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in any way available to you, unless it is very deep. If it reaches the muscle, you must take care not to cut into it.	If the mouth of the fistula is not perforated, perforate it as best you can, unless the depth is too great; in which case you must not do so lest you cut the muscle.	0.8265116
Then proceed as we have described until it is healed.	Then treat as we have said until it heals.	0.93132335
This is the form of the spined spatumilis used for splitting the fistula, with one end sharply curved, while the other end is blunt to avoid cutting unnecessarily, as you see.	Figure of the sharp-pointed scalpel for cutting open fistulae; the curved edge should be exceedingly sharp and the other blunt, lest you cut what should not be cut, as you see.	0.73518044

chapter-2-subchapter-81.txt
On the suture of hemorrhoids, from which blood flows after their incision: and on the treatment of fissures.	On cutting and incising piles that are bleeding, and the treatment of fissures.	0.6141684
Hemorrhoids exist in two forms. They are either inside the anus, resembling blisters of charcoal or embers, or as if they were like grapes. And among them are small and large ones; blood flows from them constantly, and there is one, or there are many.	Haemorrhoids are of two kinds: either internal, resembling red bubbles or grape-seeds, small or large, with blood perpetually flowing, and they may be single or multiple; or they may be external, round about the anus.	0.85283244
However, those that are outside the anus usually have little moisture, from which yellowish fluid or a small amount of blood flows steadily, and they are the same color as the body.	External ones are for the most part fairly dry; a little yellowish fluid or blood constantly oozes from them, and they are of the colour of the body.	0.76826847
And the treatment for those inside the anus is to instruct the patient to sit; then press, until the anus emerges, and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Therefore, suspend them with hooks, or hold them with your fingernail. Then cut them at their roots.	The treatment of internal piles: bid the patient open his bowel and bear down until the anus opens out and the swellings are disclosed to you; then quickly take hold of them with hooks or with your finger-nail and cut them off near the roots.	0.717319
If the hooks do not hold them, due to their moisture and softening, then grasp them with a rough cloth or woolen fabric, and extract them with your fingers. Then cut them, and sprinkle some warm powders on them after the incision, so they act as a substitute for cauterization. Or cauterize them as described previously in the chapter on cauterization. Then treat them with the remaining treatment until they heal.	If the hook does not retain its hold on them because of their humidity and softness, then cut them with a piece of rough material or a rag of goat-hair, or draw them out with your fingers and cut them off; and after excision sprinkle some caustic powder on to act instead of the cautery; or cauterize them as previously described in the book on cauterization; then dress in the usual way until healed.	0.90945876
If the anus does not yield to egress, then administer an enema with a mild irritant to cleanse the anus, and so that it yields to egress quickly when the patient presses.	But if the anus will not open out for you then give a slightly corrosive enema so as to wash out what is within, and then, the anus will open out quickly when the patient bears down.	0.80893815
If the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their treatment is light, easy: just grasp them with your fingernail or a hook and cut them. Then treat them as described, until they heal.	Now the treatment of external piles is easy and simple: take hold of them with your finger-nails or catch them up with a hook and cut them away; and treat as before mentioned until cured.	0.8090348
And if someone shuns incision with iron, then it is necessary to perform their suture according to this method. Take a twisted thread and insert it into a needle. Then pull the hemorrhoid upwards, and make the needle penetrate at its root from the other side; wrap the two ends of the thread at the lower part of the needle, laying them crosswise, and tie the hemorrhoid tightly. Then knot the thread and remove the needle.	But with the patient who refuses excision with the knife, this manner of removal should be practised: thread a twisted thread into a needle, then draw the piles upward and run the needle through the root of each, from one side to the other, and wind the ends of the thread round beneath the needle as it lies crosswise, and bind the pile firmly; then knot the thread and remove the needle.	0.81829774
Do this with all the hemorrhoids, but leave one unsutured so that excess blood may flow from it.	Do this with each pile, but leave one not destroyed so that the superfluous blood may flow from it.	0.8538704
Then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or carrot oil on the anus, and instruct the patient to rest. Then leave it alone until it falls off.	Then apply to the anus a piece of material soaked in oil of roses or wax; apply it and bid the patient lie quiet; then leave him until the piles fall away.	0.8691573
When the hemorrhoids fall off, treat them with ointments and the remaining care until they heal.	When they fall away, dress with ointments and the usual dressings until healed.	0.66800135
On the treatment of fissures. They often occur due to the drying of stool and the constriction of nature.	The treatment of fissures: these often arise from dryness of the faeces and from constipation.	0.663793
When they become chronic and medicine has no effect, it is necessary to scrape them with the point of a Spatumila, or with your fingernail, until they become moist, and the upper crust that prevents them from healing is removed. Then treat them until they heal properly.	If they become chronic, and medical treatment is unavailing, you should scrape them with the edge of a scalpel or with your finger-nail until they become soft and the upper layer, that prevents healing, is removed; then dress until they mend as they should.	0.82280445
If they do not heal, then repeat the scraping more vigorously than the first time until they bleed significantly and the surface is removed; then treat them until they heal.	But if they do not heal, repeat the scraping more strongly than at first until they bleed freely and become raw; then apply dressings and they will heal.	0.79901403

chapter-2-subchapter-82.txt
Chapter 82.	CHAPTER EIGHTY-TWO.	0.57206166
Know that Almirmar is nothing but a round knot of the same color as the body, similar to the head of a nail; it appears on the entire body, especially on the lower parts of the feet and toes, and causes pain when walking.	A corn is a round knob, the same colour as the body and resembling the head of a nail. It occurs in all parts of the body but particularly in the soles of the feet and the toes, whence arises pain in walking.	0.7350501
Therefore, it is necessary to cut around the nail, hold it with forceps or a hook, and remove it from its root.	You should cut away what is round the corn and take it with forceps or a hook and tear it out by the root; then dress it.	0.69388926
Then treat it; and if you wish, cauterize it as was previously discussed in its chapter.	If you wish you may cauterize it in the manner already described in the book on cauterization.	0.5919317
As for dry Athelil, it is a small, rough, filtered, round prominence on the surface of the body. And it often occurs on the hands of children.	Then concerning dry warts: a wart is a little round rough compact eminence on the surface of the body; it occurs often on the hands of boys.	0.616854
The treatment for it is to stretch the Athelil and cut it, or to tie it with a silk thread or hair until it falls off. And if you wish, cauterize it as mentioned before, either with fire or with sharp medicine; and now both inward and outward Athelil are eradicated with the instrument I will describe.	Now the treatment is to draw out the wart and cut if off; or tie it off with a silken thread or a hair until it falls out; or if you wish, cauterize as said before, either with the actual cautery or with caustic. Sometimes warts, inverted or otherwise, are uprooted with the instrument I shall describe under the treatment of pimples.	0.7998587
Formica is also a small, thick, filtered prominence on the surface of the body, going very deep; and when cold reaches it, it feels like an ant's bite, appearing all over the body, especially on the hands.	A pimple is also a little compact thick prominence on the skin surface, going deep; when it gets cold there is a feeling as of an ant's sting in it. It is found all over the body but mostly on the hands.	0.8247792
The treatment for it is to take a tube from a goose feather or a strong vulture feather, and place that tube over the Formica until the tube's circle encloses it. Then twist your hand with the tube until you cut around the Formica; insert it deep into the flesh and remove the Formica from its root.	The treatment is to take the quill of a strong feather of the goose or the vulture, and place the quill over the pimple so as to encircle it with the circumference of the tube; then revolve the quill with your hand so as to cut all round the pimple, and go deep into the flesh, and then the pimple may be drawn out by the roots.	0.8234797
And if you wish, do this with a tube of brass or iron, in this manner.	If you wish you may extract it with a tube of bronze or of iron, of this form.	0.81911254
Let the top of the tube have a raised and rounded cover so that handling and twisting it over the finger is eased.	The upper closed part of the tube should be fine, solid, and twisted, to give easy purchase for the fingers in holding and revolving it.	0.6890787
And if you wish, cauterize the Formica as previously discussed in the cauterization of Athelil in the chapter on cautery.	If you wish you may cauterize the pimple as described earlier on the cauterization of warts in the book on the cautery.	0.67583597

chapter-2-subchapter-83.txt
On the forms of instruments used for enemas in illnesses of the anus, diarrhea, and colic.	On the kinds of instrument for administering enemata in diseases of the rectum, and in diarrhoea and colic.	0.8742675
Sometimes the enema device is made of silver, or brass, or cast or hammered bronze.	A clyster may be made of silver or of Chinese alloy or of cast or hammered bronze.	0.71271586
And sometimes these instruments are made small or large, depending on the patient for whom they are administered.	Large and small varieties of this instrument are made, to suit those on whom they are to be used; those for the treatment of children will be small.	0.602948
Therefore, that which is administered in treating small children should be small, and for those whose anus is weak or painful, so should be their enema devices.	Patients with stricture of the anus, or pain, will have very slender clysters.	0.43989453
Large enema.	Figure of a large clyster.	0.49791908
Its tube, that is, the upper part to which the reservoir is tied, should be wide in this way, with a separation so that the reservoir can be fastened as you see, and its lower end, which is inserted into the anus, should be blunt, that is, not open, very smooth, tapering to a thin point; and on one side, it should have two holes, and on the other side, one hole.	The upper end of the funnel to which the membrane is bound should be broad like this; it should have a rim where the membrane may be bound down, as you see. The lower extremity, which is introduced into the anus, should be closed and smooth, and on one side of it should be two holes, and on the other, one; the width of the holes should be about that of a probe or a little wider.	0.8547821
The diameter of the holes should be about the thickness of spokes, and slightly thicker, and the reservoir in which the medicines are placed should be made from the bladder of an animal or from egg parchment, shaped like a small bag, with a base of one palm in length.	The membrane to hold the medicament is made out of an animal's bladder or of parchment, made up in the form of a small bag, a span in diameter.	0.67375326
And it should be pierced with many holes all around it, with the space between each hole about the width of a finger. Then insert a strong thread of raw fiber, made of ten strands or so, into these holes, and tie it around the reservoir like a small bag. When the reservoir is placed on it, tie it tightly at the top of the enema device between the two separations. Then administer the enema with it.	It should be pierced with a number of holes in a circle a finger's breadth apart; and into these holes pass a strong thread of yarn, twisted of ten or so threads, and with this gather up the skin like a bag; and when the medicament is placed in it tie it down firmly between the two rims on the upper end of the clyster; and then give the enema.	0.83667374
And this is the form of the reservoir's circle and the holes depicted here.	This is the figure of the circle of skin with the holes.	0.6097718
The method of administering the enema with it is to fill the reservoir or bladder with medicine, warmed to the tolerance level of the patient; and be careful that it is not too hot or too cold.	Now the way to give an enema with this instrument is for the parchment or bladder to be filled with the medicament, which should be warmed so as to be tolerable for the patient; but beware lest it be too hot or too cold.	0.8508431
Then the patient should lie on their back and raise their legs upward, and place beneath them a pad, that is, leather on which people lie, or a cloth.	Then let the patient lie back and raise his legs; and put under them a leather mat or a blanket.	0.85630935
Then anoint the end of the enema device with oil, egg white, fenugreek mucilage, or similar substances. Then gently insert it into the anus. Then the assistant should take the reservoir with both hands and squeeze it forcefully until it empties everything from the device into the intestine.	Then anoint the tip of the clyster with oil or egg-white or mucilage of fenugreek or the like; then gently pass it into the anus; then let an assistant take the membrane in both hands and together firmly squeeze it until all the contents are squirted into the bowel.	0.87165236
Then remove the enema device, and the patient should raise their legs against the wall.	Then the clyster should be removed and the patient should raise his legs against the wall.	0.85725087
If the medicine urges him to expel, he should hold it as much as he can. And if he sleeps with it the entire night, it is most beneficial.	If the enema stimulates him to evacuate, let him hold it as long as he can; if he delay all night long, it will be all the more efficacious.	0.82900417
If you administer an enema for diarrhea, and he hurries to expel it, then repeat the enema until he is healed.	If the enema be given in a case of diarrhoea and he has to evacuate hastily, then the use of the enema should be repeated until he is cured.	0.8218317
If there are hemorrhoids or painful abscesses in the anus, then use a very thin, gentle enema device, like those used for children.	If there be haemorrhoids or painful tumours in the anus, the clyster should be exceedingly slender and smooth, of the sort employed for children.	0.77509046
And this is the form of the thin enema device with a tightly wrapped covering.	Here is a figure of a fine clyster with its skin tied on.	0.49386954

chapter-2-subchapter-84.txt
Chapter 84.	CHAPTER EIGHTY-FOUR.	0.63019264
I have already spoken in the section on wound treatment which pertains to the book, and here I will describe their treatment manually and with medicines in full.	I have already mentioned in the appropriate section the treatment of such wounds as are suitable for cauterization. Here I shall describe the operative and medical treatment in full.	0.731202
I say, therefore, that wounds vary depending on what causes them and the place where the wound occurs.	So I begin by saying that wounds differ according to that which causes them and according to the site.	0.88244796
Thus, the objects that often cause wounds are things like the throw of a stone, the cut of a sword or knife, or a blow with a spear, wood, arrow, and similar objects.	Those things that cause wounds are many: a knock from a stone, a cut from a sword or a knife, a blow by a spear, stick, or arrow; and many such things.	0.79385483
Wounds that occur in different parts of the body include wounds on the head, neck, chest, abdomen, liver, and similar parts.	To consider wounds according to their site on the body, they are such as a wound occurring in the head, or neck, or chest, or belly, or liver, and so on.	0.82129925
And I will narrate the treatments of certain wounds, to establish a rationale and rule for other wounds.	Now I am going to describe the treatment of certain wounds, so that you may take them as a standard and a guide for other wounds.	0.7367445
And I will begin with simple head wounds, as the mention of complex wounds will come at the beginning of the third chapter.	I shall begin particularly with the simple wounds of the head; for mention of the compound wounds will be made at the beginning of the third book.	0.87288773
I say, therefore. When a simple head wound occurs and there is no fracture of the bone, consider then if it is from the throw of a stone or something similar, and it has only broken the skin: if the wound is large and you fear a hot abscess forming, then proceed quickly and perform a cephalic phlebotomy immediately; do not delay this, and extract blood according to the patient's strength, if there is no contraindication to phlebotomy, especially if there is little blood coming from the wound. And let the phlebotomy be done on the side opposite to the wounded area.	I say then, that when there occurs a simple wound of the head, with no accompanying bone-fracture, you should look; and if it be caused by a knock from a stone or the like, and has only broken the skin, but it is a big wound and you fear lest there occur an abscess, then bleed the cephalic vein at once without delay; draw off from him blood in proportion to his vigour if there is no contra-indication to venesection; and particularly if the haemorrhage from the wound be slight.	0.85630524
And let the phlebotomy be done on the side opposite to the wounded area. And the patient should avoid overeating, wine, and heavy foods.	The venesection should be on the opposite side to the wound; and caution the patient against gluttony and wine and rich food.	0.7469582
If there is something preventing bloodletting, then reduce the food intake, and avoid meat and wine.	But if from any cause venesection is prevented, he should be on a light diet and avoid meat and wines.	0.751099
And if a hot abscess forms on the wound, apply a cooked compress soaked in rose oil alone or with wine containing astringency.	And apply to the wound, if there be any inflammation, cotton wool soaked in oil of roses, either alone or with a somewhat astringent wine.	0.8172741
If you are free from concern about a hot abscess, then apply to the wound, if it is fresh with its blood and has not yet been affected by the air, a powder I will describe shortly; if the air has already altered it, then apply certain ointments until it heals.	And if you are sure there is no inflammatory swelling, then apply directly to the wound, if its blood is fresh and it is unaltered by the air, the powder that I shall describe to you a little later. But if the air has already changed the wound, apply to it one of the ointments to cause it to discharge the pus; then dress until healed.	0.8609286
If the wound is large or caused by a sword cut or similar, and its edges do not come together with compresses, then bring them together with sutures, as I will describe in the treatment of abdominal wounds.	Now if it be a great wound, being caused by a sword-cut or the like, and dressings will not bring the edges of the wound together, you should suture them together in the manner I shall describe in dealing with the suture of abdominal wounds.	0.84035754
If the wound is already exposed to the bone, is hanging, and only held in place by a small attachment, then cut it off. Then treat the wound with medicines and restore hard flesh in place of the skin, and instruct the patient to eat foods with substantial nourishment, such as heads and cooked wheat, until it is like porridge, and similar foods.	But if the skin has actually disclosed the bone, and is attached by a small strip only, then cut it away and dress the wound with medicaments that will produce firm flesh to replace the skin, and bid the patient go on a diet of solid food such as brawn and gruels and the like.	0.816237
If you find putrefaction in the skin and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut off all the rotten part and remove it; then treat it.	And if decomposition arise in the skin and it will not adhere to the bone, then excise all the diseased part and discard it and then dress.	0.7749945
If in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flows and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then locate the artery. If you find it unsevered, then cut it with a Spatumili or tie it. If necessity demands when what we mentioned does not work, then cauterize it until the bleeding stops.	If in these wounds there be an artery or vein shedding blood, and medicinal applications do not stanch it, then examine the artery, and if you find it not quite severed then cut it through with a scalpel and ligature it; and if you are compelled, our directions being unavailing, then cauterize until the haemorrhage stops.	0.8405402
If these wounds are small and simple, then their treatment is easy and light: simply apply this powder over them, as it heals them before the air can affect them.	If these be small and simple wounds their treatment will be a light and easy matter; it is sufficient to sprinkle some of this powder on while they are still bleeding, before the atmosphere causes a change.	0.818246
The Method of the Healing Powder. Take one part frankincense, two parts dragon's blood, and three parts unslaked lime; grind it all thoroughly and sieve it. Fill the wound with this powder and bind it tightly until it adheres well and coagulates with the blood.	Description of the powder: let one part of olibanum and two parts of dragon's blood be taken, and three parts of quick or slaked lime, all beaten up together and passed through the sieve; and let the wound be packed with this and bound up tightly so that the powder sticks in position and coagulates with the blood.	0.78113246
Then bind it over with compresses and leave it undisturbed, not loosening it while it remains, so that it does not form an abscess. For the medicine should not be removed until it is healed.	Then bind pads above and let it be, not undoing it so long as it remains without swelling; for the dressing will not come away of itself until it is healed.	0.8414345
Sometimes lime alone suffices when you do not have frankincense or dragon's blood at hand, as it can perform the same function in many large wounds when it is appropriate to apply it and bind them, provided the wounds are fresh with their blood and have not been affected by the air.	Lime alone can do this if you have no olibanum and dragon's blood at hand. It has exactly the same effect too on most large wounds, when the application and bandaging are properly done, and when the haemorrhage is recent, so long as the air has not changed them.	0.76197207
But if the air has already altered them in some way, especially in summer, then this powder should not be used: instead, treat it as we have said, applying certain digestive ointments or barley poultices made with water and honey until they discharge pus. Then continue with the remaining treatment until they are healed.	If, however, the air has brought about some change, especially if it be in the summer season, then there is no point in the application of this powder. Treat it then as we have said, by applying one or other of the suppurative ointments; or by applying a gruel of barleymeal with water and honey, so that the pus flows; then treat by all the usual methods until cured.	0.8116889
If, however, the wound also causes a small fracture in the bone, then extract it with a forceps; I will soon describe the treatment for fractures of the head in what is to follow.	If, with the wound, there be also fracture of a bone, if it be slight, you should extract it with forceps. I mention the treatment of fractures of the head later on.	0.83349454
On Wounds of the Neck.	On wounds in the neck:	0.7191746
If a wound occurs in the neck, there is no difference in its treatment and the treatment of a simple head wound.	If a wound occur in the neck the treatment of it does not differ from that of a head wound, if it be simple.	0.9169261
But if a nerve or artery in the neck has been cut, and it is a nerve, there is no clever solution other than to avoid treating it with anything that strongly contracts, like ziniar, zegi, and similar substances. For they harm the nerves and contract them.	But if a nerve or artery in the neck happens to be cut: if it be a nerve, there is no device that will serve except to avoid treatment of it by strong styptic remedies such as verdigris and vitriol and the like; for these injure the nerve and cause spasm; and under no circumstance let anything cold be applied to the wound, for the substance of the nerve is cold and it is continuous with the brain, which is the most noble among the organs.	0.7659383
And do not place anything cold at all on the wound, because the nature of the nerves is cold and connected with the brain, which is the most elevated of the organs; the treatment should be gentle, using medicines such as washed lime in sweet water, sometimes infused with oil or rose oil, and tutty washed also in sweet water, and other minerals treated in this way, along with moist ointments.	But let your remedy for it be mild, such as lime slaked in sweet water many times and moistened with olive-oil or oil of roses; and with tutty, likewise washed in sweet water; and other minerals according to this prescription, and with bland ointments.	0.6933615
If the wound is large, then administer sutures or draw its edges together with compresses. Then treat it until it is healed.	If the wound be large, use stitches or draw the edges of the wound together with pads; then dress until cured.	0.87842476
If the wound is deep or has formed a cavity in its lower part where pus has accumulated, then pierce it at the most depressed part.	But if there be depth to the wound and a sinus appears at the bottom of it, in which pus has collected, then make an opening at the site of greatest depth.	0.7656635
If an artery is cut in the wound and blood flows, then separate it, cut it, and tie it; or cauterize it if necessity demands.	Now if an artery has been cut in the wound and you are in time to find it still bleeding, divide it or ligature it; or cauterize it if you are compelled to.	0.8537968
If the vertebrae of the throat or all of it are cut, and the respiratory passage is intact, then bring the edges of the skin together with sutures over the windpipe, do not touch the throat; instead, align it and restore it to its natural shape. Then bind it with an appropriate bandage and leave it for several days. Then treat it with ointments that have astringency and drying properties until it is healed.	If it be such a wound that some of the cartilages of the trachea are laid open, or the whole trachea, the jugular veins being safe and sound, then join the skin edges together with a suture over the windpipe, and do not touch the windpipe, but straighten it and restore to its natural form; then tie firmly and leave for some days; then treat with salves having some styptic and astringent quality, until healed.	0.853472
If the wound has already made an impression on the bone, then examine it; if there are bone fragments, extract all of them or as many as you can, and leave what cannot be removed until the wound becomes purulent and the fragments separate and come out easily.	If the wound has affected bone, examine it, and if there be fragments of bone in it get them all out, or all you can. Those you cannot get hold of, leave until the wound suppurates and heals, and it will be easy to extract them.	0.90612423
If the wound is fresh, then sprinkle over it the powder I described. If bone is visible in the wound and a fistula forms, then treat it with the method mentioned in its own chapter.	If it be a fresh wound, sprinkle on the powder I have described ; and if any bone corrupt in the wound and it becomes a fistula, treat it by those means we shall mention in their place.	0.8641549
On the wound in the shoulder blades.	On wounds in the chest and between the shoulders:	0.5511148
If there is a blow from a lance or knife, and you see its depth, then consider. If, therefore, air comes out of the wound when the patient breathes from it, then know that the wound is mortal.	If it be a piercing wound by a spear or a knife, and you see that it is deep, examine if there be a passage of air out of it when the patient breathes; whence you may know that the injury is mortal.	0.8927827
But if it does not have depth, and it is fresh with its blood, then do not apply powder in the first hour, nor tighten it, so that blood is not retained in its depth and returns to the heart, killing the patient. Instead, put drawing ointment on it and open it twice a day.	But if it is not deep and the haemorrhage is fresh, then do not straight away apply powder or bandage lest it keep the blood in the depths, so that it be returned to the heart and kill the patient; but apply to it a drawing ointment, and uncover it twice daily.	0.85503066
If, however, ointment is not available, then place old cotton at the mouth of the wound to draw out the moisture, and have the patient sleep on the wound so that what collects in it flows out.	If you have no ointment, apply carded cotton to the opening of the wound to soak up the humidities issuing from it. And make the patient sleep on the (side of the) wound so that what collects therein may flow out.	0.8020966
If three or more days have passed for the wound, and the patient has not had spasms, no bad heart tremor, nor difficulty in breathing, and you see that the rest of his condition is good, then know that the wound is safe. Therefore, treat it with linen cloths and other treatments until it is healed.	And if three or four days pass by after the wound, and the patient have no spasm or harmful palpitation of the heart nor obstruction to drawing breath, and you see that in other respects he is doing well, you may know that the wound is not dangerous; so treat it with pads and the usual dressings until it heals.	0.9028119
If its healing is delayed and it now remains open, then know that it has become a fistula. Therefore, treat it according to its type.	But if it will not heal and it permanently discharges pus, you may know that it has become a fistula; look for the treatment of this in the proper place.	0.6792021
And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut and is simple on the surface of the chest or back, then treat it as previously mentioned, with sutures if it is large, or with powder if it is small.	If the wound be from a cut with a sword or knife, a straightforward surface wound in the breast or back, then treat it as described before; that is, by suture if it be a great wound or by powder if it be a small one.	0.8817363
But if it has made an impression on the bone and fragments have broken off, then examine the wound and hasten to extract those fragments if they are separate. If they are not separate, then leave them until the wound putrefies, for extraction will be easier.	But if there has also been injury to the bone, cutting out fragments from it, you should explore the wound and hasten to draw out the fragments if they are detached from the bone; but if they are not detached then let be until the wound suppurates, when the removal of the fragments will be easy.	0.89299697
For other wounds occurring in other members, the treatment is as we have discussed.	Then with regard to other wounds occurring in other parts of the body, the same class of treatment should be used for them as for those already mentioned.	0.66801786

chapter-2-subchapter-85.txt
On wounds of the belly and the emergence of the intestines and their exit.	On wounds of the abdomen, and protrusion of the intestine; and on suturing them.	0.76736474
The rupture that happens to the belly is great, moderate, or small.	The tear that occurs in the abdomen may be great or small or it may be middle-sized.	0.8490298
From a great rupture, sometimes the intestine or a number of intestines comes out.	From a large tear one or more segments of gut may protrude.	0.75434166
Therefore, their reinsertion and suturing become more forceful and difficult.	The reduction of this and the suture of the wound is an exceedingly hard and difficult matter.	0.61306226
And a small rupture also becomes difficult in another way. It follows, then, that their reinsertion becomes more difficult if you do not immediately replace them in their place, for they swell, open, and enlarge, making reentry difficult.	Small openings may also be difficult in another way, for they are bound to be harder to reduce, and if you do not hurry to return the gut to its place at once it will swell up and enlarge, thus rendering reduction difficult.	0.8519285
Because of this, a moderate rupture is better, for with it the reinsertion of the intestine is not as difficult as in these two other types.	So the best tear is the medium-sized, for in this case the reduction of the intestine will not be as difficult as in the two other cases.	0.76678395
Know that suturing of the belly is done in four ways.	Then you should know that suturing the abdomen may be carried out in four ways.	0.84681
Two common sutures are suitable for suturing the belly and other wounds of the body; two other sutures specifically pertain to other wounds. However, they are more proper for the suturing of the belly; I will describe each with explanation and clarification.	Two of them are general; suitable both for suture of the abdomen and for other wounds of the body. The other two sutures are special; they may be used for other wounds, but are more suitable for abdominal wounds. I shall describe each one to you separately, with comments and explanation.	0.91784275
I say, therefore, that when the wound is small and something of the intestine comes out of it, making it difficult to replace, this is due to one of two reasons. Either because of the small size of the rupture, as we have said, or because of swelling in the intestine due to the cold air.	I begin then by saying that when the wound is small, and a piece of intestine protrudes from it, rendering the reduction of it difficult, the difficulty will be due to one of two causes: either on account of the smallness of the fissure, as we said; or because the gut has become inflated on account of the coldness of the air.	0.87837213
When it is so, then it is necessary to warm it, by immersing a sponge or damp cloth in warm water alone. Or boil squinant, cyperus, and spike in water, and bathe the intestine with it until the swelling subsides.	If the latter case obtains, the gut must be warmed by fomenting with a sponge or piece of cloth bathed with warm water or water in which have been boiled rushes and cyperus and hyacinth, bathing the gut until the inflation is gone down.	0.8217874
Sometimes wine with astringency achieves this, and it is better than plain water for reducing swelling.	Wine that is somewhat astringent may do; in bringing down the swelling it is better than plain water.	0.78104275
When you see the swelling subsiding, then moisten the intestine with water in which marshmallow or mallow has been boiled. For by this, its entry is eased with little difficulty.	When you see that the swelling has come down, bathe the gut with water in which have been infused althea and mallows; for with this the reduction of the bowel becomes easy, using the lightest effort.	0.78852344
If, however, its return is delayed after this treatment, then make a small incision in the rupture with the instrument used to cut hemorrhoids.	But if after this treatment the reduction is still difficult, open up the wound a little with the instrument for opening up haemorrhoids.	0.77739656
And the initial treatment is better when prepared than cutting, so that there is no compulsion to cut after necessity and lack of instrument.	The first method, if possible, is better than incision, but one may be compelled to incise when other means have failed. This is the form of the instrument.	0.569468
Let one part of it be twisted, sharp, and the other part not sharp, and the fine end should not be as fine as a needle but rather slightly blunt, resembling the cauda, as you see.	The curved side should be sharpened, but not the other; the slender extremity should not be as slender as a scalpel, but rather blunt; it is an instrument like a small polo-stick, as you see.	0.80600584
When, therefore, the wound is widened and the intestine enters, then it is necessary that it be returned to its natural form in its proper place if possible, for that is better.	When the wound is opened up a little with the instrument and the bowel is reduced, it is important to return it to its natural shape and proper position, if you can, for that is better.	0.7834948
But when the rupture is large in the lower part of the belly, then the patient must lie on their back, with their legs elevated higher than their head. And if it is in the upper part of the belly, then place his head and chest higher than his lower parts.	When the wound is large and in the lower abdomen the patient should lie on his back and have his legs higher than his head; but if it be in the upper abdomen his head and chest should be placed higher than his lower parts.	0.9101155
And similarly, if there is a rupture in one of the two sides of the belly, then always set your attention and consideration on this, that the part with the wound is higher than the other part.	And in the same way if the opening be on one side of the abdomen you should always make it your object to put the wounded side higher than the other.	0.7765887
And so you must handle it in this way in large wounds and in moderate wounds.	So must you proceed in large or middling wounds.	0.7770219
However, in small wounds, place it as it has been prepared for you.	But in small wounds put the patient in a position convenient to yourself.	0.7175964
Then make sure you have a diligent assistant present who will hold the entire rupture with his hand and bring its edges together. Then uncover it for the one who follows with the suturing, little by little; this is the method of one common suture.	Then have an assistant under your direction to enclose within his hands the whole of the wound and bring the edges together, and then uncover it bit by bit for the one who is putting in the stitches.	0.80207896
And it is to take a needle, or a number of needles, according to the size of the wound. Then leave a space the width of a ring finger, that is, a physician’s finger, from the edge of the rupture, and place one needle by inserting the thread into the two edges of the skin, with the two edges of the tissue beneath the skin from the inside, until it penetrates from the other side, and now you have joined the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the tissue, forming four layers.	Now this is the description of one general suture, namely: one or more needles are taken, depending on the size of the wound; then, leaving about the width of the little finger from the end of the opening, pass an unthreaded needle from within through both edges of the skin together with both edges of the peritoneum which lies beneath the skin, piercing from one side to the other; thus you will have brought together both skin edges and both peritoneal edges, making four layers.	0.84301054
Then bind with double thread around the needle several times from both sides together, until the two edges of the wound are decently joined.	Then wind a double thread several times round the needle, and tighten up from both sides so as to bring the two edges of the wound perfectly together.	0.90018886
Then leave the width of a finger again, and insert another needle into them; afterward, stitch it with thread as you did with the first needle. Do not cease doing this with the necessary needles until you complete the entire constriction of the wound.	Then again leave about a finger's breadth and put in another needle and fasten it with thread as you did in the first instance; and go on doing this with as many needles as you need until you have finished mending the whole wound.	0.93634486
And let the needles be of medium thickness and fineness, for very fine needles cut the flesh quickly, and thick ones are difficult to insert into the skin; therefore, they should be medium in fineness and thickness.	The needles should be of medium fineness; for the very fine needles soon cut into the flesh; while thick needles, on the other hand, are difficult to pass through the skin; so they should be medium between fineness and thickness.	0.90756273
It should not happen that the needle is placed too close in the two edges of the skin so that the flesh is not cut quickly and the wound does not open before it consolidates; nor should it be too far apart, so that the wound is not hindered from consolidating.	You should not introduce the needle too near the edge of the skin lest the tissues be soon cut through and the wound gape before it has joined. Nor should there be too great an interval between the stitches, lest the wound be prevented from scarring up.	0.87723064
Then cut off the ends of the needles, so they do not harm the patient while sleeping; and place small cloth pads around them to hold the ends of the needles, and leave them until you know that the wound is now consolidated.	Then cut off the ends of the needles lest they hurt the patient during sleep; and make for him pads of linen scraps to cover the needle ends on both sides; and let them be until you know the wound is healed up.	0.86113757
And this type of suturing with needles in this way is more suitable for small wounds. For it is sufficient to use one or two needles in the suturing of these.	This method of suture with needles is most suitable in small wounds, for one or two needles or thereabouts will probably be enough for such.	0.8161856
The second common suture, however, is to join with suturing the four edges: two edges of the skin and two edges of the tissue at once, with a needle that has an even thread in fineness and thickness.	Now the second kind of general suture is to bring together all four edges, the two skin edges and the two peritoneal edges, at one and the same time, with a needle furnished with a twisted thread of medium thickness.	0.7655697
Then, when you have penetrated with the needle through these four edges, return the needle to the side where you began so that the thread lies across the top part of the wound, so that the suture resembles the stitch of a garment that binds fabric, and place between each suture the width of a little finger.	Then when the needle has pierced these four edges bring it back precisely to where you began, so that the thread may lie knitted over the wound to make a stitch in the manner of sewing up the bags in which goods are packed. The distance between stitches should be a little finger's breadth.	0.86505497
And men know this suture.	Everybody is familiar with this stitch.	0.5880072
And with this suture, I closed a wound that had happened to a man in his belly, who had been wounded with a knife, and the rupture of the wound was larger than a palm, and about two palms of his intestine had come out from the middle intestine, and the rupture was in the middle of the belly.	With this stitch I once sewed up a wound that a man got in the belly. He had been wounded with a knife; and the opening of the wound was more than a span long; and by that time there protruded some two spans' length of his mid-gut.	0.8555707
I therefore returned it after his intestine had remained outside the wound for 24 hours.	The opening was in the middle of his belly; and I reduced it after the bowel had been outside the wound for twenty-four hours.	0.69482803
The wound thus healed in a span of about 15 days; I treated him, and he was healed, and he lived many years afterward, going about his daily affairs.	The wound healed in about a fortnight, and I treated him until he was better; and he lived for many years after this, carrying on as usual.	0.7983398
And the physicians had judged that he would not recover.	The verdict of the doctors was that he could not be healed.	0.77580476
And it was miraculous that I did not treat it with ointment. For I was in a place where no ointment or any medicines were available. Therefore, I placed old cotton over the wound twice a day and regularly washed it with honey water until it was healed.	The remarkable thing is that I did not treat him with any ointment, for I was in a place where there was no sort of medicine; so twice a day I applied teased-out cotton wool to the wound, and carefully washed it with honey-water until he was healed.	0.8796463
Now I will describe two types of specific sutures according to the narrative.	I shall now describe one of the two kinds of special suture according to the text of Galen.	0.75626475
And it is that you begin with a sharp suture and insert the needle from the outside to the inside.	You begin at the skin, running the needle from without inwards.	0.5718028
When the needle penetrates the skin and goes into the muscle along the length and width of the whole body, leave the end of the tissue on the side where you inserted the needle and make it penetrate the other end from the inside to the outside on the opposite side of the muscle.	When you pass it through the skin and the muscle that runs the length of the belly, leave the edge of the peritoneum on that side where the needle was introduced; and pierce the other edge of the peritoneum from within outwards through the other edge of the abdominal wall.	0.78511095
Then, once you have made it penetrate, make it penetrate again in the same way, in the same end of the muscle from the outside to the inside; leave the tissue end on this side, and insert the needle into the other end from the inside to the outside, making it penetrate as you pass it through the tissue at the muscle end on that side until it penetrates it fully.	When you have done this, pierce the same edge of the abdominal wall from the outside inwards, leaving the edge of the peritoneum which is on that side, and pierce the other side from within outwards. As you pierce, make the needle pass through the peritoneum to the edge of the abdominal wall that is adjacent to that part until it pierces right through the whole.	0.80821323
Then start again from this same side and stitch it with the tissue end that is on the other side, and pull the needle out of the skin it penetrated.	Then begin again on that same side and sew it together with the peritoneal edge on the opposite side and bring the needle out through the skin nearby.	0.82168686
Then return it to that skin and sew the tissue end on the other side with this end of the muscle, and pull it out of the skin on that side, and do this turn by turn, one after another, until you have stitched the entire external part according to that pattern.	Then reintroduce into the same skin area and sew the opposite peritoneal edge with that abdominal skin edge and bring the needle out through the adjacent skin. Do this once again and repeat until you have sewn up the whole wound after this fashion.	0.7919278
And the essence of this suture is that it resembles the stitch of leatherworkers when they stitch hides, so that you stitch the tissue in one turn on one edge of the skin and leave it on the other side in the next turn until complete.	In short, this way of suturing is to sew with the stitch used by furriers in sewing skins; thus you stitch the peritoneum once one way with the skin edge and leave it once the other way, until you have done.	0.70653814
The second type of specific suture, which Galen described.	Now the manner of the second type of special stitch which Galen mentioned is this (these are his own words): that you suture it in the same way as many practitioners.	0.6328728
This instruction was narrated as stitching it in the way some physicians do, joining each part to its naturally fitting counterpart, applying each tissue end to its corresponding end and each muscle end to its opposite end. And that is done as I am telling you.	That is, they suture each part to the part that corresponds naturally to it; so they join one peritoneal margin to the other and one skin margin to the other, in the manner I shall describe.	0.6855704
You should insert the needle into the closest muscle end from the outside and make it penetrate inward in that area alone, leaving both tissue ends. Then turn the needle and make it penetrate from the outside to the inside through both tissue ends on both sides.	You should put the needle from without inwards, in that edge of the abdominal wall that is nearest to you, and make it pass inward through that alone, leaving out the peritoneal edges; then turn the needle round and run it from without inwards through both peritoneal edges.	0.8287562
Then turn both again, making both ends penetrate from the inside to the outside in the two other muscle ends on the opposite side.	Then turn it round again and make it pierce, from within outwards, the other edge of the abdominal wall, on the opposite side.	0.7267638
And this method of suturing is better than the common simple suture, and it is the one previously mentioned.	This type of suture is better than the easy general suture that has been mentioned.	0.75475705
This is thus also Galen’s instruction.	These are Galen's very words.	0.6961496
And some have said. The belly suture is done with two needles. This means inserting a single thread into both needles, beginning by inserting the needle from the side closest to you and making it penetrate to the other side, as in the suture of those who sew leather evenly.	Some have said that the suture of the abdomen may be performed with two needles, thus: you thread one thread into both and begin by introducing the needle into that part near you and carrying it through to the other side. Then you insert the other needle on the far side and bring it through to the near side, after the manner of the shoemaker's stitch.	0.8204936
And know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, then its suture is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.	You must understand that when the fissure is in the middle of the abdomen the sewing of it is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.	0.867265
And the judgment of treating the wound is the same as for other wounds.	But the medical treatment of the wound comes under just the same heading as that of other wounds.	0.7517388
This is because, when you reach a fresh wound with its blood, before the air alters it, and you return the intestine, sew it, and position it, then apply a healing powder over it.	When you find a wound with its blood quite fresh, before the atmosphere has altered it, and you have reduced the intestine and have sewn it up and closed it firmly, apply to it powder to encourage fresh growth.	0.68984354
But if the air has already altered the wound, then place some ointments over it, those available to you, until they produce pus, the threads fall off, and the tissue and muscle consolidate. Then treat it as you would treat other wounds, until it is healed.	But if the air has altered it, then apply to it some of the available ointments until it suppurates and the threads come away and the peritoneum and abdominal wall heal; then dress it as you would any other wound, until it is better.	0.81839645
If you do not have medicines available, then immediately place old cotton over it once it starts emitting pus, and change it twice a day, as I taught you, until it heals.	If you have no medicaments to hand, apply cotton wool as soon as suppuration begins, and change it twice daily, as I have taught you, until it heals.	0.9169189
For you do not need other medication in many situations when the wounds are simple.	You will need no other treatment in the majority of cases when the wounds are simple.	0.85833
But if you fear that the wound might spread to the principal members with injury, then it is necessary to soak soft wool in moderately warm oil or rose oil, and place it around the areas between the groin and under the armpits.	But if you fear that the important organs may share the hurt of the wound, then you should dip some soft wool in moderately warm olive-oil or oil of roses and bind it round the various sites between the groin and the axillae.	0.88469434
If he feels pain, pricks, or rotting in his intestines (for this often happens), then administer an enema with astringent, dark, warm wine, especially if the rot has already reached the intestine, and an exit wound has formed penetrating to its cavity.	If pain or gangrene be felt in the bowels—and that frequently happens—then clyster him with tepid astringent black wine, particularly if the gangrene has already set in in the bowel and has become a wound penetrating to the abdominal cavity.	0.78378975
And know that a wound in the large intestine heals more easily, while one in the small intestine is more difficult to heal.	You should know that if the injured bowel be the large intestine it will heal the more easily, while if it be the small its healing is more difficult.	0.80975246
The intestine called the jejunum does not heal at all from a wound that happens to it; this is because of its numerous veins, their size, the thinness of its structure, and its proximity to the nature of the nerves.	But the part of the bowel called the jejunum is not likely to recover from an injury to it at all; and that is due to the number and size of arteries in it and to the thinness of its structure and to its nearly approaching a nerve in its character.	0.81472653
But if what emerges from the wound is the omentum, and you encounter it fresh, return it in the same manner by which you return intestines evenly.	If what protrudes from the wound be omentum, and you find it freshly protruding, then reduce it as you do intestine.	0.7298736
But if time has passed and it has turned green or black, then you must tie it with thread above the area that has darkened, to prevent blood flow. For in the omentum there are veins and arteries.	But if some time has lapsed and it has turned green or black, you should ligate it above the site where it has gone black lest there be a haemorrhage; for the omentum contains veins and arteries.	0.91324955
Then cut off what is beyond that ligature, and leave two ends of the thread hanging from the lower part of the wound outside it, so that the drawing and extraction of it at the point of the omentum can be eased for you, along with the discharge of pus from the wound.	Then cut off what is below the ligature and leave the ends of the thread hanging out from the lower part of the wound, so that it will be easy for you to draw upon it and extract it as the omentum falls away and the wound suppurates.	0.8687382
¶ Recollection of a wound that happened in the intestine.	A note on the wound occurring in the intestine.	0.7667177
When a rupture happens in the intestine and is small, it is possible for it to be restored in some people; I saw a man who was wounded in his belly with a lance blow, and the wound was on the right side of his stomach, and the wound became chronic and formed a fistula, from which waste and air escaped.	When a break occurs in the intestine and it is a small one, it is possible, in some men, that it may mend. For I myself saw a man who had been wounded by a spear-thrust in the abdomen. The wound was to the right of the stomach, and, being chronic, became a fistula whence issued faeces and flatus.	0.90110624
I therefore applied treatment, though I was not confident in his healing; I did not stop attending to him until he was healed and the place was consolidated.	I set about treating him, though I had no hope of his recovery, and I continued to attend him, and eventually he recovered and the place healed over.	0.7839539
After I saw the place was consolidated, I feared for the patient that something bad might happen in his belly, but no bad event befell him. And he remained in good condition, eating, drinking, engaging in intercourse, entering the bath, and exercising in his diet.	And when I saw that the place had healed over I was afraid for the patient lest some harm should occur in the abdominal cavity; but absolutely no harm arose from it, and he remained perfectly well and healthy, eating and drinking and engaging in coitus and going to the bath and carrying out the duties of his office.	0.8396114
And some practitioners have said that when there is a wound in the intestine, and it is small, it should be tied in this way. And it is to take ants with large heads. Then bring the two edges of the wound together, and place one of these ants, which has its jaws open, over the two edges of the wound. When it bites down and closes its jaws, cut off its head, for it adheres and does not release.	Some men of experience have said that when a wound occurs in the intestine and it is small, it should be sutured in this manner, namely: ants with large heads are taken; then the edges of the wound are brought together and one of these ants is applied by its open jaws to the two edges of the wound, and when it seizes it and closes its jaws then the head is cut off, and it will stick and will not loosen.	0.8754382
Then place another ant close to the first, and continue doing this ant after ant according to the length of the entire wound.	Then another ant is applied near the first; and you proceed after this manner with a number of ants according to the size of the wound.	0.81996626
Then return it and sew the wound. For those heads remain attached in the intestine until the intestine nourishes itself and heals, and no harm whatsoever comes to the patient.	Then reduce the intestine and sew up the wound; for the heads will remain sticking to the intestine until it is healed up; and no harm will come to the patient.	0.8768941
And it is possible to tie the intestine even with a fine thread, which is derived from an animal intestine, attached to it after it is inserted into a needle.	The intestine may also be sewn up with the fine suture which is extracted from an animal's gut and sticks to it after being threaded in a needle.	0.860304
And it is to take the end of this thread from the intestine and thoroughly remove the flesh. Then tie a fine linen thread wrapped around its end. Then insert that thread into the needle and sew the intestine with it.	The method is that the end is taken of this suture made of gut, well scraped; and to this end is fixed a fine linen thread, twisted, and then that thread is passed through the needle affixed to the suture of animal's gut, with which the intestine is sewn and then replaced in the abdominal cavity.	0.77170527
And this method of suturing with ants and intestine is only a matter of trust and hope.	These kinds of suture, with the ants and with the gut, are by way of a remote hope.	0.5582641
Know that a wound that is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the small intestines, has no solution except attentive care, nor can it be healed at all.	But if the opening be great and wide, and especially if it be in one of the small intestines, there is no technique to deal with it, nor any cure.	0.7356379

chapter-2-subchapter-86.txt
On the treatment of Zuchemen and Fistulas.	On the treatment of defluxions and fistulae.	0.80617684
Know that every wound or swelling, when it becomes chronic and aged, and turns into an ulcer, and does not heal, continually discharges pus, and is not closed: then it is universally called a fistula, wherever it is on the body, and we call it Zuchemen.	You should know that any wound or tumour, when it becomes old and chronic, and turns into an ulcer, and does not heal over, but discharges pus chronically and constantly, is generally called a fistula, in whatever part of the body it may be; but we call it a defluxion.	0.85828125
And a fistula is indeed, in truth, a knotted, filtered, hard, white formation: without pain, having the hollowness of a bird's feather: and for that reason, some call it Risati, which means feather.	The fistula proper is a compact hard white painless induration with a central hollow like a bird's quill; on which account some call it a quill.	0.60979617
And at certain times it is moist, discharging pus. And sometimes the moisture is drained at certain times. And sometimes this moisture is abundant, sometimes scant; it is thick, or it is thin.	At certain times it may be moist, constantly discharging pus; and again at certain times the moisture may cease; and the discharge may be greater or less; and it may be thick or thin.	0.86443734
And I have already explained in the section on wounds that every ulcer that does not heal, nor grows flesh within, is due to one of nine causes.	I said previously in the appropriate section, when I was discussing abscesses, that any ulcer that would not heal nor show growth of tissue was due to one of nine causes.	0.8113817
And I have already shown all these causes and their signs, and their treatments with medicines in the section; here, I shall make you aware of the treatment of the fistula and Zuken, which is performed by surgical operation.	I have indeed already, in their proper place, explained all these causes and their symptoms and their medical treatments. Now here I must explain to you the operative treatment of fistula and defluxion.	0.81547874
Know, therefore, that a fistula can occur in all parts of the body. For among them are fistulas that reach the large veins and arteries, or nerves, or tendons; or to the intestine, or the bladder, or one of the ribs; or to one of the vertebrae of the back, or to one of the compound joints, like those of the hand and foot; and among them are those that approach the proximity of a principal organ, and similar.	You should know that a fistula may happen in any part of the body; and some fistulae reach as far as some great vein or artery or nerve or membrane or intestine or the urinary bladder, or one of the ribs or dorsal vertebrae, or some highly complex joint such as the hand or foot, while some terminate quite near some major organ, and so on.	0.88579935
Therefore, those among these fistulas in this manner are illnesses difficult to heal, and do not accept treatment; engaging with them is laborious and uncertain.	Fistulae of this kind are among the diseases from which recovery is difficult; they are not amenable to treatment and to occupy oneself with them is labour in vain.	0.82047623
But if there is a fistula whose depth does not reach these places I have mentioned, and you hope and trust in its healing, and wish to investigate it, then take a probe of copper or iron, if the fistula extends straight, and examine it with that.	But if there are any fistulae which do not reach in depth the places we have mentioned, and you have some hope and expectation of curing them, and you wish to attain to recognizing these, then you take a probe of bronze or iron, if the fistula run in a straight line, and investigate it with that.	0.9042586
If, however, there is twisting in the fistula, then investigate it with a probe of fine lead. For lead, with its softness, adapts and bends around the twists.	But if the fistula be tortuous then investigate it with a thin leaden probe; for lead is soft, so as to flex on entry and follow the curves of the fistula.	0.8397788
If the fistula has multiple openings, it is not possible to investigate it with a probe. Therefore, inject from one of its openings into the others.	But if the fistula have multiple openings so that you cannot explore it with the probe, then make an injection into one of the openings.	0.8806822
For the moisture with which you inject it travels toward the other openings and flows from them.	The fluid you inject into that one will run to the other openings and flow out from them.	0.85235274
Then carefully investigate in any way possible, so that you may recognize whether there is a bone, or a nerve, and whether the fistula’s cavity is deep or shallow; or if it is a single fistula with multiple openings. Consider all of this with the utmost diligence, by questioning the patient, by detecting pain when pressing your hand upon the location, and through other signs and causes related to the swelling.	Then make a complete exploration by whatever means you can, to find out whether there be at that place a bone or nerve, and whether the fistula be deep or superficial, and whether the fistula be one with multiple openings. Inform yourself of all these points, exerting yourself to inquire of the patient whether he feels pain while you are compressing with the hand, and seeking other indications and causes of tumour that may arise.	0.9348986
When you have confirmed all of this precisely, then proceed confidently with the treatment: if the fistula is close and visible, or in a safe location distant from a joint, nerve, artery, vein, or one of the areas I have described, then cut the fistula as I have previously explained, and remove from it any impurities or corrupted flesh, which grows at its opening from flesh or callus, and similar matter; and treat it until it heals.	When you have made quite certain of all these points, then proceed confidently with the treatment, namely: see if the fístula be obvious and accessible, or in a harmless situation far removed from a joint or vein or artery or tendon or any of the other places I have mentioned to you. Then lay open the fístula by the method I have described and fetch out of it all the granulations and diseased and superfluous tissue and whatever tissue or growth be arising in its opening, and dress until healed.	0.8997222
If, however, the fistula is of great depth and is straight, then you must cut it as deeply as possible. Then cleanse it thoroughly of all corrupted flesh.	If the termination of the fistula lies deep and its course be straight, you should cut it open as far in as you can and then clean out of it all diseased tissue; then use swabs soaked in corrosive, and push them to the bottom of the fistula, which is as far as you can reach with the probe.	0.73493344
Next, apply wicks wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula, which you have explored with iron; repeat this several times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that remains in the cavity of the fistula from corruption.	Do this repeatedly until the caustic has destroyed all the superfluous matter remaining at the bottom of the fistula.	0.527074
Then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it heals.	Then dress it with ointments that make the flesh grow sound, until it heals.	0.82760864
If it does not heal through that method, then cauterize it as we have described.	But if it does not heal thus, then cauterize it in the prescribed way.	0.81845176
If the cause of the fistula is a bone, and you are certain of this, then locate it and cut it as I have explained, unless something such as a vein, nerve, or principal organ prevents you, as we have said.	If a bone be the cause of the fistula, and you are sure of that, then examine the fistula and open it up in the way I have told you, if there be nothing in the way like a blood-vessel or nerve or important organ, as we said.	0.86770487
If, then, you uncover a bone, and there is some corruption or blackness in it, then scrape it until all the corruption is removed. Then treat it with what generates flesh until it heals.	And if the bone is laid bare to you and there be in it some corruption and blackening, then scrape it until all the corruption be removed; then put on dressings that will encourage granulation, until it be healed.	0.81890273
If it does not heal and continues to discharge pus as before, then know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption.	If it does not heal but discharges pus in the way it did before, then you may know that you have not yet managed to extirpate the corruption completely.	0.85318613
Therefore, expose it again and perform a careful scraping and cleansing with your utmost diligence.	Therefore you must expose it again and with the utmost diligence carry out the scraping and cleaning of it.	0.9103254
Then restore it. If it heals, that is good; but if not, then know that the corruption is in a deep part of the body, which you have not reached. Therefore, you have no recourse but to leave it to nature.	Then dress it; and if it heals, good; if not, then you may know that this corruption is very deep-seated in the body and out of reach, and there is nothing you can do for it but leave it to nature.	0.8333868
But if the affected bone is small and you are able, extract it with delicate forceps suited to it.	If the diseased bone be a small one, and it be possible for you to extract it, then do so with a pair of fine forceps suited to the purpose.	0.8083739
If there are multiple bones, then carefully extract all of them, leaving none behind, using all your strength.	And if there be a number of bones then you must accurately carry out the extraction of all of them, and spare no effort to ensure that none is left.	0.7551103
If any moisture obstructs you, and there is no risk or error in cutting it, then incise the moisture and flesh, if they are there, and free the bones.	If any ligaments lie in your way and there be no danger in incising them, then make an incision into the ligaments and whatever tissues are there, and free the bones.	0.7618847
If you are not prepared to remove the bones immediately, then place on the wound something that will cause it to decay, and leave it until the flesh and moisture around those bones putrefy.	If it is not possible for you to extract the bone immediately, apply over the wound something to induce suppuration, and leave it for some days until suppuration has set in in the tissues and ligaments around the bones.	0.7662823
And keep the wound from closing. And tighten the incision that you made in your operation. Indeed, if you fear, place over it a cloth soaked in powdered sulfur with oil, or a cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment, or some green ointment.	Keep an eye on the wound lest the incision that you made during your operation close up; if you fear this, apply to it cotton wool soaked in sulphur beaten with olive-oil, or cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment or in one of the green ointments.	0.8523302
For when those moistures putrefy and the bones separate from them, their removal and extraction is eased.	Then, when those ligaments have been softened by putrefaction and the bones crumble, it will be easy to shift them and take them out.	0.76904684
If it is a single large bone, such as the shin bone, or hip bone, or similar, and a large part of it is affected, then scrape it thoroughly until all blackness and corruption are removed. Then restore the wound.	If it be one large bone such as the tibia or the femur or the like, and the diseased part be only the surface, then scrape it thoroughly until all the blackness and corruption is gone, then close the wound.	0.8671143
But if the affected part is large, and the corruption has already reached the bone marrow, then it is necessary to saw it and cut it completely up to the place where the corruption has reached; then treat it until it heals.	If the corrupt portion be very extensive and reach to the marrow of the bone, you will not be able to avoid sawing it off and cutting it all away to the point where the corruption ends; then dress until healed.	0.7957648
And I will tell you about a case of zuken that affected a man’s leg, so that you may use it as an example and aid in your operation.	Now I shall tell you of a defluxion that once occurred in a man's leg, as an example and a help to you in your treatment.	0.7888879
There was a young man, about thirty years old, who experienced pain in his leg due to a cause originating within his body, that is, from internal sources, until the matter reached his leg, and a large swelling formed: and there was no external cause.	This man was young, about thirty years of age. He once got a pain in the leg from something internal, which so worked that eventually matter came into the leg and caused it to swell greatly, there being no external cause.	0.8358489
Thus, a long time passed with the errors of the physicians, until the swelling was opened, and much matter collected in it. And his treatment was delayed until his leg developed fistulas, and many openings formed in it, all of which discharged pus and bodily moisture.	And time passed by, to the accompaniment of error on the part of the doctors, until the tumour opened and much discharge came away; and the treatment was so mismanaged that fistulae formed in the leg and many sinuses opened up, all of which discharged pus and body humours.	0.8787955
Thus, many physicians treated him for about two years, but there was no skilled practitioner, until I was called, and I saw his leg and the matter flowing abundantly from those openings; the man’s whole body had already wasted away, and his complexion was yellowish.	A whole host of doctors had been treating it for a matter of two years, not one of whom had any skill in the surgical art. Eventually he sought me. I saw his leg, with matter coming away from the orifices in large quantities; and the man's body was wasted and jaundiced.	0.8248502
So I inserted a probe into one of the openings, and the probe reached the bone.	So I introduced a probe into one of the openings and the probe touched bone.	0.950504
Then I examined all the openings, and found them connecting with each other from all parts of the leg.	Then I investigated all the openings and found them all communicating with one another in all parts of the leg.	0.9525463
So I hastened and cut over one of those openings until I exposed part of the bone, and found it corrupted; it was already eaten away, blackened, rotten, and perforated, extending even into the marrow.	So I quickly cut down upon one of these openings until a part of the bone was laid bare, and I found it diseased, by now eaten away, and black and foul and full of holes, down to the marrow.	0.9051339
Therefore, I sawed off what I had uncovered, the corrupted part of the bone.	So I sawed off as much of the diseased bone as I had exposed and could get at.	0.67255956
And I determined that there was no other corruption in the bone except that which I had cut and sawed off. And I had already eradicated it.	In fact I thought that there was no more disease in the bone beyond what I had cut and sawn away, and that I had completely eradicated it.	0.7343744
Then I applied a restorative treatment to the wound with consolidating medicines for a long time. But it did not heal.	Then I tried for a very long time to heal the wound with medicines encouraging growth of flesh, but it would not heal.	0.81727964
Then I probed, and exposed the bone a second time beyond the first exposure, and found further corruption in the bone; so I sawed off that portion of corruption as well.	Then I again uncovered the bone, above the first opening, and found the corruption co-extensive with the bone.	0.79863596
Then I attempted to restore it. But it was not restored.	So again I sawed away as much of the corruption as I could see; then I tried to heal it, but it would not heal nor unite.	0.5740789
So I exposed it again, and continued cutting the bone piece by piece, and attempted to restore it; but it was not restored until I had cut off about one palm’s length of bone and removed it with its marrow.	Then I opened it up once more and went on cutting away the bone piecemeal and trying to heal it, and it would not heal until I had cut away about a span of bone with the marrow; then I treated it medicinally and it quickly healed over and was cured.	0.8291601
Then I restored it with medicines, and it healed quickly and was cured; this repetition in his operation and cutting was necessary only because of the patient’s weakness, his limited tolerance, and my fear for his life, for he frequently suffered fainting spells from excessive drainage.	But it would not have been necessary to repeat the operation and the incision thus, were it not for the patient's weakness and inability to tolerate much at a time, and because of my fears for his life, since an evil faint was constantly seizing him on account of the heavy drain.	0.7140824
Thus, he was completely healed; hard flesh grew in the place of the bone, his body was restored to good condition, his strength returned, and he resumed his regular activities; walking posed no difficulty for him at all.	But he was completely cured, and in place of the bone there grew up firm tissue; his bodily state was sound and his strength was restored. He went about his business, and no hurt whatsoever came to him from walking.	0.8600227
But if a prominent bone in a part of the body is already fractured, then you must saw it as follows: take a band, and tie it at the end of the prominent bone, instruct someone to pull it upward, and place another band made of wool, thicker than the first band. Then tie it over the flesh beneath the bone, and extend its end to draw the flesh downward; and you expose the flesh over the area you wish to saw, so that the saw does not injure the flesh.	Now in the case of a prominent bone that has been broken in any part of the body, it should be sawn off in this manner: you take a ligature and tie it to the extremity of the prominent bone and bid someone keep it stretched upward; then you put on another ligature of wool thicker than the first, tying it to the tissue that is beneath the bone, and pull on the end so that the flesh is drawn down and you lay bare of flesh the spot where you intend to saw, so that the saw does not injure the flesh.	0.9111088
Place a piece of wood or a board properly beneath the lower part of the bone, for when you do this, it prevents the saw from cutting the decayed flesh.	You should place a block of wood or a board firmly beneath the bone; which done, there is no hindrance to the saw's cutting through the diseased bone.	0.8172921
The sawing must be slightly above the corrupted area, so that no corruption remains within the hollow of the bone; and nothing should be visible to indicate the need for further sawing.	The saw-cut should be made a little above the site of the disease in case there should be disease in the cavity of the bone that is not apparent on the surface, which might compel you to carry out the sawing a second time.	0.65170133
But if the bone is corrupted and is not protruding, rather it continues from one part to another, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, then expose all the flesh from all sides. Then place a piece of wood beneath it.	If the bone be diseased without any swelling, but it all seems the same from one part to another, and the disease be in the middle or in one segment of it, then expose it on all sides; put the block beneath, and saw it from the first side, where the disease is.	0.7687807
Afterward, saw it from the first part where the corruption is, until the sawing continues to the other side; and let the sawing be slightly beyond the length of the corruption, as we have said.	When you have finished this, saw it from the other side. The saw-cut should be at a little distance from the diseased part, as we have already said.	0.6202407
But if the corruption is in a joint, cut through that corrupted joint and saw the bone where it connects to the other side.	If the disease be in one of the phalanges, amputate the diseased phalanx and saw through the bone where it is continuous on the other (healthy) side.	0.58635855
If the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then the only solution is to abrade it.	If the disease be in the joint between two members, then there is nothing to be done but scraping.	0.60582376
If the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, then the matter is exceedingly difficult. However, you must examine how the corruption appears to you. And abrade it, and clean it by any method possible to you, and with whatever skill is appropriate for you, provided that no vein or nerve obstructs you.	If the disease be in the carpus or tarsus it is a very difficult matter treating them; you must peel off the disease in whatever way seems possible, and scrape it away and clean up the part in whatever way you can and by whatever technique is convenient for you, so long as there is no vein or nerve in your way.	0.7821988
And know that the cutting instruments and saws for cutting these bones are many, depending on the position of the bones, their preparation, their thickness, their fineness, their size, their smallness, their hardness, and their sparseness. Therefore, you must prepare a suitable instrument for each type of operation.	Now you should know that there are a great number of cutting instruments and saws for cutting these bones, varying according to the different sites and arrangements of the bones; their thickness or thinness; their greatness or smallness; their hardness or sponginess; so you should have ready for every sort of operation an instrument suitable for that operation.	0.87063706
And know that these operations reveal to you the kind of instrument you need, when you engage in prolonged study. And knowledge of the methods of this art, through experience with various ailments, will enable you to find on your own the appropriate instrument for every affliction.	You should know too that when you have long experience and knowledge of the branches of this art the operations themselves may well indicate the kind of instrument needed; for the man who is skilled in the art and has seen various kinds of disease may think out for himself which instrument is suitable for each disease.	0.8149759
And I am setting forth for you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments, which serve as examples for cutting, and the test by which you may apply them to other cases.	At the end of this chapter I give you illustrations of a number of instruments as types for you to copy and as a pattern upon which you can base others, God willing:	0.7393358
Form of another saw.	Another saw.	0.64834255
Form of a joint scraper. Let the head of this scraper be shaped like the head of a star-shaped nail, and its points like the points of an elischetfegi.	Scraper; the head of this scraper should resemble the head of a nail, stellate, engraved like a file.	0.7061816
And it is not suitable except for rubbing the heads of joints when they are corrupted, or when the bone is large and broad.	What it is suitable for is to scrape the diseased heads of joints, or big broad bones.	0.6753658
Form of a larger scraper.	Another scraper, small.	0.45010483
Form of a broad scraper.	Broad scraper.	0.69759417
Form of a scraper with a hollow.	Scraper with concavity.	0.6263452
Form of another fine scraper.	Another scraper, fine. Scraper.	0.6079256
Form of another scraper with a curved end.	Another scraper, with bent extremity.	0.7500279
Form of a small, fine probe scraper.	Small scraper resembling a probe.	0.70776093
This is similar to a spoke, and the end is like a saw; it is displayed in many locations for bone scraping.	Its extremity is like a probe, and it is handy in many places for scraping bone.	0.75613344
Form of the scraper suited for scraping perforated bones.	A scraper suitable for perforated bone.	0.79163516
Its end is triangular, with sharp points.	Its extremity is triangular, with sharp edges.	0.9176427
It is made from Indian steel. And similarly, all the scrapers, cutters, and saws we have mentioned should be made accordingly.	It is made of Indian iron, as should be all the scrapers and cutting instruments we have mentioned.	0.8435093

chapter-2-subchapter-87.txt
On the cutting of extremities and the sawing of bones.	On the amputation of limbs and the sawing-off of bones.	0.9164136
Extremities decay either from an external or internal cause.	Sometimes the extremities become gangrenous, either from an external or an internal cause.	0.66298807
Therefore, when you have treated that corruption with medicines and the treatment does not help, and you see the corruption affecting a limb, which nothing repels, then it is necessary to cut that limb up to the point where the corruption has spread, so that the patient may escape death or a greater harm than the loss of the limb.	Now when you have treated this disease by medical means, ineffectively, and you see that the disease is spreading over the limb and nothing will stop it, you must cut off that limb as far as the disease has spread, so that the patient may escape death or great affliction, greater than the loss of the limb.	0.7924428
The sign of this condition is that the limb blackens and putrefies, as if burned by fire, or decays after turning black; and this decay continues until it is cut to the point beyond the limb, and it spreads throughout the whole body.	Now the sign of the victim of this state is that the limb goes black, so that you might think it were burnt with fire, or, after the blackening, it putrefies, and the putrefaction spreads to parts adjacent to that limb and begins to attack the whole body; cut it away as soon as you can.	0.8057684
Therefore, hasten to cut it, especially if the cause of the corruption is from the sting of certain venomous creatures, like the sea scorpion, viper, or rutella, and the like.	So must you do if the disease is caused by the bite of some dangerous reptile such as the marine scorpion, viper, or venomous spider, and so on.	0.7262199
If the corruption or injury is in the tip of a finger, then cut off the finger, and do not give the corruption room to spread to the rest of the hand.	If the disease or bite be at the tip of the finger, cut off the finger, giving the disease no opportunity to spread to the rest of the hand.	0.844264
And likewise, if it occurs in the hand, then cut it off from the root of the wrist, and do not allow the corruption to spread until it reaches the joint of the arm.	Similarly, if it attacks the hand, cut if off at the wrist, giving the disease no opportunity to spread and attack the two bones of the forearm.	0.7410444
If it invades further, then cut the arm at the elbow at its joint.	Similarly, if it attacks the forearm, cut it off at the elbow through the joint itself.	0.6748549
But if the corruption spreads beyond, and you see it around the elbow, then that is where the patient’s death lies. To apply treatment beyond this is a matter of strength.	If the disease passes onward and you perceive that it has reached the region of the shoulder, by no means cut the shoulder, for that will be the death of the patient; use any treatment but that, as best you may.	0.6535016
Likewise, do the same with the foot; when the corruption invades a toe, then cut it at one of the joints; and if it reaches the sole of the foot, then cut off the whole foot. If it reaches the knee, then cut the leg at the knee joint.	In the same manner act in regard to the foot when the disease attacks a toe; namely, amputate the toe through one of the interphalangeal joints. If the disease attacks the tarsus then amputate the whole foot; and if it ascends toward the knee, amputate the leg at the knee-joint.	0.9063034
But if the corruption has already spread above the knee, then there is no remedy other than to leave the patient to die.	If it be that the disease has passed on above the knee, there is nothing of any avail in this case but to leave it, and for the patient to resign himself to death.	0.73254776
The method of cutting or sawing a limb is to tie a band below the area you wish to cut, and another band above the place. Let an assistant pull one band downward, and another assistant pull the upper band upward. And you separate the flesh between the two bands with a wide spatula until all the flesh is exposed. Then it is to be cut or sawed.	Now the way to amputate or saw off a limb is to bind a ligature round below the site and another above; an assistant draws the one downward and another assistant draws the upper ligature upward; while you dissect away the tissues between the two ligatures with a broad scalpel until it is laid bare of flesh; then it should be cut or sawn.	0.8825003
It is necessary to place linen cloth all around, so that the saw does not touch the healthy area, which could cause the patient additional injury and a hot swelling.	You must place linen dressings on every side lest the saw touch a part that is sound and thus cause the patient additional pain and inflammation.	0.81729054
If there is internal bleeding during the operation, then cauterize the area quickly, or place on it some powders that stop bleeding. Then return to your treatment until it is complete.	If a haemorrhage occurs while you are operating, cauterize the place as quickly as possible, or apply to it one or other of the styptic powders; then continue until finished.	0.7898408
Then bind the wounded limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it heals.	Then bind up the mutilated limb with a suitable bandage and dress until healed.	0.92204845
And I will tell you what happened to a man’s foot, an instance of this same condition I am telling you about.	Now I shall relate to you an example; what I am going to tell you is exactly what happened to a certain man's foot.	0.7967297
It happened that his foot became blackened, with a burning similar to that of fire; and at first the corruption affected his toe, until it affected the whole foot.	He had a blackening of the foot, with a burning like that of fire. The disease, to begin with, was in one toe, but it went on to involve the whole foot.	0.7849152
The man hastened on his own, after seeing the corruption affecting his limb with such intensity, feeling it in the pain and burning; he cut it at the joint, and he was healed.	When the man saw the disease spreading in the limb and felt the violent pain and burning, he hastened of his own accord to amputate it at the joint, and he got better.	0.8440606
After a long time had passed, the same corruption occurred in his index finger.	After a long time had passed the very same kind of disease arose in the forefinger of his hand.	0.79474914
He came to me, and I tried to remove the excess with medicines I applied to his hand after cleansing his body; but the excess was not repelled, and it began to spread to another finger, until the corruption began to affect the hand.	He came to me, and I attempted to suppress the superfluity with remedies that I applied to the hand, after purging his body; but the superfluity was not to be suppressed and began to spread to the second finger, and eventually the whole hand was involved in the disease.	0.89935094
He then called me to cut off his hand, but I did not want to, hoping that I could still repel the excess; and I also feared for his life at the thought of cutting off his hand. For the man’s strength was nearly spent.	He urged me to cut off his hand, but I did not wish to do this, hoping I should be able to overcome the superfluity, and also fearing he would die at the amputation of his hand, for the man's strength was on the decline.	0.85817814
After he lost hope in me, he returned to his own land; and I received word that he hastened and cut off his entire hand, and he was healed.	When he despaired of me he went back to his own country, and I then heard that he had gone and cut off his whole hand, and got well.	0.8452364
I have recounted this story only so that it may serve as a guide for cases of this kind of illness, and as an example to follow and act upon accordingly.	I narrate this story as help against this kind of malady when it occurs; and as guidance for you to take and act upon.	0.79969954

chapter-2-subchapter-88.txt
On the treatment of sinuses, and the nature of enemas with medicines.	On the treatment of sinuses and the way to irrigate them.	0.6901686
And its treatment is to cut all that skin as it is unfolded, especially when it has thinned and become like a cloth: and you are assured that it is not adhering to the place due to its corruption.	The treatment of it will be to cut away all that skin with a circular incision; specially if it be thinned and has become like a rag, and you are sure that it will not adhere to the place, because of its corruption.	0.8346226
If, however, you hope that the skin will adhere, and it does not result in that final corruption in consequence, and if there is thickness from flesh in the skin, then treat it with a clyster, and consider the sinus.	But if you are in hope of its adhering, and the corruption has not reached that point, and there is in the skin some thickness of flesh, then treat it by irrigation.	0.65700114
Then if it is large, and the pus discharged from it has a foul odor, then cleanse it with an Egyptian medicine, which is made of vinegar, oil, and ziniar, taking equal parts, placed in a vessel, and boiled over fire until the medicine becomes red and thickens like honey.	The procedure is that you examine the sinus, and if it be large and the purulent discharge from it smell bad, then irrigate it with Egyptian medicine, which is vinegar, oil, honey and verdigris, equal parts of each, mixed in a vessel and heated on the fire until the compound thickens and assumes the consistency of honey.	0.7609623
Then take from it what you need, and dissolve it with water and honey, and cleanse the sinus with it; tighten its opening, and leave the medicine in it for about two hours.	Then take as much as you need and dilute it with water and honey, and with this irrigate the sinus and bind up the opening, leaving the compound inside for two hours.	0.86779016
Then extract it with pressure; do this for as many days as necessary until the sinus is cleansed, and the foul odor is removed.	Then get it out by pressure. Do this for several days until the sinus is clean and the smell disappears.	0.8840633
And sometimes it is cleansed with ash water when this medicine is not available; take ash from vine wood or holm oak wood, and throw it over the water. Then strain it, and cleanse with it until you are confident that the sinus is now washed.	It may be irrigated with water of ashes if the medicine is not at hand. For that, you take ashes of vine or of oak, and put water upon them; then clarify the liquor and with it irrigate the sinus until you are sure it is thoroughly clean.	0.8238132
If the patient cannot tolerate Egyptian medicine or ash water, then cleanse it with water and honey mixed with some crushed ziniar. Or cleanse it with honey and wine mixed together, since honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and wine helps the sinus adhere, especially when the wine has an excess of astringency and dryness.	But if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then irrigate him with water and honey with which a little pounded verdigris has been mixed; or irrigate with honey and wine mingled; the value of the honey lies in its cleansing and washing, while the wine closes up the sinus, specially if it be a wine which has some dryness and astringency.	0.8986398
When you have done this several times, and are confident that the corruption in the sinus is now removed, then cleanse it with something that promotes flesh growth in it.	When you have done this several times and you are sure that the sinus is clean of diseased matter, then irrigate it with those compounds that will encourage granulation in it.	0.82039464
This means you should take dyafinicon plaster and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine; or cleanse it with certain medicines and other ointments, the properties of which I have written in the treatise on ointments.	For example, you may take a little Palm ointment and dissolve it in oil of roses and some astringent wine; or irrigate it with some of the other ointments and medicines whose prescriptions we have recorded in the treatise on ointments.	0.75789225
If the opening of the sinus is narrow and does not admit the clyster tube, then enlarge it slightly with an iron tool; or place a linen strip soaked in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment in it, until it expands.	If the opening of the sinus be too narrow for the nozzle of the syringe, open it up slightly with the knife, or put in it a pad steeped in Egyptian ointment or vermilion ointment, until it is dilated.	0.8360721
Similarly, if the opening is too wide, then draw its lips together with a suture, and leave enough space for the clyster to enter without any further addition.	On the other hand, if the opening be wide, bring the edges together with a suture, and leave of it sufficient width that the syringe may be only just introduced.	0.7329227
Likewise, if the opening from which pus flows is elevated above, then cut it at a lower point so that the pus flows downward, since pus, when confined in the depth of the sinus, prevents flesh from growing in it.	In the same way, if the opening from which the discharge flows be raised up, then incise it at its lowest part so that the discharge may flow downward out of it; for when the discharge collects at the bottom of the sinus it prevents the formation of flesh in it.	0.9143313
If it is not possible for you to cut the sinus lower as you desire, then attempt to prepare the limb in a way that allows pus to flow from it easily according to your preparation. Ensure that no pus at all is retained in it; and take healing medicines that are applied over the wound, appropriate for what you intend. And spread them over a linen cloth. And let the cloth be of such size that it covers the entire sinus.	If you cannot open it up as you wish at the lower point, then try to set the part in whatever position you conveniently can to facilitate the discharge of pus, and try to ensure that no pus is held up in it. As for the consolidating medicaments that are applied externally to the sinus, and the manner of their application: you take one of the ointments suited to your purpose, and spread it on a piece of lint of sufficient size to cover the whole sinus; then with scissors cut a hole in the lint over the mouth of the sinus and a little wider than the sinus opening; then spread on another piece of lint a quantity of softening ointment proportionate to the opening and put the one on the other so that it stands away from the opening of the sinus, in order to ease the discharge of pus from it; and do not remove the larger dressing until after many days.	0.8234941
But the one that is on the sinus opening is the one you remove every hour, to allow the pus that accumulates in it to flow out; and so you may know whether the discharge is copious or scant, digested or undigested.	But the dressing over the sinus opening you may constantly remove, so that the pus collected behind it may come out and so that you may know whether there be much or little ichor, and whether digested or not.	0.82768106
And with this, again consider the location of the sinus, whether its owner feels pain in it or there is no pain, and whether there is an abscess in it or not.	And at the same time investigate the site of the sinus itself to see whether the patient feels any pain in it or no pain, and whether there be any swelling in it or not.	0.8321012
Therefore, when your treatment progresses in this manner, and you see material emerging from the sinus opening, then know that the sinus is already adhering or is close to adherence; then, release it in the morning or on the third day, and when you uncover the wound, replace the cloth and renew the ointment.	Then when your treatment has reached such a point that you see that there is only a little superficial matter coming out round the mouth of the sinus, you may know that the sinus has closed up or is near to closing up. Then you may unbandage it the next day or the third day, and when the wound is unbandaged make a change of dressing and ointment.	0.82673436
However, if thin discharge comes out from the sinus after a long interval, then do not despair of its adhesion, for its healing is approaching, since among people, there are those who are slow in generating flesh in their wounds, and others who act contrary to this.	But if, after a long while, the sinus discharges a thin ichor, do not despair of its closing up, for its healing is near. For there are some men whose wounds are slow in healing, and some are the opposite.	0.8237409
But if undigested pus emerges from the sinus after many days, then know that the sinus is not adhering.	If, after many days, undigested pus is discharged you may know that the sinus has not closed.	0.7846606
Therefore, if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and its matter is prolonged, then increase the drying quality of the medicines; let physicians make the medicines moist in substance but dry in their effect, like dyafinicon ointment, when an excess of zegi is added to it.	If the closing of the sinus be delayed and it be a long affair, make the medicines dryer; let them be medicines that have some humidity in their substance but dryness in their potency, such as Palm ointment with the addition of excess of rock-alum.	0.7014333
And among the more final treatments, take dyafinicon ointment, dissolve it with rose oil, and sprinkle it with old wine in equal measure.	A most efficacious treatment is to take Palm ointment and dissolve it in oil of roses and sprinkle over it old wine of even consistency.	0.66858757
Then prepare it with this and use it.	Then knead together, and use that.	0.7431853
Or take myrrh, aloe, and frankincense; grind it all, and sprinkle it over honey while it is over the fire. Then spread it on a cloth and bind it over the sinus; also spread it with the honey you boiled until thickened, sprinkle spices over it, place it on a cloth, and bind it.	Palm ointment at hand; if you heat the honey to a thick consistency and use that; or take myrrh and aloes and incense of juniper and beat them all up together and sprinkle on the honey while it is heating on the fire, spread on lint and bind over the sinus; or spread on it honey heated to a thickness, and over that sprinkle powdered aromatic roots, and over these place a dressing that you bandage on.	0.84240186
And sometimes long aristolochia, and the roots of heavenly lily, which is a lily, and herb flour, and centaury are applied to it. Use them simply or combined, grind them, sift them, and sprinkle them over the honey as I mentioned, and use it.	Sometimes also in a case of this sort long birthwort and the root of the blue iris and vetch flour and centaury are usable, either separately or mixed, beaten up together, sifted and scattered into honey as I described; use them thus.	0.7521601
But if the matter of the sinus is prolonged and it is not healed by this treatment, then know that there is corruption in its depth, or it is already affecting the bones, or the other hard parts, or ligaments; then treat it with the cure for fistulas, as previously mentioned.	But if the sinus be chronic, and it does not heal with this treatment, then you may know that there is corruption at the bottom of it, which has affected the bones or motor nerves or ligaments; the treatment then is that of fistula as already given.	0.8671083

chapter-2-subchapter-89.txt
On the care of panaritium, injured nail, and incision of an extra finger, and section.	On the treatment of paronychia and broken nails; and on the amputation of a superfluous finger; and the separation of webbed fingers.	0.6798703
Panaritium is an abscess that forms under the nail of the thumb of the hand or foot, and perhaps it occurs on other fingers.	Paronychia is a growth of flesh under the nail of the thumb or big toe; it may also occur in the other fingers and toes.	0.78648984
When its condition is prolonged, and treatment is neglected, it becomes a warm abscess or decays and releases pus, until it corrodes the nail root; it may destroy it entirely, and sometimes the decay reaches the bone, producing a foul odor, and the tip of the finger becomes swollen and dark-colored.	When it is chronic and the treatment of it is neglected, it comes up as an abscess, or corrupts and generates pus until it eats away the root of the nail. Often it rots it entirely, and often the disease reaches the bone and gives rise to foetor and broadens the tip of the finger and makes it livid in colour.	0.87436724
When you are treating it as we described in the previous section, and your treatment is not effective, then you must cut away with an iron all the excess that remains of the nail. Then cauterize the wound afterward. For cauterization is very helpful.	When you have treated it with those means mentioned in their place, and your treatment is ineffective, you must excise all the superfluous growth from the nail and then cauterize the wound, for in this case cauterization is a great help.	0.8258389
If, however, the bone is sound and the nail is also healthy, and the empty extensions of the nail press the flesh inward, begin to prick it, and injure it, then you should place a thin stick under the angle of the nail that pricks the flesh and push it upward; cut away the flesh with ease, and apply burning or corrosive medicines to what remains of the flesh until all of it is removed. Then treat it with ointments until it heals.	But if the bone be healthy and the nail also healthy, and the in-turned angle of the nail has pressed the flesh inwards and begun to stab it and injure it, you should pass a thin probe beneath the corner of the nail that presses into the flesh, and raise it up and carefully cut away that flesh and apply caustic to the remainder, until it is all gone; then dress with ointments until cured.	0.9210175
But if the decay has already affected the bone, then you must cut away that bone and remove it, for it will never heal as long as the corrupted bone remains.	But if it should be that the disease has already begun to involve bone, that bone should be excised and removed; for it will never heal while there remains any diseased bone.	0.8734075
If you see the corrosion and decay spreading into the finger, then cut it at one of the joints, as previously described. Then treat it until it heals.	And if you see the corrosion and corruption spreading in the finger, amputate it at one of the joints, as has been previously mentioned; then dress it until it is healed.	0.89873135
If the nail is damaged or struck, causing intense pain, then first it is necessary to perform phlebotomy on the patient. Then cut the nail with a sharp spatula in a transverse incision from above toward the visible part.	If a laceration or bruising happen to the nail, with violent pain, you should first bleed the patient and then cut away the nail with a sharp scalpel, a swerving cut from top to bottom.	0.72137004
Be careful not to let the incision reach the flesh under the nail, for you would cause intense pain for the patient and lead to the growth of extra flesh in that spot.	But be careful not to cut into the nail-bed, for you will give the patient violent pain and it will cause a growth of superfluous flesh at the place.	0.8131393
Then treat the area with something that soothes pain.	Then dress the part with sedative dressings.	0.63688827
An extra finger, which appears in some people's hands, may be entirely fleshy, or in some cases contain bones, or may even have a nail; and some grow from the root of a joint or originate at certain joints of the finger. One that grows at certain finger joints is immobile, while one that grows near a finger joint may be mobile.	A superfluous finger growing on the hands of some men sometimes is all flesh, sometimes contains a bone, sometimes has a nail. Some of them arise at the root of a finger, or on one of the phalanges of a finger, and the latter do not move, while those that arise from the root of a finger do sometimes move.	0.8765665
Thus, the section of those that are fleshy is easy. That is, to cut it at its root with a broad spatula.	That which is purely fleshy is easily removed; you cut if off at the root with a broad scalpel.	0.7073853
However, the treatment of one that originates at the root of a joint is difficult. Therefore, refrain from incising it.	But the treatment of that which arises at the root of a finger is difficult; you should avoid amputating.	0.8449868
But for one that grows on the finger near the last joint, you should first cut its flesh in a circular incision down to the bone. Then saw the bone with one of those saws suited for it. Then treat it until it heals.	In the case of one growing from the finger at a phalangeal joint, you should first cut through the flesh down to the bone with a circular incision; then saw the bone through, with one of the saws that suit the purpose; then dress it until it heals.	0.8250392
Fusion of the fingers, which often occurs either by birth — that is, they are born with it — or by the healing of a wound, or by burning with fire, and similar causes.	As for webbing of the fingers one to another, that occurs very frequently. It may be either congenital or from the healing of a wound or burn or the like.	0.72863805
It is necessary, therefore, to cut that fusion until the fingers return to their natural shape. Then place linen strips or cloths soaked in rose oil between them, so they do not fuse again quickly, and keep them separated; or place a thin lead sheet between them until the area consolidates as needed.	You have to cut the web away until the fingers are brought back to their original form; then interpose between them a pad or piece of material soaked in oil of roses, to prevent them from rapidly joining together and to keep them apart; or you can put between them a thin sheet of lead until the healing takes place as it should.	0.89118505
Similarly, if some fingers are fused with the palm, then cut that fusion according to what is prepared and suited to the shape of the limb.	Similarly, if one of the fingers becomes joined to the palm of the hand, cut through the adhesion according to the form it takes, and with proper regard for the shape of the member.	0.7934648

chapter-2-subchapter-90.txt
On the incision of the disease.	On cutting for varices.	0.57393086
Veins are twisted, thick, and full of melancholic superfluities that appear in various parts of the body: and mostly, they occur in the legs, especially in those who travel, labor, and carry loads.	Varices are thick twisted veins filled with melancholic superfluities. They occur in most parts of the body, but generally in the legs, particularly in the legs of couriers and ploughmen and porters.	0.77759576
Therefore, it is necessary to administer an expulsion of black bile from the body with a strong expulsion at times.	First you must purge the body free from black bile, several times, strongly.	0.63149
Then perform a phlebotomy on the basilic vein of the patient.	Then venesect the patient in the basilic vein.	0.8013014
Their treatment with iron is in two ways. One of these is that they should be cut, and black blood should be extracted. The other way is to elevate the vein and remove it entirely.	The treatment with the knife is of two kinds: one is to incise and bring out all the black blood, the other is to draw out the vein and extract it bodily.	0.8335865
The cutting of it is in this manner. First, soak the leg with a lot of hot water until the thick, foul blood is dissolved. Then bind the patient's leg from the upper part of the thigh down to the lower part of the knee with a band. Then cut the vein in one, two, or three places with a wide incision.	The incision is done thus: the leg is first well fomented with hot water to liquefy the thick foul blood; then bind up the patient's leg well from the upper part of his thigh to below the knee; then make an ample incision into the vein in one, two, or three places.	0.8850552
Then lift, that is, extract the blood with your hand from the lower part of the leg upward, and from the upper part perform a phlebotomy on the patient initially. Then cut down to the nail until an amount of blood comes out that you see as sufficient and within the tolerance of the patient's strength.	Then with your hand press the black blood upward from the lower part and downward from the upper part of the leg and draw off as much blood as you see suffices or as the patient's strength can bear.	0.77190363
Afterward, bind it, and instruct the patient to abstain from foods that generate black bile: and repeat the evacuation and phlebotomy when the veins are filled, and this harms the patient.	Then bind up, and bid him abstain from foods that give rise to black bile. The evacuation and venesection should be repeated whenever the veins fill up again to the patient's hurt.	0.7071178
Its elevation is in this way. Shave the patient’s leg if there are many hairs on it. Then immerse it in a bath, or bathe it with hot water on the leg until it reddens and the veins swell, or have the patient engage in vigorous exercise if a bath is not available until the limb is heated.	Extraction is carried out in this way: the patient's leg is shaved if it is very hairy; then bring him to the bath and foment the leg in hot water until it becomes red and the veins are filled. Or if there be no bath available let him take violent exercise until the limb gets hot.	0.8635707
Then cut the skin along the vein in a longitudinal section, either at its end near the knee or in its lower part near the heel.	Then make a longitudinal incision in the skin over the vein, either at the upper end of it near the knee or at the lower end near the ankle.	0.92943776
Then open the skin with hooks and strip the vein on all sides until it becomes visible to touch: and upon its appearance, you see it red with a blackish tint. When it thus goes out from the skin, you see it white as if it were a cord.	Then with hooks open up the skin and dissect away round the vein on each side until it is laid open to view. When it is visible you will see it red almost to the point of blackness; and when it is freed from the skin you will see it look like a cord.	0.92674625
Then insert a probe beneath it, so that when it is elevated and exits the skin, suspend it with a gentle, blunt hook.	Then pass beneath it a probe to lift it up, and when it is clear of the skin hold it with a blunt smooth hook.	0.8274505
Then make another incision near that incision, three fingers apart. Then strip the skin from the upper part of the vein until it becomes visible. Then elevate it with probes as you did before and suspend it with another hook as you did initially.	Then make another incision near by, three fingers distant; then dissect away the overlying skin until it comes to view; then raise it with a probe as before and lift it with a second hook as you did at first.	0.9232922
Then cut another incision, or several incisions, if needed. Then elevate and cut it with a final incision near the heel.	Then make yet another incision or several if need be; then draw out the vessel at the lowest incision near the ankle and cut it through.	0.87553215
Then draw it out to the section that is above it. And do this until you extract it from the section that is higher, or from all the incisions, until it is fully drawn out: then cut it.	Then draw it towards the incision above that and so on until you draw it out of the third incision (or) the uppermost, until it is all extracted; then cut it off.	0.8466063
But if it does not respond to extraction and elevation, then insert a needle with a strong doubled thread, tie it, and pull it out, or insert a probe beneath it, and turn your hand to every side until it comes out. And be careful not to cut it. For if it is cut, it becomes very difficult to elevate, and it causes harm to the patient.	But if it does not respond to your attempts to draw and extract it, pass in a needle with a strong double thread and ligate it and draw it up; and introduce a probe beneath it, and twist it all round until it comes out; but be careful lest it break; for if it break the total extraction of it will be very difficult for you and harm will thereby come to the patient.	0.9122206
When you have extracted it entirely, place wool soaked in wine and rose oil, or oil, over the wounds, and treat the patient until healed.	When you have got it all out, apply to the incisions wool soaked in wine and oil of roses, or olive-oil, and dress it till it be healed.	0.8582277
But if the vein is contracted, having twists and bends, and is not as we have said in a straight line, then it is necessary to cut it over each twist and bend.	If the varix be contorted, with twists and turns from side to side and not in a straight line, as we said, then you should cut down along both sides of the twisted part and the places where it is tortuous, then catch it up with hooks and extract it whole.	0.70561
Then suspend it with hooks until you elevate it entirely, and be careful near your incision on it not to cut or injure the vein, for it will become difficult for you to elevate or extract it. Therefore, maintain your caution.	Be careful in incising over it that you do not cut into or injure the vein, for this will render the extraction difficult; therefore be most careful.	0.793882
The form of the incision by which the vein is healed.	The lancet for cutting upon a varix.	0.403014
The form of the blunt hook.	The blunt hook.	0.574947
It does not have the curve like other hooks, nor a sharp end, so as not to wound the vein; it is thick and smooth, for if it were slender, it would cut the vein by its thinness; indeed, let it have extra thickness, as we have said.	It is not bent like other hooks, and its extremity must be blunt so as to not injure the vein. It should be of a broad curve and smooth, for if it is fine-pointed its fineness may cut the vein; rather it should be quite thick, as we said.	0.90779245

chapter-2-subchapter-91.txt
On the extraction of the vein of the leg.	On the extraction of the Medina vein.	0.7042073
This vein forms in the legs in hot lands, like Alizegi, the land of the Arabs, and in dry, hot lands with little tenderness, that is, where no grass or trees grow.	This kind of vein occurs in the leg in hot countries such as the Hejaz and the lands of the Arabs and in hot arid infertile countries.	0.7750535
And it may perhaps form in other places of the body besides the legs.	It also often occurs in other parts of the body beside the legs.	0.7580052
Its formation indeed is due to decay that occurs beneath the skin, similar to how serpents and ascarid worms occur within bodies and worms form between the skin and flesh.	The origin of it is a corruption taking place beneath the skin in the same way that round-worms and worms and gourd-worms arise in the inward parts of the body; also the worms that are generated between the skin and the flesh.	0.8250803
The sign of the beginning of this vein’s formation is that a violent inflammation occurs in the leg. Then the area becomes blistered. Then the vein begins to emerge from the site of that blistering, as if it were the root of a plant or an animal.	The sign of the beginning of the occurrence of this vein is a violent inflammation in the leg; then the place swells up and blisters; then the vein begins to extrude at the blistered place as if it were a plant-stem or an animal.	0.93262744
When its end appears, you must wrap around it a piece of lead weighing from one to two drachmas, and knot it, letting the lead hang from the leg.	When its extremity has appeared it should be wound and tied round a little piece of lead, from one to two drachms in weight, which you leave hanging from the leg.	0.8931538
Thus, whenever something from it comes outward, wrap it in lead and knot it. If it becomes too long, then cut part of it and wrap the remainder. And do not cut it at the root before it is entirely extracted. For if you cut it, it contracts and goes into the flesh, causing an abscess, decay in the area, and a bad ulcer.	Then as fast as any of it issues from the leg, wrap it in the lead, and if there be plenty of it cut off part and tie the rest of it; do not cut it right down until it has all come out; for if you cut it right down it will contract and draw back into the flesh and produce at the place an abscess and suppuration and a bad ulcer.	0.8550339
Therefore, it must be handled gently and extracted gradually until its very end is reached, leaving nothing of it in the body; in some people, this vein emerges with a length of five and ten palms. It has even been reported to me that it came out twenty palms long in one man.	Therefore it should be treated gently, and drawn out slowly until the very extremity of it emerges and not the least bit of it remains in the body. In some cases the vein comes out five or ten spans in length; indeed I have heard of one twenty spans long that came out from a certain man.	0.93446916
If it is cut during your treatment, then insert a probe into its hole, pierce it with a long opening, along with the body, until all the matter within is evacuated, and treat the decay in the area with medicines for a few days. Then treat it as you would for abscesses.	If it breaks during your treatment of it, then pass a probe into the hole and open it up with a long incision longitudinally, until all the contained matter is evacuated; and try to make the place suppurate with medicines for a few days, then treat as an abscess.	0.9207998
This vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot itself, and it has many openings, with a branch emerging from each opening.	Sometimes also this vein is found branching, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot itself; and in this case there are many openings and a branch comes out of each.	0.9107223
Therefore, treat it as we have described in the section, and with what has been previously stated.	The treatment is as mentioned above in the section.	0.5139396

chapter-2-subchapter-92.txt
On the incision for worms generated under the skin, called the "Bovine Disease."	On incision for the worm arising beneath the skin, called 'the cattle disease'.	0.9145603
This disease is called the "Bovine Disease" in a certain land among us, because it often occurs in cattle, and it is a small worm that forms between the skin and flesh.	This complaint is called by us in some regions 'the cattle disease' since it frequently happens to cattle.	0.72386146
And it moves throughout the whole body, ascending and descending, and becomes perceptible as it moves from one limb to another, until it eventually breaks through the skin and emerges wherever it ruptures.	It is in fact a small solitary worm generated between the skin and the flesh, that creeps all over the body, both up and down; it can be felt as it creeps from one part to another until it breaks out at a place where it can break through the skin, and out it comes.	0.7347008
Its formation is due to the decay of certain humors. Just as worms and serpents, that is, roundworms and ascarids, occur in the belly.	It arises from the putrefaction of certain humours as do worms, round-worms and gourd-worms in the abdomen.	0.80769116
For when it moves through the body and rises to the head, and reaches a place, it may rupture there, emerge, and destroy the eye; this happens frequently.	Part of the harm that may be expected of it is that when it creeps about the body and goes up to the head and reaches the eye it may make an opening in the eye and come out and destroy the eye; this frequently happens.	0.8001696
Therefore, when you wish to treat and remove it, this can only be done when it is moving and visible to the senses.	If you wish to treat this and extract it, it must be done while it is creeping about and can be felt.	0.72871697
You must therefore bind tightly above and below it with a constricting band. Then make an incision over it and extract it.	You must tie a tight tourniquet above and below it, then cut down upon it and extract it.	0.8642041
But if it is deep in the flesh and cannot be found, then apply a cautery with fire over the area until it dies.	But if it burrows into the tissues and you cannot locate it, then apply the actual cautery to the place until you have burnt the worm.	0.80641353
The greatest fear is its corruption, by which it destroys the eye, as we have mentioned.	The greatest damage to be feared from it is damage to the eye, as we have said.	0.8275641
If you see it has already reached the head near the eye, then bind tightly beneath it with a strong constriction on the eyebrow. Then make an incision over it and extract it.	So if you see that it has entered the head and is near the eye, then bind a strong bandage over the forehead beneath it, then cut down upon it and draw it out.	0.8636652
The patient must cleanse their body with medicines that dissolve foul, putrid humors.	It is important also for the patient to take care to cleanse his body with laxative medicines from all corrupt and evil humours.	0.69692314
And they should avoid foods that cause decay.	He should also avoid all foods giving rise to putrefaction.	0.7528528

chapter-2-subchapter-93.txt
On the incision for the disease Nakir.	On incision for the disease known as 'flitting disease'.	0.5020336
This disease is called Nakir in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in certain limbs, then shifts from one limb to another.	The disease known in our region as 'the flitting disease' is a pain arising in a limb and then passing from limb to limb.	0.6819486
And I have indeed seen it, as I will tell you. I was called to an ailing woman in a certain village. She uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm cord.	I have personally seen it as I shall describe to you: I was called to a woman patient in a country district, who uncovered her arm and showed me a small inflation of the cephalic vein.	0.7885668
After remaining there for an hour, I saw a swelling moving along like a worm, ascending to her shoulder faster than can be believed, like quicksilver running from one place to another.	After I had waited a while I saw the swelling creep like a worm along the forearm, ascending towards her shoulder, with the greatest possible speed, as of quicksilver running from place to place.	0.86109746
The pain then left that area and became fixed in the shoulder.	Then the pain left that place and settled in the elbow.	0.92187834
Then, after sitting for another hour, it ran into the rest of the body, until it reached the other arm.	Then I waited a while and the pain ran through the whole body until it reached the other arm.	0.7367588
Then she told me that it moved throughout her whole body, as I had seen.	Then she related to me that it used to pass all round her body as I had seen it.	0.90299505
I was amazed at the speed of its movement from one limb to another. I had not seen this illness with my own eyes in such a manner before. However, I have seen many who experience pain moving from limb to limb, though I had not seen it with my eyes as I did in this woman.	I was amazed at the speed with which it migrated from one part to another, as I had never before seen this disease in this form, though I had seen many who had a pain that passed from limb to limb; but never with my own eyes had I seen anything like what I saw in this woman.	0.94025916
And I do not think this is the case unless it is because the woman was from those villages of people with dry bodies and exposed veins; thus, this shifting windiness appears to the senses.	The only opinion I could form of it was that it was due to the woman's being of the dwellers in the wilds, dry of body, with outstanding veins, and hence that moving vapour was perceptible.	0.7088152
And it is necessary that this does not appear in those who are indulgent, with moist bodies and hidden veins.	But it follows then that it does not appear in that manner in people leading a leisured life, with humid bodies and hidden veins.	0.7442292
Therefore, when you wish to treat it and the patient feels the pain, if it is visible to you, as we have said, then bind tightly above and below it quickly; make an incision over it until the confined windiness exits, and cauterize the area.	When you want to cure this, and the patient feels the pain of it, and if you observe the appearance we have described, then tie a bandage round above and beneath it as quickly as possible and cut down on it so that the vapour enclosed there may come out; and cauterize the place.	0.8586285
But if it is not visible to your eyes, then treat it with body evacuation, and with what expels windiness, and soothes it with foul-smelling pills and pills of serapinum, and the like.	But if there is nothing visible to you then treat by purging of the body and by medicines dispelling and getting rid of flatus, such as foetid pills and pills of sagapenon and the like.	0.7457608

chapter-2-subchapter-94.txt
On the extraction of arrows.	On the extraction of arrows.	1.0
Arrows vary according to their types and according to the places in the body where they lodge.	Arrows vary both as to types and as to the different parts of the body pierced by them.	0.8343204
Their diversity is as follows: for among them are those that have large and small points, and those that are concave and deaf. And among them are those that have three edges. And among them are those with tongues.	They differ thus as to type: some are big and some are small; some with hollow heads and some with solid; some of them have three angles and some four; some have tongues; some have spikes.	0.82520854
Among the signs of the brain when an arrow lodges there, and it penetrates the bone, and the membrane over the brain emerges, are these: sudden seizures, dizziness, vertigo, redness in the eyes, swelling, redness of the tongue, spasms, mental confusion, and vomiting of bile. And sometimes blood comes out from the nose or ears. And sometimes speech is cut off, and the voice is destroyed. And a white moisture similar to porridge comes out of the wound site.	Now the signs when the arrow has struck the brain, and penetrated the bone and injured the meninges covering the brain, are these: there arise from that a violent headache and vertigo and giddiness and a redness in the eye, and a redness of the tongue, and convulsion and mental confusion and bilious vomit; perhaps also blood comes out of the nose or from the ears; often also the speech is affected and the voice is lost; also there comes out of the site of the wound a white fluid which resembles gruel, from which there flows something like the juice of meat.	0.90204895
If these signs appear to you, then refrain from treatment, and extract the arrow if it does not come out.	If you observe these signs, avoid treating the patient and extraction of the arrow if it has not come out.	0.8867252
The signs of an arrow when it lodges in the heart are that it is near the left nipple, and it feels as if it is fixed in a hard object, not in an empty one. And sometimes the movement of the arrow resembles the beat of a pulse, and black blood flows from the wound. And coldness of the extremities follows, along with cold sweat and fainting. Know, therefore, that death approaches without a doubt.	The signs of an arrow in the heart are: nearness to the left breast; the patient feels it as if it were fixed in something solid, not hollow; often also there will be imparted to the arrow a pulsating movement; and black blood will issue from the wound; and after this follow coldness of the extremities and a cold sweat and unconsciousness; then you may know that death is surely on its way.	0.9072724
The sign of an arrow wounding the lung is foamy blood coming from the wound, and the vessels following the neck become inflamed, and the patient's color changes. And he breathes a deep, high breath, and seeks the attraction of cold air.	The sign of an arrow that has wounded the lung is the exit of frothy blood from the wound; also the vessels that lie along the neck swell up and the patient changes colour, breathes heavily, and seeks to inhale fresh air very strongly.	0.8983407
But if the arrow lodges in the membrane in the chest, then it is near the small ribs, and there is great shortness of breath with intense pain, with sighing, and all the muscles of the shoulders move.	But if the arrow strike the pleura then it will be close to the small ribs and he will breathe deeply with much pain and heaving of the chest, and all parts of his shoulders will be agitated.	0.8542184
And if the arrow lodges in the stomach, then perhaps something undigested exits from the wound.	If the arrow strikes the stomach, often undigested food comes out of the wound and renders the case obvious.	0.68056786
And if the arrow lodges in the abdomen and sticks there, something of feces exits from the wound, or bile, or intestine that is already ruptured. Therefore, there is no hope in curing it, nor in extracting the arrow.	If the arrow wounds the belly and is fixed in it, and from the wound there comes excrement or omentum or torn bowel, there is no hope in treatment nor in extracting the arrow.	0.8517869
But if the arrow lodges in the bladder and urine comes out, and something proceeds from it to the outside, and the pain is stronger over the afflicted, then know that it is fatal.	If the arrow has hit the urinary bladder, and urine comes out and some of the bladder protrudes and the patient has violent pain, then you may know that the wound is mortal.	0.76794666
However, the remaining parts, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulder, auxiliary part, spinal vertebrae, clavicle, hip, leg, and similar parts of the body are preserved in most cases, as long as the arrow does not hit an artery or nerve and is not poisonous.	But as for the other parts, such as the face, eye, throat, shoulder, arm, dorsal vertebrae, collar-bone, hip, leg, and the like, in most cases they will heal if the arrow does not happen to strike an artery or nerve, and if the arrow is not poisoned.	0.86594784
And I tell you what I have observed concerning these arrows, so that you may apply it in your practice.	Now I will relate to you certain cases of arrow wounds that I have seen, so that you may be guided thereby to your own methods of treatment.	0.63092947
For instance, an arrow fell into a man’s tear duct at the root of his nose. I therefore extracted it for him from the other side, under the fat of his ear, and he was healed, and no harm occurred to his eye.	For example, once an arrow struck a man at the corner of his eye near the root of the nose, and I extracted it from him on the other side beneath the lobe of his ear, and he got well, and his eye was none the worse.	0.88846064
And I extracted another arrow for a Jew, which had lodged in the fat of his eye beneath the lower eyelid, and the arrow was already hidden, and I only managed to reach a small part of it, where it was fixed in its wooden shaft, and it was a large arrow from the Turkish bows, with a smooth iron head, without barbs.	Also I extracted from a Jew another arrow that had pierced the orbit beneath the lower eyelid; the arrow had sunk out of sight and I could take hold only of the tiny extremity of it which is secured to the shaft; but it was a big arrow from a compound bow, the iron tip four-sided, very smooth without barbs.	0.86091137
Thus the Jew was healed, and no bad incident occurred to his eye.	The Jew recovered, nor did any ill befall his eye.	0.82733876
And I extracted another arrow from the throat of a Christian.	I also extracted another arrow from the throat of a Christian.	0.9508828
And it was an Arabic arrow, one that has barbs. I therefore made an incision over it between the two guidegi, for it was already embedded in his throat. So I proceeded delicately with it until I extracted it, and the Christian was healed.	It was an Arab arrow, one of those with two barbs; and I cut down upon it between the two jugulars (for it lay deep in the throat), and worked gently at it until I extracted it; and the Christian was saved and recovered.	0.8735018
And I extracted another arrow from a man, which had fallen into his abdomen, and we thought he would die from it.	I also extracted another arrow from a man, that had struck him in the abdomen, and our opinion was that he would certainly die from it.	0.918612
But after thirty days had passed, and nothing in his condition had changed, I made an incision over the arrow, maneuvered skillfully, extracted it, and he was healed, with no bad incident occurring.	But when it had remained in him for the space of thirty days or thereabouts, and his condition was unimpaired, I cut down upon the arrow and manoeuvred it out and extracted it; and he recovered, nor did any harm befall him.	0.8192331
And I saw a man into whose back an arrow had fallen, and the wound had healed over it. Then, seven years later, the arrow emerged at the base of his hip.	I also saw a man who had been struck in the back by an arrow and the wound had closed over it; and when the space of seven years had elapsed the arrow came out at the root of the hip.	0.9120558
And I saw a woman into whose abdomen an arrow had fallen, and the wound healed over it, and the arrow remained inside her, yet none of her bodily functions were affected, and she experienced no harm in any of her natural operations.	And I saw a woman who had been struck in the abdomen by an arrow and the wound healed with the arrow remaining in it, and her condition was unimpaired; she felt no harm from it and her natural functions were not harmed.	0.9132159
And I saw another man into whose face an arrow had fallen; the wound healed, and it remained without causing him much pain, and many other similar cases.	And I saw a man who had been struck by an arrow in the face, and it had healed over, and he did not feel much pain from it. And many such have I seen.	0.8366629
And I extracted an arrow from a man among the King’s nobles, which had fallen into the middle of his nose and had shifted slightly to the right; the entire arrow was concealed.	I once drew out an arrow from one of the officers of the State, that had struck him in the middle of the nose and was inclining a little to the right, and the whole arrow was buried.	0.7871924
Thus I was called to treat him three days after the arrow had fallen. I found the arrow wound very tight.	I was called to treat him three days after he had received the arrow wound; and I found the arrow wound very narrow.	0.9006692
I therefore probed it with a thin probe, and did not feel it, but he did feel a prick and pain under his right ear. I then suspected that this prick was from the arrow’s tip.	I explored it with a fine probe but did not find it; but the patient felt a pricking and a pain beneath the right ear, and I hoped that the pricking was due to the arrow.	0.84589326
So I applied a plaster to the area with attracting and digesting properties, confident that the area would become inflamed, and the sign of the arrow would appear for me to cut over it; yet no indication showed that the arrow had reached that spot.	So I applied a poultice to the spot, a poultice with power to draw out and cause suppuration, desiring that the place should swell and that a sign to indicate the arrow should appear so that I could cut down upon it.	0.7872938
So I continued applying the plaster over him for many days; no incident occurred, and the wound healed in the meantime, and he remained untroubled by the extraction for a period of days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose. And he told me about it.	But nothing happened at that place to indicate that the arrow had come through to there; so I persevered with poulticing it for many days; yet nothing fresh manifested itself and the wound healed up meanwhile, and the patient despaired for a time of its extraction.	0.7721533
And he told me about it. I then applied a sharp, corrosive medicine over the wound for many days until it opened, and I probed it and felt the thin tip of the arrow where it adhered to the wood.	Then one day he felt the arrow inside his nose, and he told me of this; so for a number of days I applied a caustic medicine to the wound until it opened.	0.74794126
Then I continued to open the wound with that sharp medicine until the tip of the arrow became visible to us, and approximately four months passed with him.	I explored it, and felt the slim end of the arrow which is fastened to the shaft; then I enlarged the opening of the wound by the use of the caustic until the tip of the arrow was plainly visible to me. About four months passed.	0.6914855
Then, after the wound had widened enough, and it was possible for me to insert forceps into it and move it, though it did not yield to extraction, I did not stop refining and devising methods over it until one day I started on it with forceps properly made, as their form will appear at the end of the chapter, until I extracted it. Then I restored the wound.	Then when the wound was enlarged and I was able to introduce forceps into it I pulled on it and moved it, but it would not come out. And I went on skilfully and gently trying for it with various instruments until one day I caught hold of it with a pair of strong forceps (their shape will be described at the end of the chapter) and drew it out; then dressed the wound.	0.81446207
And indeed, doctors judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored. Nevertheless, I restored it, and the wound healed, and the patient recovered fully, with no harm done to him at all.	The medical men judged that the cartilage of the nose would not be restored, but I restored it and the wound healed up and the patient made a complete recovery nor did he suffer any harm.	0.886462
And I tell you the manner of extracting certain arrows so that you may use it as a rule and guide over what I have not described.	Now I shall tell you the method of extracting certain arrows so that you may take it as a guide and an analogy for others that I have not mentioned; since all parts and details of this art cannot be comprehended in any description, nor can any book include them.	0.6807847
For the parts of this art and their distinctions are not fully conveyed in narration, nor does a book cover it all, and a skilled craftsman compares the small over the large, and what is present over what is absent, and finds a new procedure and new instrument in the context of extraordinary occurrences in this art when they happen.	A skilful worker will form a judgement on much, from little; and on what is not present from what is before him; and he will think out a new method and a new instrument for an unaccustomed case when it occurs in the practice of this art.	0.6016277
Therefore, I say that arrows do not exit from the parts in which they are fixed except in two ways. Either by drawing it out from the place where it entered. Or through the opposite side.	So I would state that arrows come out from the parts of the body they have transfixed, in two ways: either by drawing out from the site of entry; or from the opposite side.	0.8646781
And the one that exits from where it entered, or is an arrow lodged in a fleshy area, can be drawn out and extracted.	An arrow that comes out by the track of its entry: the arrow may be visible, standing out from a fleshy part, in which case it may be extracted by pulling.	0.60034525
But if it does not yield to exit at the time it falls, then you should leave it for a few days, until the flesh around it begins to decompose, and the extraction and removal become easier.	If it does not respond to traction immediately it strikes, you must leave it for a few days until the surrounding tissues have suppurated, when the pulling and extraction of it will be made easy.	0.73789287
Similarly, if it is lodged in the bone and does not yield to you for removal, then leave it also for a few days, and try again each day with traction and movement until it exits.	Similarly if it has stuck fast in a bone and will not come out, leave this also for a few days, repeatedly pulling on it and shifting it day by day, and then it will come out.	0.8432284
But if it still does not yield to exit after days, then you must drill around the arrow in the bone from all sides with a fine drill, until the area for the arrow is widened. Then pull it and extract it.	But if it will not come out after some days, you will have to drill away the bone from all round with a fine drill so as to make room for the arrow; then draw on it and pull it out.	0.8944492
If the arrow is already hidden in a part of the body and is concealed and out of reach, then locate it with a probe. If you feel it, then pull it with certain instruments suitable for its extraction.	If the arrow is buried in some part of the body and is quite lost to sight, explore for it with a probe, and if you can feel it then draw it out with any suitable instrument.	0.8842672
If you cannot reach it because of the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and if there is no bone, nerve, or vein there, then make an incision over it, widening the wound until it becomes possible to extract the arrow.	But if you cannot get at it on account of the narrowness of the wound and the depth at which the arrow is, and there be no bone nor nerve nor blood-vessel, then cut round it until the wound be sufficiently wide to enable you to take hold of it and extract it.	0.85519093
If it has barbs to hold it, then free the flesh lodged in them on all sides with every skill you can manage, and proceed carefully if the flesh cannot yield to the breaking of the barbs or their twisting, until it is freed.	And if it have two barbs by which it is held, free them from the adherent flesh all round, in any way you can; or, if you cannot free the tissues, try skilfully to break off the two barbs and twist them about until the arrow comes free.	0.77018154
And when you are performing the extraction of an arrow, wherever it is, use the twisting of your hand with forceps in all directions until you make it emerge, handling it with the utmost delicacy so that the arrow does not break, making its extraction more difficult for you.	Whenever you try to extract an arrow from any part, employ a twisting motion of your hand with the forceps in all directions until you free it; and use the utmost gentleness not to break the arrow and thus make it hard to draw it out and remove it.	0.8617871
If you cannot manage it in one attempt, then leave it for several days, until the surrounding tissues begin to decay. Then try again, as it will be easier. If, however, bleeding hinders you, then administer the treatment I mentioned in its chapter, and take care to avoid cutting any vein, nerve, or tendon.	If you are unable to get it out at once then leave it for some days until the tissues that surround it putrefy, then return to it, for then the extraction will be easy; and if haemorrhage interfere use the remedies prescribed in the chapter dealing with that.	0.7783979
And use every skill you can in freeing the arrow, with ease, calm, or slowness, and firmness, as I have told you.	Exercise the utmost care not to cut a blood-vessel or nerve or tendon; and employ the greatest skill in freeing the arrow; it should be done gently and unhurriedly and with perseverance, as I have told you.	0.6374247
And it is necessary that when you pull the arrow, the patient is positioned as he was at the moment the arrow struck him. For it is more beneficial. But if that is not possible, then use whatever positions are available to you.	When extracting an arrow you should place the patient in the same position he was in when the arrow struck him, for that is more convenient; but if you cannot do this then let him be in whatever position is possible for you.	0.85256636
Now, for an arrow that exits through the opposite side, either part of it is already protruding externally, or its tip creates a bulge felt under the nearby surface of the skin, and you see it protruding; make an incision over it large enough to accommodate the forceps.	The arrow that is to be extracted from the opposite side either has some part protruding through or else the tip of the arrow gives rise to a palpable swelling just beneath the skin and you see it sticking out; then cut down upon it; the incision should be wide enough to admit the forceps.	0.8454027
Then pull it, for it will be easy to remove.	Then pull on it, for the extraction of it will be easy.	0.92945385
But if it is retained in the bone, then twist your hand in a circular motion until the arrow is set in the bone and enlarges itself: then pull it out.	If it is stuck in bone, twist it round with your hand until the arrow makes an impression in the bone and opens up a way for itself; then pull it.	0.69370735
And if not: leave it for a few days, then try again until it comes out.	If it does not come out, let it alone for some days, and repeat until it does come out.	0.7457185
But if the shaft of the arrow is within it, then push it with it.	If the arrow-shaft be in the wound, then thrust the arrow out with that.	0.72984457
But if the shaft has fallen, and you wish to apply pressure, then insert into it a hollow instrument so that its concavity enters the tail of the arrow: then push it with it.	But if the shaft has fallen out, and you wish to employ thrusting, introduce down to it the hollow instrument whose cavity will enter upon the ferrule of the arrow, then push it forward with that.	0.84189034
But if the arrow is hollow, then push it with an instrument that enters it. For the arrow is eased by that.	If the arrow be hollow, thrust it forward with an instrument that will enter into the cavity, for the exit of the arrow will thereby be made easy.	0.73380685
But if the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary to hollow out all the flesh in which the poison is, if that is possible for you. Then treat it with what is suitable for it.	If the arrow be poisoned you must, if you can, cut out in a circle all the flesh into which the poison has entered; then treat it with what is appropriate.	0.82280725
But if the arrow has fallen into the chest, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the side, and it is near enough that you can touch it with the probe, and it is possible for you to cut above it: then cut, and beware of cutting a vein or nerve, and extract it.	If the arrow that has struck be in the chest or abdomen or in the urinary bladder or in the flank and it be close enough for you to explore it with the probe and you can cut down upon it, then do so, but beware of cutting into a blood-vessel or nerve. Then remove the arrow.	0.8151547
Then suture the wound if you see fit, and treat it until it heals.	Afterwards suture the wound, if suture be necessary, and dress it until it heals.	0.8347903
And this is the form of the forceps by which arrows are extracted.	Forceps for extracting arrows.	0.47656447
Let the tips be like a bird’s beak, which are made like iron: when they grip the arrow, they do not let go.	The extremities resemble the bill of a bird and are engraved like a file so as not to lose grip when you close them upon an arrow or some other object.	0.49349588
And many types are made from them, large, small, and medium, according to the size of the arrow and its slenderness, the breadth of the wound, and its narrowness.	They are made in several kinds, large, small, or medium, all according to the bigness or smallness of the arrow and the breadth or narrowness of the wound.	0.8186745
The shape of the hollow pusher.	The hollow thruster.	0.56259865
This is of a blunt end like a spoke, so that its entry into the hollow arrow is eased and it is pushed with it.	The extremity is solid like a probe, to facilitate entry into, and pushing, the hollow arrow.	0.7426883

chapter-2-subchapter-95.txt
On the bloodletting of veins.	On venesection.	0.67292166
The veins to be bloodlet, which are customary in the body, are thirty.	The blood-vessels in the body which it is customary to open are thirty(two) in number.	0.734442
Of these, sixteen are in the head: two pulsating veins behind the ears, called the two "Herbs"; two arteries visible in the temples; two veins in the tear ducts of the two eyes, called "Lookers"; a vein situated in the middle of the forehead; and a vein at the tip of the nose.	There are sixteen of them in the head, and they are: two pulsating vessels behind the ears that are called the two occipitals; the two external arteries in the temples; and the two veins in the two internal angles of the eyes, called the vessels of sight; and the vein running up the middle of the forehead; and the vein situated at the tip of the nose; and the two jugular veins in the neck; and the two veins in the upper lip and the two in the lower lip; these being the veins known as 'the four vessels'; and two veins beneath the tongue.	0.8955209
However, in the arms, there are five veins in each arm to be bloodlet.	As for the veins that are bled in the arm and hand, they are five.	0.5828526
And the Salvatic vein, located between the ring finger and the little finger, with two branches.	And the salvatella which is the vein between the little and ring fingers; it has two branches.	0.85273075
In the leg and foot, there are three veins. One of these is located under the arch of the big toe on the outer side. The second is the Saphenous, located near the heel on the inner side. And the Nesse vein, located near the heel on the outer side.	There are also three veins in the leg and foot; one of these is the sciatic vein on the outer aspect; the second is the saphena situated near the heel on the inner aspect; and there is the external saphena situated near the heel on the outer aspect.	0.8651953
And in the other leg, there are three veins similar to these.	And there are three veins, counterparts to these, in the other leg.	0.90598524
On the bloodletting of the two veins behind the ears.	Venesection of the two veins behind the ears.	0.83211374
Bloodletting of the two veins behind the ears is beneficial for chronic catarrh, migraines, "sahafati," and old sores of the head.	Bleeding from both of these will give relief in cases of chronic catarrh, migraine and chronic foul pustules, and scabs of the head.	0.6285578
And the method of bloodletting it is as I will describe. The patient’s head is to be shaved, and the occiput is rubbed at the location of the two veins with a rough cloth, rubbing well. Then the patient should tightly bind his neck with a band until the two veins appear. Their locations are behind the ears in two sunken spots of the head.	The method of venesecting these two is as I shall now describe: the patient's head should be shaved and the hinder part, in the region of the two veins, should be strongly chafed with a rough cloth; then the patient should bind his neck with his turban until the two veins are visible; their position is behind the ears in the two flattened places of the head; feel for them with your finger and when you feel their pulsation beneath your finger then mark the place with ink.	0.87827665
Then insert it under the vein in the skin until the lancet reaches the bone. Then lift your hand with the vein and skin upwards, and cut the vein along with the skin with a cutting incision. The length of the incision should be about the width of two joined fingers, or around that; let as much blood flow as you desire.	Then take a knife-scalpel, known as a lancet, and insert it beneath the vessel into the skin until the scalpel reaches the bone; then lifting with your hand both vessel and skin make an incision dividing both skin and vein; the length of the incision should be about two fingers side by side; then draw off the quantity of blood you wish.	0.904413
Then compress it with pads, and leave it until it heals.	Then bind them up with dressings and leave it until healed.	0.85574746
And their incision and cauterization were already covered at the beginning of the book.	The incision and cauterization of these two vessels has been discussed earlier in the book.	0.65952015
Bloodletting of the two arteries in the temples is beneficial for chronic migraines, a persistent throbbing, continuous eye pain, and the flow of excessive discharges to the eyes.	The section of the two arteries in the temples gives relief for chronic migraine and severe headache and constant ophthalmia and the flow of acrid superfluities into the eyes.	0.80530345
And the method of bloodletting them is as I will describe to you. The patient should tightly bind his neck until the two veins become clearly visible to the touch, and their pulse is felt under your finger. Then mark them with ink.	Now the manner of incising them is as I shall describe: the patient should bind his neck with a sash until the vessels stand out clearly to the eye and their pulsation is manifest under your finger; then mark with ink.	0.8709316
Then lift the skin above the vein upward with your index finger, insert the cutting lancet underneath, and raise the vein upwards. And cut it as you did with the other two veins, allowing the blood to flow according to your need.	Then with your forefinger raise the skin over the vessel and introduce a lancet beneath and lift up the vein and divide it as you did the other two; and draw off as much blood as you need.	0.8994138
Then release the patient’s binding and press your finger over the vein for an hour. Afterward, place a dressing and pads on it, and bind it tightly from above; leave it until it heals.	Then loosen the band round the patient's neck and put your finger on the vein for a while; then apply cotton wool and a pad, bandage securely, and leave until it heals.	0.88332105
And their mention, incision, and extraction were already covered at the beginning of the book.	They and their incision and extraction have been mentioned earlier in the book.	0.817827
The benefit of bloodletting the frontal vein after the bloodletting of the Cephalic is for old ailments of the face, for migraines, redness, and foul ulcers.	Venesection of the vein in the forehead is, after venesection of the cephalic, a relief to chronic diseases of the face such as pustules and scabs and erysipelas.	0.6968567
And the method of its bloodletting is as I will tell you. The patient should tightly bind his neck with a band until the vein appears. Then take the instrument called the "Digger."	Now I shall relate to you the method of cutting: you bind the patient's neck until the vessel stands out; then you take the instrument called the 'pickaxe'.	0.7109074
Place the pointed tip that is on the head of the Digger over the vein, and strike it with a comb or something similar, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you desire. Then release the perforation of the patient, and press it until it heals.	The spike in the head of the instrument you place on the vessel itself and then strike with a comb or some similar thing; and let the blood flow to the extent you wish; then loosen the band round the neck and bandage the vein until healed.	0.832101
Sometimes it is opened with a broad lancet. However, it is not necessary for the lancet to have a sharp end like other lancets; rather, it should have a broad end. And bloodlet it across, since the bone is close, and perhaps the lancet might break in it if it is fine.	Sometimes it is opened with a broad scalpel; the scalpel, however, should not have a sharp point like other scalpels but should be a little broader at the tip, and the vein is cut obliquely, because the bone is close and the scalpel, if it is too fine, may be broken on it.	0.8439549
The benefit of the two veins in the two tear ducts of the eyes is for the eye suffering from scabies and redness, and "sebel" in the eye, and ailments of the face.	Venesection of the two lachrymal veins gives relief in diseases of the eyes such as granular conjunctiva and inflammation and pannus, and in diseases of the face.	0.56457454
The method of their bloodletting is for the patient to tightly bind his neck with a band. Then bloodlet them while you stand above his head.	Now this is the method of incising: the patient binds a sash round his throat, then you cut open both veins, standing in front of him.	0.5646255
And the bloodletting should be done horizontally in a short length, with a small lancet, somewhat broad, as there is no flesh in that place. If the lancet has a fine end, it may break.	The incision should be oblique, slightly longitudinal, with a small, rather broad scalpel, for in this place there is no flesh; so if the knife have too narrow a point it may be broken on the bone.	0.79022944
Then let as much blood flow as you need. And place a dressing on them, bind them for one night, then release them.	Then let flow what blood you wish, put cotton wool on both, tie for one night, then loosen.	0.8390571
The bloodletting of the nasal veins is helpful for acute fever, severe throbbing, and ailments of the face, like migraines and redness that appears in the face, especially when it is old.	Venesection of the vein of the nose helps in acute fevers, in violent headache, and in diseases of the face such as the red pustules that arise on the nose, especially if they are chronic.	0.7984726
The method of its bloodletting is for the patient to tightly bind his neck. Then hold his nose with your left hand, take a fine, long lancet, and fix it in the middle of the cartilage, between what divides the nose straight down. For the vein is not felt there, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.	This is how you make the incision: the patient binds his neck and then you hold his nose with your left hand and take a long fine scalpel and stick it in the middle of the very lobule of the nose, perpendicularly in the nasal septum (for the vein is not obvious at that spot) and blood will immediately flow out.	0.788617
And it is necessary to hold your hand with the lancet for a short time, and let the blood flow according to your need. Then bind it for one night. For it heals quickly.	You should advance the scalpel a little and cause the blood to flow as required; then bandage for one night, for it will quickly heal.	0.75888014
The benefit of bloodletting the two Guidegi veins is for constriction of breath, the onset of leprosy, melancholic ailments, impetigo, foul ulcers, and corrosive conditions, that is, scaly herpes.	Venesection of the jugular veins helps tightness of breath and the early stage of elephantiasis, and the melancholic diseases arising on the surface of the skin, such as the black vitiligo and impetigo and malignant ulcers and cancrum oris.	0.505738
The method of their bloodletting is for the patient to bind under both in his neck with a strap, and for the practitioner to stand above the patient’s head while the patient sits on a seat.	Now the way to venesect them is for the patient to bind his neck below them both with a band; let the operator stand behind the patient and let the patient be seated upon a chair.	0.7790122
Then bloodlet the vein in a somewhat large length. Then extract a moderate amount of blood, or according to what you see is needed. Then do likewise with the other vein.	Then incise the vein longitudinally with a rather wide opening; then let a moderate amount of blood, or according to what you think necessary; then do the same with the other vein.	0.93577456
Afterward, release the binding and press the two veins with moderate pressure so that the patient is not suffocated. And leave it until morning. For the wound heals.	Then loosen the band and tie the veins with a moderate pressure lest the patient be suffocated; leave him until the next day and the wound will be healed.	0.85149074
On the bloodletting of the Algeberich veins. The benefit of bloodletting the Algeberich veins is that it helps with the ulcerations in the mouth, the corruption of the gums, foul ulcers, cracks in the lips, and even foul ulcers in and around the nose.	The four veins of the lips: venesection of them is effective, second to section of the cephalic vein, for pustules on the mouth and rotting of the gums and malignant ulcers and fissures of the lips and for malignant ulcer in the nose and round about.	0.5738411
The method of bloodletting them is to have the patient sit before you and to bind his neck with a band. Then turn his lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left, both identified by their dark color. And that is true, as around them are tiny, dark veins. Then make an incision in each one.	The way to venesect is to seat the patient in front of you and bind a sash round his neck, then roll back his lips and look for the two veins, one of which you will see to the left and the other to the right; their dark colour will show them up against the lip and also the fact that round them are fine dark veins; so cut down upon both, dividing them.	0.9171462
But if you are in doubt and do not know which one, then focus on the incision of the larger and more visible one.	But if you are in doubt about the matter and are not sure what they are, set about incising the largest and most obvious.	0.8526921
Similarly, do the same with the two veins in the upper lip; this is often customary, and incise the two veins in the lower lip.	Do the same with the two veins in the upper lip.	0.68480945
On the bloodletting of the vein under the tongue after the Cephalic bloodletting. The benefit of bloodletting the two veins under the tongue is that the Cephalic bloodletting helps with obstructions in the throat, ailments of the uvula, and diseases of the mouth.	The two veins under the tongue: their venesection is, after section of the cephalic, of good effect in the quinsy arising in the throat from disease of the uvula, and diseases of the mouth.	0.69205165
The method of bloodletting them is to have the patient sit between your hands facing the sun, lift his tongue, and look under the tongue for a vein on each side, both with a darkish color.	The way to venesect them is to seat the patient before you in the sunlight and raise his tongue, and look, and you will see beneath the tongue one vein on each side, blackish in colour.	0.8376402
Therefore, bloodlet each one, and take care not to press your hand too much in bloodletting them. For beneath them are arteries, and there may be a blood flow from those arteries.	Cut them; but be careful not to go too far in your incision, for beneath them lie arteries from which there may be haemorrhage.	0.75672436
The three veins in the elbow that are bloodlet are commonly treated in all people.	The three veins that are opened in the elbow are the veins which universal custom has used for bloodletting.	0.6978905
Their bloodletting is done in two ways. Either by pricking with a broad myrtle-shaped lancet, or an olive-shaped one with a fine edge, or by cutting with a knife-shaped lancet, called "Alnesil."	There are two ways of venesecting these: either by piercing with a broad myrtle-leaf scalpel or a rather fine olivary; or by cutting with a knife-edged scalpel, the lancet whose figure follows.	0.80209357
And it is suitable for opening hollow, full, projecting, visible, thick veins that contain thick, turbid blood.	As you see, it should be broad so as to serve for opening hollow, full, outstanding, obvious and thick veins, and those containing turbid blood.	0.80743265
And this lancet is of lesser width and a finer tip.	This scalpel is less broad and finer-pointed.	0.79539245
And it is suitable for the bloodletting of fine veins that contain thin, yellowish blood.	It is suitable for venesecting fine veins that contain thin jaundiced blood.	0.83660805
The bloodletting of the Basilica vein, which is one of these three veins, is beneficial. It draws blood from ailments that are below the throat and neck, following down to the chest and abdomen. The bloodletter must be cautious when bloodletting it, as there is an artery beneath it.	The basilic vein, which is one of these three vessels, helps, when cut, by extracting blood from disorders below the throat and neck, in the parts neighbouring the chest and abdomen.	0.806301
If an error is made, and too much force is applied in the lancet puncture, it will cut that artery, resulting in a blood flow. Therefore, it is necessary not to use a puncturing lancet but rather to cut with the Alnesil.	When one venesects it one must be careful and wary of it, for beneath the vein is an artery, so that if one is inaccurate and sticks the scalpel in too far one will cut the artery and cause a haemorrhage; therefore venesection of it should not be done with a transfixing scalpel but should be an incision with the lancet.	0.696432
If the Basilica is not clearly visible, then it is necessary to change to another vein or seek one of its branches, or instead bloodlet the Cord of the arm. The Cord of the arm is clearly visible, so cut it with the Alnesil, as we mentioned.	If the basilic vein is not clearly discernible, leave it and turn to another, or look for a branch of it; or venesect the brachial cord instead, for that is evident; incise it with the lancet as we have said.	0.85791475
If you wish to bloodlet the Basilica itself, you should press the arm beforehand to feel for the pulse location. Then mark the spot with ink, bind the arm, and cut the vein with a concave incision using the Alnesil, as we described. Be cautious not to let the cut fall near the artery.	But if you wish to open the basilic vein itself you should, before you bandage the arm, palpate the place till the site of pulsation is found; then mark it with ink; then bind the arm and cut the vein obliquely with the lancet as we said, and take care that the stroke fall some way from the artery.	0.8656257
And if you see an inflation at the marked spot when you bind it, that inflation is from the artery; therefore, avoid it.	If, when tying the bandage, you see a swelling in the place that you have marked with ink, that swelling is the inflation of the artery, so avoid it.	0.8119374
If you see the blood spurting at the bloodletting site like a child’s urine, and it is thin, red blood, then know that it is from the artery. Then act quickly and place your finger on it for a long moment, then remove your finger. If the blood flow stops (for it often stops), then bind the arm, and let it be, advising the patient to refrain from moving it and to be cautious.	And if, on section, you see the blood spurt out like a child's urine, and it is clear and red, then you may know that it is arterial blood; so then be quick and put your finger upon it for a long while; then remove your finger and if the bleeding stops, as it often will, then bind up the arm and leave it.	0.8835864
And he should not move it for a few days until it heals.	Caution the patient against neglecting it; let him be careful and not move it for some days, until it heals.	0.6091107
But if the blood does not stop and overwhelms you, and no remedy is at hand, then cut the artery if you can see it. For its ends will contract, stopping the blood.	But if the bleeding is not stayed but resists your treatment and you have no medicament there at the time, then cut the vessel through if you can see it; for the two ends will contract and the haemorrhage will stop.	0.85833263
Or take the bark of a pistachio tree, split it, take one half, and bind it over the vein with appropriate pressure using a band and pads until the next day.	Or else take a pistachio nut shell and split it and take one half and bind it over the site of the haemorrhage with a pad and bandage until next day.	0.84971225
And if not, then treat it with what has previously been mentioned from the location of the powders that stop blood flow; stopping its blood is not difficult in most cases due to the small wound and the possibility of binding from the arm.	The bleeding may stop; if not, then treat by those means mentioned previously, namely the application of styptic powders. It is not difficult in most cases to stop the bleeding, because the wound is small and it is easy to bandage the arm.	0.7466597
The bloodletting of the Fusca vein is beneficial as it draws blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body, due to its composition from a branch of the Basilica and a branch of the Cephalic, as we mentioned.	Venesection of the median vein results in drawing off blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; this being due to the fact, as we said, that it is composed of a branch of the cephalic and a branch of the basilic veins.	0.81022966
The bloodletter should exercise caution in bloodletting it, as there is a nerve beneath it. If too much force is applied in the lancet puncture and the nerve is struck, numbness will occur, and healing will be difficult, perhaps even incomplete.	The venesector should be very careful in opening it because there is a nerve beneath; and if he takes the scalpel too deep and hits that nerve it will cause stupor, the healing of which will be difficult and perhaps even impossible.	0.7985965
This nerve is often felt. If it is hidden in some people and is fine and not visible, then it is necessary to position your bloodletting with the Alnesil and avoid the nerve with caution.	Generally this nerve can be felt, but if in some persons it lies hidden and is slender and not discernible, then you should make your venesection an incision with the lancet and diligently avoid the nerve.	0.7740235
If the vein lies between two nerves, then split the vein lengthwise.	If the vein lies between two nerves you should cut it longitudinally.	0.8621571
On the Cephalic vein. The bloodletting of the Cephalic vein is beneficial as it draws blood from the head and helps with ailments of the eyes.	The cephalic vein: section of it is effective in drawing blood from the head and in diseases of the eyes.	0.7985159
And it is appropriate with this vein, if you wish, to bloodlet it by pricking with an olive-shaped or myrtle-shaped lancet, as it is the safest of all veins, as there is no artery or nerve beneath it.	Particularly in this vein you ought, if you wish to incise it, to make your incision by puncturing with the olivary or the broad myrtle-leaf scalpel, for this is the safest of all veins as there is neither artery nor nerve beneath.	0.85732484
However, in bloodletting, it is best to avoid only the head of the upper arm and seek a softer spot; and it does no harm if it is not found on the first try, allowing for several attempts.	When you are cutting it you have only to avoid with the scalpel the head of the muscle and to look for the soft place.	0.41351154
However, some people may develop a small abscess if it is not bloodlet on the first try, but this abscess does not harm them in any way.	It will not injure it, if at the first cut you miss the vein, to repeat the incision several times; except that in some people it will sometimes swell up if the section is not made at the first stroke; nevertheless that swelling will do him no harm.	0.64785886
On the usefulness of bloodletting, and the precautions to observe in it. The nature of bloodletting and its complications, about which you must think to correct.	The manner of venesection, the accidents that may supervene, and the necessary preliminaries for performing it properly.	0.5192624
Firstly, you must know that bloodletting is only practiced for the preservation of health, its persistence, and as a precaution against the onset of diseases.	First you should know that venesection may be employed either for the preservation of health or in cases of disease.	0.6840533
And so that bloodletting may be done on one of the three veins in the elbow, namely the Cephalic, the Dark, and the Basilic. And so that bloodletting may be done at the start of Spring before fasting, in spring and summer, and in autumn and winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear.	When used for the preservation and maintenance of health and for guarding against the occurrence of disease, the venesection should be in one of the three vessels at the elbow, cephalic, median, or basilic; and it must be performed at the beginning of spring when the signs of repletion appear.	0.64864457
And let bloodletting be done on the first or third day, after three hours have passed since daybreak.	The venesection should be done on a Sunday or Tuesday, after three hours of the day have passed.	0.6599248
However, bloodletting practiced in illnesses does not have a fixed hour; rather, when convenience and necessity call for it, it may be done at night, or day, and at any hour, and at any time.	On the other hand, venesection administered for diseases has no fixed hour but when need and necessity arise, either by night or by day, at any hour, in any season.	0.8442599
And children should not be bled until they have reached fourteen years of age. Nor should a pregnant woman be bled, except from the fourth to the seventh month. Nor should the elderly, who have already passed sixty years, be bled.	Children should not be venesected until their fourteenth year, nor should you venesect old men of over sixty years.	0.77406883
Therefore, when anyone wants to be bled for any reason, they should cleanse their intestines before bloodletting with a gentle enema, if much stool is retained, so that the veins do not draw from the intestines putrid superfluities that harm the principal organs during bloodletting.	When anyone has decided to be bled, for whatever reason, first of all his bowels must be purged with a gentle enema if they contain much excrement, lest at the venesection putrid superfluities be drawn from the bowels into the veins, that might harm the chief parts of the body.	0.83070564
Nor should a person suffering from toctina, that is, a nauseating fullness, nor a gluttonous one, nor one recovering from drunkenness, be bled until these conditions are cleared from them.	No one suffering from indigestion or surfeit or drunkenness should be venesected until recovered from these; nor a dropsical patient.	0.81827605
And bloodletting should also be avoided after an episode of colic, vomiting, diarrhea, excessive intercourse, labor, exercise, wakefulness, fasting, and anything that depletes strength from the body or mind.	Beware also of venesection after stomach-trouble or vomiting or diarrhoea or much intercourse or fatigue or exercise or sleeplessness or fasting and anything else that diminishes the strength both bodily and spiritual.	0.8202106
Then consider the subtlety of the humors beforehand, if the blood is thick from foods, drinks, and medicines: if that is possible for him.	Then, beforehand, see to the refining of the humours, if the blood be thick, by means of food and drink and medicines, if that is practicable for him.	0.81307435
Then let him enter the bath, if nothing prevents it; or engage in some exercise, to make the blood more fluid.	Then, if there is no contra-indication, let him enter the bath; or let him take a little exercise to make the blood thin.	0.872823
And place his bloodletting in the chest, around the third hour of the day, as we said: and strive so that his chest may be cleared that day of all harmful emotional occurrences, such as distress, anger, and fear; and of all physical events, such as labor, pain, excessive intercourse, and similar things.	Then perform the venesection in the early part of the day, as we have said. Let him endeavour on that day to have his mind free from all such evil spiritual affections as anxiety, anger, or fear; and from all bodily affections such as excessive fatigue and weariness and intercourse and the like.	0.83807373
And let him have present at his seat things with which people are accustomed to use, such as spices, perfumes, music, and similar items, as much as possible.	There should also be in the place where he is sitting such things as are customary for men to enjoy, such as various perfumes, aromatics, and music, and the like, as each one may.	0.78842586
Then let the bloodletter sit on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of the one being bled; afterward, extend his arm, and the bloodletter should rub it with his hand two or three times. Then let him bind the ligament with a strap, and wrap it twice.	Then the venesector should sit on a cushion raised above the cushion of him whose vein is to be opened. Then let him stretch out his arm, and let the venesector chafe it two or three times with his hand; then he should bind a bandage round it by means of thongs twisted two or three times.	0.914671
And let the binding be moderate, for when the binding is uneven, or too tight, it then hinders the flow of blood; or if too loose, it also hinders the flow of blood.	The ligature should be moderately tight, for any other sort of ligature, be it too tight or too loose, will hinder the flow of blood.	0.7474304
Then, after binding, the one to be bled should rub his hands together until the veins are engorged and visible to the touch.	After putting on the tourniquet the patient about to be venesected should chafe his own hands together until the veins swell up and become obvious.	0.76348686
Then the bloodletter should wipe the lancet with a little aged oil.	Then the venesector should wipe over his knife with a little olive-oil, preferably old.	0.68121904
Then he should place the index finger of his left hand slightly on the vein itself below the spot where he intends the bloodletting, so that the vein does not slip away and the incision misses. For among the veins there are some that you find to flee like a string during bloodletting: and among them are those full of air, and when you place the lancet over it, it contracts under the lancet, deceiving the bloodletter, who then does not open the vein; and even if he does open it, it is narrow. Therefore, the bloodletter must be steady and careful in all these things.	Then he should place the forefinger of his left hand on the vessel itself below the place where he wishes to cut, lightly, so that the vein does not slip away and elude the stroke; for there are some veins that you may find like cords slipping away at venesection, while others are filled with flatus and when the knife is applied to them they contract under it and deceive the operator and the knife fails to open the vein or makes only a narrow opening. Wherefore it behoves the venesector to be firm and deliberate in all these cases.	0.9025286
Then he should put down the lancet. If then the vein opens with one attempt, that is good. And if not, then repeat it with another attempt a little below or above that spot, with quickness, unless the area becomes inflamed.	Then he should apply the knife and if the vein is opened first time, good; but if not, let him repeat a little lower down or a little above, quickly, if the place does not swell.	0.87745297
But if the area becomes inflamed, or the patient grows fearful, then leave him for a day or two, and do not tie the binding. For it may draw a warm inflammation. Nor should he enter a bath.	If it does swell or the patient be anxious, then leave him for a day or two and do not bandage, for that might perhaps provoke an abscess; nor let him go to the bath.	0.8409101
Then let him repeat the bloodletting, if he wishes.	Then if he likes, let the venesection be repeated.	0.78754777
But if the opening is small, or the blood flows subtly, and you fear the desired amount may not exit, then insert the lancet again in the same opening straightly and add a bit to the procedure.	If the knife has made an opening but it is small and the flow of blood is feeble and you fear that the amount of blood you require will not come out, then gently insert the knife again straight into the same opening and widen it a little.	0.8050645
And do this quickly, before the area becomes inflamed, for in many people, a small procedure leads to an inflamed area.	Do this speedily before the place swells up; for in many people the place swells up at once from a small opening.	0.7587503
If you see that it is already inflamed, then do not repeat on it at all, for nothing excuses it to you. And place something of the oil sediment on it, for it alleviates the flow of blood. And it is better in this case than oil itself or other oils.	But if you see it swell up, on no account make another incision for it will be ineffectual; but apply to it a little lees of oil, for that will facilitate the flow of blood; it is superior in this situation to the oil itself and to all other unguents.	0.79712224
Similarly, use oil sediment in all your bloodlettings, in which you treat veins with a restriction on blood flow: alfarach antidote and sagzenea do this when one of them is placed on the area.	Therefore use lees of oil in all cases of venesection when the flow of blood is hindered.	0.506137
For the blood is thinned and dissolved when it is thick.	The great theriac and shakhzanaya both have the same effect, for when the blood is thick it is rendered thin and running.	0.48484635
But if a large inflammation occurs at the site of bloodletting, as often happens, especially to one who has only been bled that time, or if the vein opening is small, then quickly place a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly heated, on the area, and press it for an hour, for it will dissolve.	If there occur a big tumour at the site of venesection, as often happens, especially with a man who has not previously undergone venesection or if the opening in the vein be small, then quickly apply to the place a sponge soaked in lukewarm salt and water and bandage it for a while, then it will go down.	0.7825992
And you should do this after the blood has exited from that vein fully, or from another vein.	You should do this after the blood has gone out altogether from the same vessel or from another one.	0.8772125
If, after some days, something dark or green remains in the area, it is not harmful; and if you wish, place on it some dissolved aloe or myrrh, or something of the juice of pennyroyal, that is, calamint or something similar.	If there remain after some days some discoloration or greenness at the site it will not hurt; if you like, apply some solution of myrrh and aloes, or juice of penny-royal or something similar.	0.88145065
And indeed, often inflammations and swellings occur with bloodletting of the Basilic vein.	Often in section of the basilic vein there occurs tumour and swelling.	0.744473
Therefore, place your hand on it, and if you find softness upon your pressing it, then that swelling is bad. Be careful, then, not to place on it anything from what we have mentioned. For blood from the artery may flow from it.	Put your hand upon it, and if you find that it sinks when pressed then it is a harmful swelling; be careful not to apply to it any of the things we have told you; for often arterial blood comes from it.	0.8517623
But make a plaster for it with something astringent, so that the area becomes firm. Then treat it with the remaining treatment until it heals.	But apply a poultice with some styptic qualities, to harden the place; then treat in the usual way until healed.	0.74785167
And you must extract blood from every person according to the measure of his strength. And from what appears as the dominant color in the blood.	Now in each case you should extract blood in proportion to the person's strength and to the prevailing colour of the blood.	0.7022666
For if the blood is black, then let it flow out until it becomes red; similarly, if you see it thick, then let it flow until it becomes thinner; and similarly if it is sharp, until its sharpness is removed.	If the blood be black, let it flow until it becomes red; in the same way, if you see it is thick, let it run until it is thin; and again, if it be sharp, until its sharpness is gone.	0.95584273
And if someone is full, strong, and requires blood extraction all at once, the bloodletting incision should be widened, and the lancet should be broad; and for someone who is weak, the opposite should be done.	In the case that is plethoric, robust, and requiring venesection just the once, the incision should be wide and the knife should be broad. And on the contrary for the debilitated person, in whose case you should venesect several times and the opening should be small.	0.7222227
And it should be drawn out in stages, and the opening should be narrow: the best method in venous bloodletting is a transverse cut, not a puncture.	And on the contrary for the debilitated person, in whose case you should venesect several times and the opening should be small. The best method in venesecting is if the incision be at an angle, oblique, cutting, not piercing.	0.66019666
And this method of bloodletting is safe from excessive blood flow and from cutting a nerve: it is more praiseworthy and safer than bloodletting along the width or length.	This manner of venesecting is safe from haemorrhage and from cutting the nerve; it is better and safer than cutting straight across or straight along.	0.7562703
For one who is accustomed to experiencing fainting during bloodletting, it is necessary to feed him before bloodletting a small amount of bread soaked in water with pomegranate juice, or secaniabin if he is warm; and draw blood from him in three or four sessions.	To the patient who habitually faints during venesection you should give to eat beforehand a little bread macerated in the juice of unripe pomegranates or oxymel, if he be of a warm temperament; and draw off the blood in three or four instalments.	0.8202718
If his constitution is cold, then he should take before the bloodletting bread soaked in syrup of quince, or in syrup of honey aromatized with spices, or in a fragrant aromatic syrup.	And if he be of a cold temperament let him take beforehand bread macerated in syrup of quinces or in aromatic syrup of honey or in fragrant syrup of basil.	0.8245808
But if fainting occurs during bloodletting, and it is due to excessive blood loss, he should then drink meat broth and a fine, fragrant syrup, use aromatics with musk, anoint his chest with it, and use the other remedies we have discussed in the section on fainting from evacuation.	If the patient faints during venesection and the cause is great loss of blood, then be should be given to drink meat-juice and thin syrup of basil; and he should perfume himself with galia moschata and anoint his chest with it. And for the rest, use what we have spoken of in its place in the chapter dealing with fainting due to evacuation.	0.77019906
For one who wishes to let his arm breathe and release blood a second time: if the bloodletting is for significant evacuation and he has weak strength, he should release blood gradually according to his strength over continuous days.	As for him who wishes to ease his arm and draw off blood a second time, when he is undergoing the venesection on account of great evacuation and the lowness of his strength, you should let the blood slowly, in proportion to his strength, on successive days.	0.84123063
However, if he wishes to let his arm breathe and release blood a second time and he is strong, then he should do so after seven or nine hours from his first bloodletting.	For him who wishes to ease his arm and draw off blood a second time, being of robust body, it must be done seven or nine hours from the first venesection.	0.8536172
For one who wishes to draw blood from his body opposite to the side where it tends to accumulate, it should be let on the second or third day.	He who wishes to draw blood from his body to the side opposite to that toward which it tends, should be eased on the second or third day.	0.9392911
But if there is much blood in his body that has already become warm and sharp, causing fever, blood must exit in one session, and a large quantity should be drawn, with the incision widened until fainting occurs, all while observing all the conditions of bloodletting. Place your hand on his pulse during the blood flow, so that death does not occur in place of fainting. For this often happens when the bloodletter is ignorant, and negligence occurs.	He who has abundant blood that has become hot and sharp and has produced fever should be bled at one time, and a large amount should be taken with a wide opening, until he faints (all the rules of venesection having been observed by you); but you should keep your finger on the pulse while the blood flows lest death take the place of fainting, for that often happens when the venesector is ignorant and there is carelessness.	0.820655
And it is not appropriate, when you wish to release the arm and draw blood a second time, with the vein's orifice now closed and the blood's exit becoming difficult, to press on it forcefully and to quickly extend it after bending. For this is very harmful; instead, leave it until it can be bloodlet a second time.	If you wish to loosen the arm and let blood a second time and you find that the opening of the vein is now closed up and the outflow of blood is difficult, you should not press hard upon it nor twist the arm violently, for that is very harmful.	0.86058366
Or carefully remove what has coagulated from the blood in the vein’s opening, and place on it something of salt dissolved in water. And place on it something from alfaroch or sagzenea, applying it with gentle compression until the blood exits.	Either you must leave him a while and then bleed him again; or the clot of blood can be removed from the opening of the vein by using the blade of the scalpel, or by applying some salt dissolved in water; or apply some of the great theriac or shakhzanaya; and put light pressure upon it until the blood comes out.	0.7135508
But if the vein is already inflamed, then leave it and do not cover it until the inflammation subsides.	But if the vein has begun to swell, leave it and do not touch it until the swelling has subsided.	0.87267625
If necessity demands releasing blood a second time and there is no excuse, then either bloodlet above that spot or on the other arm in a different vein.	And if you are unavoidably called to let blood again, venesect either above the place or in the other arm or another vessel.	0.7766694
The cord of the arm is bloodlet at the location of the Fusca and Basilic veins, when they cannot be found and are hidden, as it is formed from them.	Section of the cord of the arm: this is cut in place of the median and basilic veins when these are not to be found or are hidden; for this vein is composed of those two.	0.6532994
And the manner of this bloodletting is that the patient should place his hand in warm water until the palm reddens, and the vein becomes clearly visible.	The way to venesect it is for the patient to dip his hand in hot water until the forearm is red from the warmth and the vessel stands out distinctly.	0.82049894
Then it should be lightly bound over the vein with moderate constriction. Then, bloodlet it gradually across, not horizontally nor lengthwise; the opening should be wide, and your incision for bloodletting should be slightly above the wrist joint.	Then bandage a little above it with a moderate pressure, and then cut the vein a little obliquely, neither transversely nor longitudinally. The incision should be broad, and you should make the cut a little above the wrist.	0.90481853
If the blood flow is restricted, then immerse the hand in warm water again, and let the blood flow into the water until you achieve your goal.	If the blood does not flow easily, have the hand again put into the vessel of hot water and let the blood flow into the water until you have extracted what is needed.	0.7696028
If it is during the summer, then you are excused from reimmersing the hand in warm water. And indeed, the flow of blood is most often placed in warm water during winter.	If it be in the summer time you may be able to dispense with putting the hand back into the hot water; it is mainly in winter that you let the blood flow into hot water.	0.89679
Bloodletting from this vein is safer than from all other veins, as there is no pulsating vein or nerve beneath it.	Venesection of this vessel is safer than all others for beneath it there is neither artery nor nerve.	0.90900254
Bloodletting from the Salvatella vein of the right hand is beneficial for liver ailments.	Section of the salvatella of the right hand is efficacious in case of diseases of the liver.	0.8042207
The manner of this bloodletting is to bind the mahason of the hand with a band or your own hand, after immersing it in warm water until the vein swells and becomes easily palpable. Then, bloodlet it by making a transverse incision. And if you cut it entirely, it will cause no harm at all.	The method of venesecting it is to tie a band round the wrist or grip it with your hand, after you have put it in hot water until the vein is swollen up and is plainly to be felt; then cut it somewhat obliquely; if you cut it right through that will not matter at all.	0.8397144
Take care not to apply excessive pressure with your hand when using the bloodletting instrument. For beneath it lie the finger nerves, exposed without much flesh.	But be careful not to go too far with the knife, for underneath there are the tendons of the fingers and the place is bare of flesh.	0.6793333
Then, immerse the hand in warm water again and allow the blood to flow into it. If you do not immerse it again in warm water, the blood coagulates in the vein’s opening, blocking the flow.	Then put the hand again into hot water and let the blood flow; for if you do not put it into hot water again the blood will clot in the opening and will be prevented from flowing.	0.9080522
Once you have drawn the necessary amount of blood, apply oil and salt to the vein to prevent rapid closure.	When you have extracted the required quantity of blood, put oil and salt on the vein so that it does not heal too quickly.	0.8989113
And you should do likewise with any narrow branch vein.	You should act thus with every narrow branch.	0.78272855
The benefit of bloodletting from the left hand is that it aids ailments of the spleen; perform this bloodletting in the same way as for the right hand.	Incision of the salvatella of the left hand is of value in diseases of the spleen. Venesection of it should be carried out in the same manner as you did in the other.	0.6554858
Bloodletting from the saphenous vein is beneficial for ailments in the lower body, such as uterine conditions, menstrual retention, kidney ailments, chronic ulcers on the hips and legs, and similar conditions.	Venesection of the saphena is beneficial in diseases of the lower part of the body, such as afflictions of the uterus and retention of the menses, and for diseases of the kidneys, and for chronic ulcers of the hips and legs, and similar diseases.	0.8784815
The manner of bloodletting from this vein is for the patient to place his foot in warm water and rub it until the veins swell, then bind it above the ankle with a strap. The location of the vein is near the heel, appearing toward the big toe, and it branches out with many branches over the surface of the foot.	Now the manner of venesection is for the patient to put his foot in hot water, then friction should be applied to it until the veins fill up; then bind a thong over the joint of the foot; then the site of the vein at the ankle is shown up running toward the big toe and forming many branches on the surface of the foot.	0.8564265
Bloodlet from a larger branch of it, or at its cluster near the heel, as this is better and safer.	Then make your incision either in the broadest branch or at the ankle before it ramifies, for that is better and safer.	0.69264746
If you bloodlet it from the top of the foot, take care to avoid the nerves that lie beneath the surface.	If you venesect it on the surface of the foot, be careful of the tendons that are beneath on the surface of the foot.	0.78702044
And position your incision for bloodletting transversely, as if you intend to cut it; the incision should be Nesil.	Make the incision obliquely as though you were cutting the vein through. The knife should be a lancet.	0.6733908
If the blood flow is restricted, immerse the foot in warm water again and let the blood flow into it until evacuated.	If the flow of blood be impeded, put the foot back again into hot water and let the blood flow out into it until it is evacuated.	0.9602288
If the bloodletter misses the vein on the first try, then retry slightly above, as the area is safe, and there is no need to worry about harm if you avoid the nerves as instructed.	If the venesector makes a mistake the first time in the vein to be cut, let him repeat the section a little higher up, for the.place is safe; you need fear no mischief as long as you are careful of the tendons, as we said before.	0.7737705
Do likewise for the saphenous vein of the other foot.	In the same way you may deal with the saphena of the other foot.	0.7395959
The location of the sciatic vein, as we have said, is near the heel on the outer side.	Now the position of the sciatic vein is, as we said, on the outside near the heel.	0.8683418
Bloodletting from it relieves hip pain when caused by hot blood.	Section of it is effective in pain in the hip when it arises from hot blood.	0.7606766
The manner of bloodletting is for the patient to enter a bath and hurry, then tie his leg from the side of the hip down to above the heel with a long, narrow band four fingers wide, as it is not visible otherwise.	The way to venesect it is to make the patient get into the bath. Then hasten and bandage his leg from the hip to a distance of four fingers above the heel, with a long narrow bandage; for only this will cause it to appear.	0.8000775
When it becomes visible, bloodlet it in whatever way you find possible, or transversely, which is better, or by making a cut or incision. Its location is safer, and in most people, it is very concealed.	When it has appeared then open it in whatever way you can; at an angle, which is best, or right through, or only cut it open, for it is a safe place.	0.72851807
Its location is safer, and in most people, it is very concealed. If you cannot find it and it is entirely hidden to the senses, then bloodlet from one of its branches, namely the one that appears on the top of the foot toward the little toe; avoid the nerves, and allow the desired amount of blood to flow.	But in many people it is very hard to find; and if you do not find it or it is in no way palpable, then venesect one of its branches, which will be seen on the surface of the foot towards the fourth toe and the little toe. Be careful of the tendons, and let the amount of blood you require.	0.697571
Then loosen the binding, place leather over the bloodletting site, and bind the area. It will heal quickly.	Then loosen the bandage and apply cotton wool to the site of the section and bandage the place; it will heal quickly.	0.8385799

chapter-2-subchapter-96.txt
On Cupping and the nature of its use.	On cupping and the manner of employing it.	0.8287033
Cups are made from horns, metal, and glass.	Cupping-vessels are made of horn, wood, bronze, or glass.	0.665661
And cupping is indeed done in two ways. With scarification and blood extraction; and the other is cupping without scarification.	Cupping is carried out in two ways: one with scarification and drawing blood, and the other without scarification.	0.8527261
And this cupping, which is without scarification, is also done in two ways. For it is either with fire. Or it is without fire.	The latter, cupping without scarification, may be carried out in two ways: with fire and without fire.	0.71421915
And indeed, cupping does not draw blood from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and therefore the strength does not diminish from them, as it does in phlebotomy. Nor is it appropriate to administer cupping, either with fire or without fire, for any illness caused by fullness, until the entire body is evacuated.	What cupping does is to draw blood out of the fine vessels dispersed over the flesh; for this reason it does not cause the strength to decline as does venesection; nor may you use cupping, either with fire or without fire, in any disease due to plethora, until the whole body has been evacuated.	0.86060923
But if a need for cupping arises due to illness or habit, we administer it at any time, at the beginning of the month, at its end, and in its middle, and at any other time.	If disease or custom prescribe cupping we may apply it at any hour, at the beginning or end or middle of the month, at whatever time it may be.	0.82065177
For there are people in whom, when blood multiplies to the extent that cupping extraction is needed, they experience heaviness and dizziness in their head.	For there are some people who, when there is an abundance of blood in them, so as to need cupping, feel heaviness and pain in the head.	0.91913176
And some of them feel fullness and redness in their face, head, and neck. And some of them experience itching in their face and forehead, dimness, and dullness in their eyes.	Some find they have a fullness and redness of the face and also of the head and neck; some have an itching in their face and forehead and a dimness and irritation in their eyes.	0.9247435
And some of them experience an increase in laughter. And some of them taste blood in their mouth; or their tongue swells, and they spit blood. And some of them experience an increase in sleep. And some of them see blood and redness, the dead, wounds, and similar things in their dreams.	There are some who scratch the places where the cupping-vessels are applied; some laugh immoderately; some find a taste of blood in the mouth, and the gums swell up and they spit blood; some sleep overmuch; some frequently dream of seeing blood and redness and murdered men and wounds and the like.	0.82293165
When, therefore, we observe any of these signs, particularly if it is in the middle third of the month, we then order cupping to be performed after two or three hours of the day have passed.	So when we see anything of this kind, and especially if it be in the middle third of the month, we thereupon prescribe cupping after the second or third hour of the day has passed.	0.9082746
The benefit of cupping the nape is that it relieves heaviness in the head and benefits the eyes. However, it should be done after the entire body has been evacuated.	The effect of cupping the nape of the neck is to help in heaviness of the head and in a fluxion of humours into the eyes; but it should be done after a complete evacuation of the body.	0.8471216
And this cup indeed serves in place of the cephalic phlebotomy.	This use of cupping may take the place of venesection of the cephalic vein.	0.5454898
And it is not permitted for those of cold complexion, or those with catarrh, to use it. For it brings great harm to them.	But anyone suffering from coldness of the brain or catarrh should beware of using it, for this will cause serious harm.	0.6596872
And for this reason, the elderly and those with cold illnesses in the head should not use it.	So it should not be employed on old men or on anyone suffering from a cold disease of the head.	0.8003342
And whoever uses it frequently will develop forgetfulness.	If anyone becomes addicted to it it brings about oblivion.	0.57412803
And because of this, you should instruct the cupper to lower his hand with the cup a bit, for fear of causing forgetfulness.	You should therefore bid the cupper bring the cupping-vessel a little lower down lest oblivion supervene.	0.6490227
The cupping of Alkehel serves as an alternative to dark and basilic phlebotomy, and thus it helps with asthma, difficulty in breathing, fissures of the respiratory organ, cough, and fullness.	Now as to the application of cupping-vessels to the interscapular region: it is instead of venesection of the median and basilic veins; so it is effective for asthma and dyspnoea and for rupture of the organ of respiration, and for cough and plethora.	0.50970316
And the Alkehel cup should be applied gently, for if it is placed too low, it weakens the heart and stomach.	The cupping of the interscapular region should be made a little high, for if it is too low it will bring about weakness of the heart and stomach.	0.58760786
The cupping of Alhagdahim helps with pains occurring in the head, eye inflammations, migraines, perforations, and pain at the roots of the teeth; and it serves as an alternative to basilic phlebotomy.	Cupping the sides of the neck helps in pains occurring in the head, ophthalmia, migraine, and in quinsy and in pain at the roots of the teeth; it replaces venesection of the basilic vein.	0.802181
And you should instruct the cupper not to press his hand during scarification, so that he does not cut an artery and cause a blood flow.	And you should bid the cupper not to scarify very deeply lest he cut an artery and cause haemorrhage.	0.785759
Cupping under the chin benefits conditions in the mouth, such as ulcers and gum disease, and similar illnesses in the mouth; it serves in place of the phlebotomy of alieherich, which is in the two lips.	The application of cupping under thé chin helps against ulcers in the mouth and corruption of the gums and similar diseases of the mouth ; and may replace venesection of the four labial vessels.	0.69550896
Cupping on the shoulder blades benefits alchafacham, which arises from fullness and heat.	The application of cupping to the shoulders helps in palpitation of the heart arising from plethora and heat.	0.6462008
Cupping on the inner parts of the two elbows serves as an aid to the phlebotomy of the three veins: basilic, dark, and cephalic; for it draws blood from all the small veins in the flesh, and these small veins draw from the larger veins, until the attraction reaches the three main veins.	The application of cupping to the inside of the forearms helps in place of venesection of the three veins, namely the basilic, median, and cephalic; for it draws blood from all the capillaries of the flesh. These capillaries draw blood from other larger veins till the drawing reaches those three great veins.	0.86832964
And you should instruct the cupper not to cut too deeply in scarification, for the area is exposed without much flesh, and underneath it are nerves and arteries.	You should bid the person who applies the vessels not to scarify deeply; for the place is bare of flesh and there are tendons and arteries beneath.	0.7746023
The cup placed over alchausos benefits hemorrhoids of the anus and lower ulcers.	The application of a single cupping-vessel to the coccyx is effective for haemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers of the lower abdomen.	0.60213464
And you should instruct the cupper to use a large cup made of metal, for the area requires strong suction, and delicate cups might break; and it should be deeply scarified.	You must tell the cupper that the cupping-vessel should be large and of bronze, for the place requires strong suction, and a glass cupping-vessel may break; and he should scarify deeply.	0.8342465
Cupping on the thighs brings significant reduction, for it draws blood from the whole body, and it helps with chronic pains in the kidneys, womb, and bladder; it stimulates menstruation, and helps with bothor and ademenul; and it serves as a substitute for the phlebotomy of the two saphenous veins and alhorcobeni.	Cupping applied to both legs reduces plethora manifestly, because it draws off blood from the whole body, and so is beneficial for chronic pains in the kidneys and uterus and bladder; and brings on the menses. It also serves for pustules and boils; and takes the place of venesection of the saphenous veins and the heel-veins.	0.8771367
However, it weakens the body greatly and causes fainting in many people.	But it greatly exhausts the body and causes fainting in most people.	0.9178747
And the benefit of the alhorcobeni cupping is similar to that of cupping on the two thighs.	The advantage of cupping of the heel-veins is much the same as that of the legs.	0.556719
The method of placing the cups is as follows: first place the cup empty, and draw with moderate suction; do not leave the cups in place for too long, but apply and remove them quickly, so that the humors come to the site with a balanced flow; and continue repeating this until you see the area becoming red and swollen, and the redness of blood appears; then scarify, and gradually repeat the suction. Then consider the condition of the bodies.	The way to apply the cupping-vessels: the vessel is first put in position empty; then you suck moderately; do not long hold the cupping-vessel in place, but apply it quickly and remove it quickly so that the humours gather evenly at the place; and go on doing it time after time until the place is seen to redden and to swell, and the redness of blood is manifested. Then scarify, and repeat the suction very gently; then consider the bodily condition.	0.927631
For a person with tender flesh and sparse pores should be scarified only once, no more, so that the area does not ulcerate.	The person who is tender of flesh and porous of skin you should scarify once only, not more, lest the place ulcerate.	0.8888454
And instruct the cupper to make a larger scarification and to cut slightly deeper, and to adjust the suction with ease, speed, and gentle movement.	Tell him who applies the cupping-vessels to scarify rather widely and deeply, and to control the suction with gentleness and a delicate motion.	0.73771656
If the blood is thick, then scarify twice. In the first instance, the path is opened to refine and thin the blood; and in the second, to precisely extract the thicker blood.	If there be a thickness of the blood he should scarify twice; the first time to make a way out for the thinner blood and serum; and the second time to complete the extraction of the thick blood.	0.8383798
If the blood is very impure, then perform a third scarification to reach the final goal.	If the blood be very turbid let him scarify a third time for completion.	0.7800119
And finally, when we wish to extract blood gradually, or in a small amount, one scarification is sufficient. But if we want to extract a large amount of blood, we scarify several times.	In general, one scarification is enough when we wish to draw a little thick blood; but if we wish to draw much blood we make more scarifications.	0.8010632
And if we determine that the blood is thick, then it should be deeply scarified; the proper depth in scarification is the thickness of the skin.	If we judge that the blood is thick we should scarify deeply. A fair depth for the scarification is the thickness of the skin, and no more.	0.8477086
What should be applied in oils at the time of placing the cups, and what the person to be cupped should avoid.	The oils and water to be used in applying cupping-vessels, and what he who is to be cupped should avoid.	0.7483785
For one whose skin is thick, tough, dark, and whose pores are tight, it is necessary to anoint the places to be cupped with opening, softening, and resolving oils; if it is summertime, use oils such as alkeiri oil, violet oil, sweet almond oil, or gourd seed oil.	He whose skin is thick, solid, desiccated, and narrow of pore: the operator should anoint the place with opening and emollient and resolving oils; if it be in the summer season, with, for example, oil of yellow gilliflower or of violets or of sweet almonds or of pumpkin-seeds.	0.83225495
And if it is winter, then use daffodil oil, lily oil, chamomile oil, or sarbatinum oil, and the like.	If it be in winter, with narcissus oil or oil of lilies or camomile oil, or of jasmine, or the like.	0.8243292
If, however, the excess is thick and cold, then use oil of marjoram, balm oil, alben oil, or dill oil, and the like.	And if the superfluity be thick and cold, then with oil of marjoram or oil of wild thyme or oil of ben or oil of dill.	0.7324491
If, however, the person to be cupped has wide pores and tender flesh, then he should avoid oil, and instead wash the places to be cupped after cupping with rose water, cold water, nightshade water, gourd water, purslane water, and similar things.	If he who is to be cupped has wide-open pores and tender flesh, he should be forbidden oil. After cupping, such people should wash the sites with rose-water or cold water or water of black nightshade or of gourds or of garden purslain, or the like.	0.8166566
The one whose blood is very moist should wash the cups with vinegar, myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.	But he whose blood is very humid should wash the sites of his cupping with vinegar or water of myrtle or sumac, and the like.	0.8079642
But one whose excess is thick should wash his cups with aged wine, elderflower water, dill decoction, chamomile, and the like.	He that has thick superfluities should wash the sites of his cupping with old wine or water of purslain or decoction of dill or of camomile or the like.	0.781558
And cupping should be avoided in the bath, or immediately after the bath; rather, it should be done an hour or two after leaving the bath.	One should beware of cupping in the bath or just after the bath, but should use the vessels one or two hours after leaving the bath.	0.84365225
And one should not sleep after cupping.	And no one should sleep after cupping.	0.95138884
What should be observed for the person to be cupped or phlebotomized before cupping.	The correct procedure to be observed before and after cupping by him who is to be cupped or venesected.	0.6698997
And afterward, it is necessary to consider first: if the cupped or phlebotomized person is choleric and sharpness and inflammation prevail in his blood, then he should take cooling agents, such as pomegranate muzum, as well as endive with vinegar, lettuce, sekaniabin, julep, and the like.	It is necessary for you first to consider, and if he that is to be cupped or venesected be bilious, and bitterness and inflammation prevail in his blood, he should take cooling things such as pomegranates and endive with vinegar and lettuce and oxymel and julep, and the like.	0.7894401
And his food should be chicken, lamb meat prepared sekebiget-style, and foods seasoned with verjuice, and the like.	His diet should be chicken and mutton made into stews with vinegar, and soups with verjuice, and the like.	0.8249274
And for one whose temperament is cold, he should drink syrup of honey, almiua, or alsecaniabin made from seeds; he should drink fragrant wine of medium age, between old and new, and be instructed to consume food sparingly. And his food should be chicken, partridge, sparrows, that is, small birds, and young pigeons prepared issiadebet-style.	The man of frigid constitution should drink syrup of honey or syrup of quince or spiced oxymel; he should also take perfumed raisin wine, not too old and not too new; he should be bidden to be moderate in eating and should make his diet young pullets and larks and sparrows and young pigeons in white stews.	0.8230866
On the day of cupping or phlebotomy, drink should be more than food; and it is necessary that some people take tyriaca alfaroch in drink, or a medicine of musk, that is, nutmeg, or alesselithe before cupping and before or after phlebotomy, to strengthen the main organs and refine the blood. And they should not take it in heated drink.	And on the day of cupping and venesection he should drink rather than eat. It may sometimes be necessary to have some people drink the great theriac or musk-medicine or shllitha before cupping and before or after venesection, to strengthen the chief parts and to render the blood thin; but these draughts should not be given to the feverish.	0.8306749
On cupping without scarification. Cups without scarification are those placed over the liver, spleen, gouty areas, stomach, navel, the regions of the kidneys, and the hip socket, because these parts do not tolerate scarification.	Cupping without scarification is the cupping practised on the liver, the spleen, the breasts, the belly, the umbilicus, the region of the kidneys and the acetabulum of the femur; for these parts do not tolerate scarification.	0.8503745
Their purpose is to transfer the humor from one part of the body to another; as when we place a cup over the breasts in the condition of nasal blood flow. And we use them to release cold trapped wind in a part; as when we place a cup over the stomach and navel. This thins and warms the part, and removes pain by resolving the trapped wind.	Now the purpose of the vessels is either to draw blood from one part to another, as when we apply cups over the breasts in the case of nose-bleed; or to loosen from the part a frigid vapour that has become fixed in it, as when we place cupping-vessels on the abdomen and umbilicus; for they stimulate the part and warm it and remove the pain because they loosen the vapour.	0.8720248
It is also placed over the kidneys when there is obstruction or a stone in them. By the strength of its attraction, it may open the obstruction or dislodge the stone from its place.	Sometimes they are applied over the kidneys when there is an obstruction or stones in them; for often, by virtue of their drawing, the obstruction is opened up or the stones are dislodged from their site.	0.80092824
It works similarly when placed over the liver and spleen to dispel wind trapped in both.	They act in the same way when they are applied over the liver and the spleen when flatus is permeating them.	0.6759461
These cups are applied empty with section only. And sometimes they are applied with fire.	These cupping-vessels may be used empty with suction only; or they may be used with fire.	0.7133348
And sometimes they are applied filled with warm water for conditions of pleurisy; this involves filling a large cup with hot water alone, or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.	Sometimes in pleuritic complaints they are applied filled with tepid water. This is done by filling the vessel, which should be large, with plain hot water, or with hot water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.	0.8626357
The form of a cupping glass applied with fire.	This is the figure of the cupping-vessel for use with fire.	0.5980516
The opening of the cupping glass should be about the width of two open fingers, as we have specified, and its depth should be about half a palm. In the side, approximately at the middle, there should be a small hole, large enough for a needle to enter. It should be made from brass or citrine metal, with thick, smooth, and even edges so as not to injure the body when applied. In the center, there should be a crosswise rod made of brass or iron, on which a candle with a flame can be placed.	Its mouth should be the width of two opened fingers, as we have illustrated; the depth should be half a span; and in the side about halfway down there should be a small hole of a size to admit a needle. It should be made of Chinese bronze or of brass. The edge should be thick, smooth, even, and polished, so as not to injure the part to which it is applied. And in the middle there should be a transverse rod of bronze or iron to carry the lighted lamp.	0.88961387
This cup should be larger than the ones described earlier, though slightly smaller in some cases, depending on the illness and the age of the user.	You may make this kind of cupping-vessel in a large size, larger than we have described; and in a small size too, to suit various ailments and the age of the user.	0.6759443
The cups used for children and those with thin bodies are different from those used for adults and those with larger bodies.	For the cupping-vessels for boys and thin persons differ from those for men and stout persons.	0.67956305
To apply this cup with fire to the body, ignite a small wick made from linen or a small wax candle, and place it in the middle of the transverse rod in the center of the cupping glass. This should produce flame near the lower part of the cupping glass, ensuring the patient’s body is not burned.	Now this is the manner of applying this cupping-vessel with fire to a part of the body. You set light to a strongly twisted wick of linen or a small wax candle, and you set it on the middle of the cross-piece in the middle of the vessel so that the flame be directed toward the lower part of the cupping vessel and not burn the patient's body.	0.8636664
Then place the cup on the body, keeping a finger over the small hole previously mentioned. When the cup is in position and ready, remove your finger, allowing steam to escape through the hole, and the cup will release immediately.	Then the vessel should be placed on the part with the finger kept over the above-mentioned hole; then when we have held the vessel sufficiently long there the finger is taken away, the vapour will come out through the hole, and the vessel will become loosened at once.	0.7838673
Then, if necessary, reignite the wick as described and reapply the cup.	Then light the wick as prescribed and repeat if necessary.	0.8480193
In the case of a cup applied for pleurisy and filled with water, there is no transverse rod or small hole. It is used only by filling it with water and placing it directly on the body.	But the cupping-vessel that is used in pleurisy, with water, has no cross-piece nor hole; it is used by simply filling with water and applying to the part.	0.75483626
This is its form.	This is the figure of it.	0.79917926
The larger this cup is, allowing it to hold more water, the more effective it is.	Now the larger this cupping-vessel is, to hold much water, the better.	0.79269636

chapter-2-subchapter-97.txt
On the application of leeches.	On the application of leeches.	1.0000002
Leeches are not applied in many places, except in areas where cupping is not possible due to their small size, such as the lip, gum, and similar areas. Or in parts lacking flesh, such as the finger, nose, and similar areas.	Leeches are mostly used on those parts of the body to which application of cupping-vessels is impossible, either because of their smallness, such as the lips, the gums, and so on; or because the part is bare of flesh, like the finger, the nose, and so on.	0.85198617
The quality of leeches to be used is that they come from fresh waters, free from impurities.	This is the way to use them: you seek some leeches that are in fresh water free of dirt.	0.47151813
Then, let them stay day and night in fresh water, until they are hungry, and nothing remains in their stomachs. Then cleanse the body first with bloodletting and cupping. Then cleanse the affected area until it is red. Afterwards, place them on it.	Then you leave them in fresh water for a day and a night until they are hungry and nothing is left in their bellies; then you purge the patient's body, either by venesection or by the application of cupping vessels; then you scrub the afflicted part until it is flushed; and then place the leeches on it.	0.8299803
When they are full and fall off, if suction at the site with a cup is possible, this is more beneficial; if not, wash the site with vinegar. Then with plenty of water, rub and squeeze it.	When they are full they will fall off. If it is possible to make suction with a cupping vessel, the effect will be greater. But if not, wash the part with vinegar followed by much water; then rub and put pressure on it.	0.8581699
If the blood flow continues after the leeches fall off, and it seeps, then soak a linen cloth in cold water and place it on top, until the seepage stops.	If the blood continues to run after the leeches have fallen off, and becomes an ooze, let linen dressings be wetted with cold water and apply them over the place until the oozing stops.	0.9105661
If the blood increases, then sprinkle powdered alum or galls or similar astringents over it, until the bleeding stops.	But if the bleeding be serious then sprinkle upon the place powdered vitriol or gall or similar styptics, until the haemorrhage is stopped.	0.7731663
Or place halves of peeled beans over the site and leave them until the beans adhere, for the bleeding will stop.	Or let split shelled beans be applied to the place and left until they stick there, and then the bleeding will stop.	0.8420596
If the repetition of leech application is necessary, they should be changed when possible.	If it is necessary to repeat the application, the same leech should not be applied but another one if you possibly can.	0.76897943
If leeches are prevented from adhering, then clean the site with fresh blood. Or insert a needle at the site until some blood flows out. Then place them, for as soon as they sense some blood, they will immediately adhere.	If the leeches fail to stick on, the place should be wiped over with fresh blood or pricked with a needle to bring out a little blood; then apply them, for if they smell any blood they will immediately adhere.	0.91142356
When you want them to fall off, sprinkle powdered aloe, salt, or ashes over them, and they will fall off immediately.	When you wish to remove them, sprinkle over them a little powdered aloes or salt or ashes, then they will at once fall away.	0.8895814

chapter-3.txt
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine and concerns the restoration of fractures and dislocations in bones.	This third part of the book, too, is an essential necessity in the practice of medicine; it concerns the setting of the fracture or dislocation occurring in bones.	0.6786481
Know, O Sons, that foolish doctors and the common people boast of this chapter, though they have never looked into any ancient book nor read a single letter from it.	You should know, my sons, that ignorant practitioners and laymen and those who have never turned the pages of a single book of the Ancients about it, nor studied a single letter of it, arrogate this part of the art to themselves.	0.74832016
And for this reason, this method of knowledge is deprived in our land. And I have never found anything good in it, nor did I gain anything from it except through extensive reading of ancient books and studying their understanding, until I extracted its knowledge from them.	For this reason this section of the science has died out in our parts; I have myself found no one competent in it; and whatever skill I have, I have derived for myself by my long reading of the books of the Ancients and my thirst to understand them until I extracted the knowledge of it from them.	0.7865242
Then I applied myself to experimentation and study throughout my life.	Then through the whole of my life I have adhered to experience and practice.	0.8794961
And now I have written for you in this chapter all that my knowledge contains on this matter, based on my experiments, after I have abbreviated it for you, freed it from unnecessary length, abbreviated it to the point of abbreviation, and demonstrated it clearly; I have also designed many forms of instruments used in it, with added details, as I did in the two preceding chapters.	So now I have described for you in this book all that my knowledge has encompassed on the subject and that my experience has encountered; I have made it accessible for you and rescued it from the abyss of prolixity; I have reduced it to a brief outline; and have explained it most clearly. I have made for you many drawings of the instruments that are used in it, which is an adjunct to explanation, as I did in the two previous books.	0.8708003

chapter-3-subchapter-1.txt
Chapter 2.	CHAPTER ONE.	0.61302435
It is necessary that we state in the prologue of this chapter the main points and headings, so that the practitioner is directed first to an understanding of their truth, so that you, and those who are eager, may know or learn this noble art, and others from you.	Before we begin to speak of the fractures and dislocations of individual members we must, as an introduction to this book, give the general and particular information which compels your understanding and your being versed in it; both you and anyone else beside who is eager to learn this noble art.	0.6994334
I say, therefore, that when someone suffers a fracture, dislocation, twist, or fall, it is necessary first to hasten to bloodletting and relaxing the patient, or both together, unless something prevents it, such as weakness of strength, or if the patient is a child or very old person, or if it is a time of intense heat or intense cold.	So I say that when anyone has sustained a fracture or dislocation or luxation or fall, you should first hasten to venesect him, or get his bowel open, or both, if there be nothing to hinder such as physical weakness, or unless it be a small boy or a very old man to whom an accident of this kind has happened; or unless the weather be excessively hot or cold.	0.84849083
Then be moderate in food, with cool vegetables and the meats of birds and kids; prohibit wine and heavy meats and foods that fill the veins with blood. Until you are sure that there is no risk of hot swelling and do not fear the spreading of matter to a limb, then let the patient return to his original diet to which he is accustomed.	Next, let his diet be restricted to cold vegetables and the flesh of fowl and kids; he is to be forbidden wine and rich meat and gluttony and all foods that fill out the blood-vessels, until you are sure that there is no abscess and see no reason to suspect a flux of matter to the place. Then let the patient return to his former diet according to his custom.	0.8779608
When the broken bone begins to heal, then it is necessary to feed the patient with nourishing foods that are substantial, thick, and heavy, with a certain viscosity, such as porridge made from wheat cooked with water, rice, heads, feet, and stomachs of cows, eggs, and fresh fish, along with thick wine and similar items. With this regimen, the bone fracture consolidates more quickly and effectively.	When the broken bone has begun to mend, the patient should be nourished with very nourishing food, fat, strong, having some glutinous property, such as porridge, rice, heads, trotters, the tripe of cows, eggs, fresh fish, heavy wine, and the like; for on this diet the mending of the fracture will be quicker and better.	0.89782214
And you should know that broken bones, when in men of advanced or very old age, cannot always rejoin and consolidate fully due to the dryness of their tissues; they consolidate and join in a less firm manner than those in young children.	You should know that fractures occurring in mature and old people cannot join and mend into the original condition, on account of the dryness and hardness of their bones; though any bones that are extremely soft, like those of infants, may make a union and heal.	0.8614385
Yet nature attaches something like glue on all sides of the broken bone, where there is thickness, so that it adheres and holds it, until the parts coalesce and bind together, restoring it to full strength and firmness as it was initially, until nothing hinders its function. For this reason, it is necessary to provide the patient with food that is heavy, viscous, and thick, as we have said.	Yet nature produces around the bone on all sides something like glue, with a certain viscosity, with whose help it joins, and it binds so that one part adheres to the other and they are linked to one another until it be good and firm as it had been before; so that there is no impediment to any of its functions. It is on this account that the patient's food should be the sort that has solidity and glueyness and thickness, as we have said.	0.905617
And know that types of fractures differ according to the diversity of body parts: a leg fracture is different from a skull fracture; a fracture of the chest bone differs from that of the spine; similarly, all remaining parts vary from one another. I will cover every type of fracture, each presented in its chapter, distinct from the others. And the types of bone fractures themselves vary as well.	You should know that there are as many different types of fracture as there are members. Thus a fracture of the leg bone differs from a fracture of the cranium; and a fracture of the breast bone differs from a fracture of the bone of the back; and similarly there are differences among the other parts. We shall give an exposition of each kind of fracture, each in its own chapter and distinguished from the others.	0.9000407
For sometimes it breaks in an arched manner, in addition to splintering. Sometimes the bone fractures along its length; and it splinters into shards and projections, as in a reed when sharpened with a knife for writing. Others do not project outward; there is the fracture with a wound and rupture in the skull, and a small fissure fracture.	The fracture of each bone also has its own variations; for the fracture may be a clean break without splintering; or the fracture may be along the bone, with splinters and projections which may be sharp or may not; and the fracture may involve a wound and a laceration of the skin; and the fracture may be a crack.	0.69093996
Each type has its own method or tool for repair, which will be discussed in detail in its respective place.	Each kind has its own special technique of setting which will be mentioned in detail, each in its place.	0.78228986
One way to recognize a bone fracture is by its twisting, its prominence, its perceptible appearance, and the sound it makes when you press on it with your hand.	Among the diagnostic signs of a broken bone are: distortion, protrusion, the aspect of it, and the crepitus when you press on it with the hand.	0.6175878
Therefore, when there is no apparent twisting in the area, no sound at the touch when you move the bone, and the patient feels no great pain, then there is no fracture; it may be a twist or a small fissure. In such cases, avoid moving it or applying pressure at all. Instead, apply the suitable medications, which will be discussed later, and then bind it gently.	When there is no obvious distortion or crepitus at the site, nor do you feel movement when you manipulate the bone, and the patient does not experience severe pain, there is no fracture there. But it is possible that there is a luxation or a slight fracture or a little crack; so you must not disturb it with any extension or pressure, but apply one of the remedies suitable to the site, such as will be described later; then bind up gently.	0.88238704
And know that when the place curves and splits into two, even if injuries happen there, nevertheless, each part is separated from its counterpart. Then it is necessary for you to begin immediately to set it straight, aligning it before a hot abscess forms there.	If the bone is parted and broken in two and there is no fragmentation but a simple separation of one part from its fellow, then you should lose no time in straightening and aligning it before an abscess sets in.	0.6606549
But if a hot abscess does form, then leave it for several days until the abscess subsides. Then set it straight in whatever way you can, with gentleness and skill.	If an abscess does set in, then let a few days pass until it has subsided; then gently and skilfully straighten it in whatever way you can.	0.8188702
And know that the repair and alignment of it is easier than that of bone, in which injuries occur.	You should know that the setting or alignment of this is easier than that of a splintered bone.	0.60290647
Then bind it, as it comes back to your memory.	Then bandage as will be prescribed.	0.43917298
If, however, there are dislocations in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from both sides, whether it be a hand or foot: with your hand if the limb is small, or with two ropes, or with a rope and a hand.	But if the bone is splintered, extension from either side is necessary, whether it be hand or foot; with your own hands if it be a small member, or with two ropes or with one hand and a rope.	0.88070023
And let your position be such that you place the limb on a level place, in its natural shape, until the parts of the broken limb are extended: then try to restore those protrusions to their places by every means you can manage: and take care, with all your strength, that neither pain nor injury falls upon the patient due to your operation: and try, to the best of your ability, to apply one of the two bones to its companion, according to the best shapes.	You should place the part on a flat surface in its natural attitude so that when both parts of the broken bone have been extended you can try to restore the fragments to their proper place with all the skill and gentleness possible; and do your utmost to ensure that the patient experience no pain or distress as you operate. Try diligently to get one part of the bone fitted in the best form to the other.	0.8631466
And at that time, you must test and touch it with your hand. If, therefore, you see something different there, set it straight and align it to the best of your ability.	At the same time you should palpate and investigate both of them with your hand, and if you find anything wrong then mend it and straighten it to the best of your ability.	0.71816987
And beware of vigorous extension and strong compression, as many fools do. For often they cause, by that operation of theirs, a hot abscess or a contraction in the limb, as we have already seen from their operations many times.	But avoid violent extension or compression which many ignorant people apply; for by doing so they often cause abscess or crippling in the limb, as I myself have many times seen.	0.8050103
Then, after alignment, suitable operation, and securing of that limb, and rest, and tranquility, instruct the patient concerning it. And make him be cautious, so that he does not move it during his waking hours, his sleep, his turning, his movements, his bowel movements, and all his motions, with all his strength. And let him beware, lest the position of the limb be one that leads to pain. That is, when he feels pain or injury in the positioning of the limb: then you must adjust it to another position in which he does not feel pain.	Then after you have exactly repositioned it and bandaged it, keep that limb still and quiet, and bid the patient beware of moving it while awake or asleep, and in his shifting and stirring, and in opening the bowel, and in every activity, to the utmost of his capacity; and that he should try to let the position of the limb be such that he is free from pain; when pain or distress is felt in any position in which he has disposed the limb, he should move it to a different position in which he feels no pain.	0.9120663
And beware with him, that its position is level and straight: so that there is no twisting in the limb when it heals.	At the same time he should try to make that position even and straight, so that when the limb is mended there be no curvature in it.	0.6548176
And the nature of securing the broken limb is as I describe.	As to the way to bandage a broken limb, it is as I shall now describe to you.	0.65229595
Know that broken limbs vary in their smallness, size, and shape.	You should know that limbs which may be fractured vary in their size and shape.	0.8123608
Those of them which are small, like the arm, finger, shoulder blade, and similar, must be wrapped in a soft, thin cloth. Those which are large, like the thigh and leg, must have a wide, hard wrapping.	The strips of bandage for those that are small, such as an arm or finger or forearm or the like, should be soft and fine, while those that are thick, such as the hip, back, or breast, should have broad and strong bandages.	0.84089804
For a wide bandage joins a large limb and binds it with even tightness on every side, so that no mark enters it.	For a broad bandage holds fast to a big limb, binding it all round with an even pressure so that no defect may occur.	0.8411481
Then begin, after your setting has been completed, to place a suitable dressing for it, in soft tow over the site of the fracture. Then begin to wrap the bandage over the site of the fracture with three or four wrappings, according to what the limb deserves: and gently tighten with your hand along with the bandage.	Then, after you have finished the setting, begin by applying a suitable liniment on soft tow over the site of the fracture, then start to wrap the bandage over the actual site, three or four turns of bandage as the part may require, winding it fairly tight.	0.87234926
Then move with it to the upper part from the site of the fracture, and bind it less tightly than your binding with which you secured the fracture site. Then extend yourself with the wrapping slightly from the site of the fracture, and gradually loosen the binding, until you take a large section from the healthy area.	Then carry on the bandage above the site of the fracture, winding it more loosely than on the fractured place, and continue a little with the bandaging beyond the place of fracture, loosening the tension gradually, until you have taken up a good amount of the sound part.	0.8560095
Then take another band, and wrap it again over the fractured site with wrappings. Afterward, move with the wrapping to the lower part from the fracture. And let your operation in binding the wrapping and loosening it be as we said in the first wrapping above.	Then take another bandage and wind it several turns over the fracture and then carry it over the part below the fracture, the tightness and looseness being arranged in the same way that we prescribed for the first covering, of the upper part.	0.84239054
Then place between the wrappings some soft tow or cloth to balance any twisting in the fracture, if there is any twisting: and if not, do not put anything there.	Then put between the bandages enough soft tow or soft rags to correct the curves of the fracture, if any; otherwise put nothing in.	0.83277255
Then wrap another band over it. Afterward, place decently made splints over these wrappings at once, if there is no swelling or hot abscess in the area.	Then wind over it another bandage and at once lay over it strong splints, if the part be not swollen and effused.	0.8027389
If, however, there is swelling or an abscess: then place over it what soothes the abscess and reduces the swelling: and leave it for a few days. Then bind the splints over it at that time.	But if there be swelling or effusion in the part, apply something to allay the swelling and disperse the effusion; leave it on for several days and then bind on the splints.	0.8647201
And let the splints be from the halves of broad reeds, scraped and skillfully shaped: or be from wood used for making sieves, which come from pine, or geraid, that is, palm branches, or calingi: and let the size of each splint be according to this form and figure.	The splints should be made of broad halves of cane, cut and shaped with skill; or the splints may be made of the wood used for sieves, which are made of pine; or of palm branches; or of brier or giant fennel or the like, whatever wood be at hand.	0.86091566
However, it is necessary that the splint placed over the actual fracture be somewhat thicker and wider than the other splints: and the length of the splint should be appropriate to the size and smallness of the limb.	The size of each splint should be of this form and shape, except that the splint that is placed on the fracture itself should be a little thicker and broader than the others. As to the length of the splint, it should be greater or less as suits the fractured part.	0.73346853
Then bind over the splints with another bandage, with the same tightness as the first one. Then tie it decently above with threads, as we said regarding the tightness: and it is such that your binding is tighter over the site of the fracture: and the farther it is from the fracture, the looser the binding should be.	Then bind over the splints another bandage just as tightly as you did your first; then over that tie it up with cords arranged in the way we have said, that is, with the pressure greatest over the site of the fracture and lessened as you move away from it.	0.8887049
And the threads should be of medium thickness and fineness, and made of soft linen.	The cords should be of medium thickness, of linen supple of quality.	0.7759041
For if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operations of fools who place their threads of twisted linen cords, it is a grave error: for with these the binding falls outside the quality needed.	For if the cords are too thick, such as I have seen ignorant people use who made their cords of twisted bands of linen, that will be a grave error, for moderate tension with these is impossible.	0.8168894
And very thin threads also are not suitable: for you will not achieve with them the binding you desire.	Nor are fine threads suitable either, for with these you cannot achieve sufficient tension.	0.7761048
And there should be no less than a finger's width between each splint.	Between splints there should be a space of not less than a finger's breadth.	0.8093858
If the patient is harmed by the ends of the splints after the binding in healthy places, then place under them some soft tow or carded wool, so that nothing is injured from it.	If, after bandaging, the patient is hurt in the sound parts by the ends of the splints, then put a little soft tow or carded wool under them until they no longer hurt him thus.	0.8594147
But when there is a fracture with a wound, and a rupture happens in the skin, I will address it with recollection in a specific chapter.	As for the case of a fracture accompanied by an open wound, it will be mentioned in a special section on its own.	0.6310127
And know that not every broken limb must be bound with splints on the first day. This is because when a limb is large, splints should not be placed on it until after five days, or seven, or more, depending on your assurance against the occurrence of a hot abscess.	You should know that not every fracture should be bound up with splints on the first day; that is, when the part is big you should not apply splints until five or seven days after, or more, depending on when you are satisfied that there is no effusion.	0.8812822
And this is the method of plasters by which the ancients restored fractures and dislocations.	This is a description of the plasters that the Ancients used for repair, applied to a fracture, dislocation, or sprain.	0.59518445
¶ Method of the common abbreviated plaster, restoring fractures, suitable for many constitutions, especially for women and children: for it is made from a material that neither heat nor cold overpowers.	Description of a common simple plaster for the repair of fractures, suited to most constitutions, particularly for women and children, because in it there predominates neither hot nor cold.	0.771778
And it is thus: take mill dust, which is the essence of flour that clings to the walls of the mill as the wheel turns: prepare it as it is, except sift it with egg white: and make the mixture neither thick nor thin. Then use it.	Take mill-dust, that is, the fine flour that sticks to the walls of a mill as the grindstone moves. Pound it as it is without sieving, with egg-white, to a medium consistency; then use.	0.72779626
¶ Another method of plaster, restoring fractures, dislocations, and twisting. Take almess, ladanum, acacia, elecampane, and mugath: and resin, each 10 drachms, myrrh, and aloe, each 5 drachms, and alethil 20 drachms; grind all, sift, and mix with alethil water: or with egg white if the patient's constitution is heated. Then use this plaster. For it is of good composition, restores broken bones quickly, and benefits many people.	Description of another plaster for the repair of a fracture, luxation, or dislocation: take ten drachms each of pulse, gum-mastic, acacia, elecampane, mughath, and sukk; five drachms each of myrrh and aloes; twenty drachms of tamarisk and twenty drachms of clay of Armenia or Asia Minor; all should be pounded fine and mixed with water of tamarisk, or with eggwhite if the patient be of a warm constitution; then use this plaster, which is excellent for uniting, quickly repairing broken bones, and suits most people because of its mildness.	0.8582528
¶ Another method of plaster, which also aids fractures and twisting. Take mugath, mess, and white mallow, each 10 drachms; myrrh and aloe, each 5 drachms; acacia 6 drachms; Armenian clay 20 drachms; grind all thoroughly, sift, and mix with water or egg white: and apply.	Description of another plaster valuable for a fracture or sprain: let there be taken ten drachms each of mughath, pulse, and white marsh mallows, five drachms each of myrrh and aloes, six drachms of acacia, and twenty drachms of Armenian clay. Let them all be well beaten up and passed through a sieve and made into a paste with water or egg-white and used.	0.8199999
¶ Method of plaster for joints and bones displaced from their places: it soothes the pain affecting them, a bone fissure, and a fracture. Take raw wool, and soak it in vinegar and cooked oil: and place it over the area.	Description of a plaster for dislocated joints or bones, soothing the accompanying pain, and for a crack or fissure of bone: let unwashed wool be taken and soaked in a decoction of oil and vinegar and applied to the place.	0.7883673
And indeed in this plaster there is no restoring power, but it is good for soothing a hot abscess: and it effectively relieves pain.	Now this plaster has no power of repair but it is outstanding for reducing effusion and dispersing pain.	0.64909935
¶ Method of plaster, which restores broken bone. Take the leaves of wild fig and wild poppy: grind all, and make a plaster from both.	Description of another plaster for the repair of a broken bone: let there be taken the leaves of the hard fig and of the wild poppy and both be beaten up together and a plaster made of them while still fresh and damp.	0.65357316
¶ Method of abbreviated plaster, applied for the restoration of bone fracture: and when you want the resolution of a remaining abscess. Take marshmallow root, chamomile, violet flowers, and herb flour, each one part: grind all, and mix with wine, if the limb is not heated.	Description of another simple plaster used when a fracture is mending and you wish to disperse residual swellings: take one part each of marsh mallow root, chamomile, violet flowers, and flour of vetch; pound it all and make a paste with decoction of wine, if the part be not inflamed.	0.8262797
But if it is heated, then prepare it with fresh coriander water, or with water, and use it.	But if it be inflamed make it up with water of fresh coriander or plain water, and use.	0.90446746
On the method of a stronger plaster in loosening than the first one, when a hard swelling occurs at the restoration of a limb. Take marshmallow root, linseed, pomegranate flower, melilot, elderflower, violet flowers, and chamomile, one part of each, grind them all, and prepare with willow water, or fresh water, or wine. All of this is according to the warmth of the limb and the calm of its heat.	Description of another plaster stronger than the former for resolving, used if a hard swelling arises as the bone sets: let there be taken equal parts of each of marsh mallow roots, linseed, fenugreek, melilot, sweet marjoram, violet flowers, and chamomile; they should all be beaten up together and made into a paste with willow infusion or sweet water or wine, according to whether the part is inflamed or its heat has subsided.	0.80847234
Hippocrates, however, did not say in his book that anything should be applied to the fractured limb at its restoration except a caeretum made of wax and oil, nothing else, and he stated it should be of moderate thickness and thinness.	Now Hippocrates in his book did not mention any application for the repair of a fractured part except a wax plaster made of wax and oil, nothing else. He prescribed that it be of a consistency midway between thick and thin.	0.8555167
Galen, however, deemed it suitable to place on the fractured limb at its restoration substances with drying warmth, like myrrh, aloe, frankincense, and similar items among those we have described.	Galen, on the other hand, thought it good to apply to the broken limb, when it is mending, things which have a certain power of drying, with some heat, such as myrrh, aloes, olibanum, and the sort of thing we have mentioned.	0.8450632
On the method of a plaster that helps with injury and pain. Take equal parts of mugwort, chickpea, human hair cuttings or bird feathers, marshmallow, and salt; grind them, sieve them, and prepare them into a plaster.	Description of a plaster valuable for debility and pain: let equal parts of each be taken of mughath, chickpease, minced human hair or birds' feathers, marsh mallows and salt; grind it up and pass through a sieve and make into a paste and use as a plaster.	0.82706565
The duration for which the bandage should remain, then be loosened, is determined by observing whether the patient experiences no pain, no itching, and the fractured bone is not moved from its place; then do not loosen it for many days. But if there occurs intense itching in the area, or disturbing pain, or swelling, then hurry and loosen it immediately, and remove the plaster from it; and take a soft cloth or a gentle sea sponge, dampen it, soak it in warm water, and wash the area with it until the itching subsides and the pain is soothed.	As to the length of time the bandages should remain on before being loosened: you should keep an eye on the patient and if he suffers no pain or itching or any shifting of the broken bone, then they should not be loosened for a number of days; but if he experiences at the place a violent itching or a disturbing pain or swelling, then hasten to loosen them and make no delay; and remove the plaster.	0.8484859
But if there occurs intense itching in the area, or disturbing pain, or swelling, then hurry and loosen it immediately, and remove the plaster from it; and take a soft cloth or a gentle sea sponge, dampen it, soak it in warm water, and wash the area with it until the itching subsides and the pain is soothed. Then let the limb rest for one hour. Then place fresh wool soaked in vinegar and oil, or rose oil, over it, and bind it overnight until you are sure of being free from hot swelling, and the swelling of the limb subsides and its pain is relieved.	Then you must take a soft cloth or a soft marine sponge and dip it in tepid water and bathe the place until the itching subsides and the pain settles; then let the limb rest for an hour; then apply to it raw wool soaked in oil and vinegar or oil of roses, and bandage it on for one night until you are sure there is no effusion and the swelling of the limb has subsided and the pain has gone.	0.86409
Then reapply a light bandage and a small plaster; do not tighten it as you did at first, and apply gentle bandaging until it heals.	Then put the bandage on again gently, and a light plaster; do not bind it up as you did at the first but go gently with it until it heal.	0.91002214
If you see that swelling, redness, pain, and all other symptoms are completely removed, and you need the plaster and bandage, then reapply it as you did at first, evenly.	If you see that the effusion, inflammation, pain, swelling, and other symptoms are totally gone, and you need to plaster and bandage it, then repeat just as you did at first.	0.92399204
If none of those things happen to the limb, then do not loosen it until after three days, or four, or five, or seven. And sometimes it is left for twenty days, all according to what appears to you upon loosening of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and the flesh coagulates over it; then increase the tightness more than your initial bandage completely, and also increase the intake of nourishing food, as previously mentioned.	But if none of these things that we have mentioned occur, then do not loosen it until after three, four, or five days or a week; sometimes it may be left up to twenty days, depending on how the limb appears to you, as we said, until the fracture be united and the flesh over it be near to joining. Then bandage more tightly than before, and increase the heaviness of the patient's food as has been mentioned.	0.90291476
If, however, you see that the site of the fracture is becoming too dry and thin, then know that nourishment is prevented from reaching it. Therefore, moisten it with warm water every time you loosen it, and do this every three days, and ease the bandage slightly.	If you see the place of the fracture getting more dry and thin than it should, you may know that nourishment is being prevented from reaching it; so foment it with tepid water each time you loosen it; do this every three days, and ease the bandaging somewhat.	0.90535295
Through this operation, nourishment flows to the limb, and it heals quickly.	This action makes nourishment flow to the limb and it will quickly heal.	0.89506185
What foolish restorers do by setting the fracture improperly when it is not initially restored as it should be, and instead set it crookedly, is a mistake in their operation and a great danger; if it were correct, the ancients would have said so in their books and worked with it.	What some ignorant bone-setters do is to break the bone again if at first the repair is not as it should be and has mended crookedly. This operation of theirs is mistaken and dangerous; if it were right the Ancients would undoubtedly have spoken of it in their books and would have used it.	0.8772571
And I have not seen any trace of this in any of their writings at all, and it is better that it not be done.	But I have not found a trace of it in a single one of them; and the right course is not to use it.	0.71889454

chapter-3-subchapter-2.txt
On fractures occurring in the head.	On a fracture occurring in the head.	0.93672884
The types of fractures are diverse, and their forms are many, and their causes are distinct.	The kinds of fracture occurring in the head are many, of various forms and differing causes.	0.8055389
There is a type of fracture that occurs from a blow with a sword: and the blow removes the entire bone until it reaches the membrane beneath the bone, just as an ax does in wood; because of this, this type of fracture is called Axial.	Some fractures are due to a sword-stroke which may cut right through the bone and reach the membrane beneath the bone, like an adze-cut in wood, for which reason this kind of cut is called 'ascial'.	0.7607033
Or a sword cuts a part of the bone, and cuts its surface, but the cut does not penetrate to its depth: and this type of fracture is called Kalaan, that is, a simple Lifting.	Or the sword may cut through part of the bone, only slicing through the surface and not reaching the depth; this kind is called an absolute avulsion.	0.69014657
And it is a wound of two fractures, either large or small.	The wounds in these two fractures can be either big or small.	0.7240653
And there is a fracture which is a crushing or abrasion: and its cause is a blow with a stone, or a fall onto a stone, or something similar.	There are also some fractures accompanied by smashing or crushing; such as by a blow from a stone or by falling on a stone, and the like.	0.7999147
And this fracture is either penetrating, which is already approaching the membrane beneath the bone, or it is on the surface of the bone: and the wound from these two types of fractures can also be either small or large.	A fracture of this kind will be either penetrating, reaching the membrane beneath the bone; or superficial; the wound in these two fractures may be either big or small.	0.83085597
And there is a fracture which is hidden in the bone in the thinness of a hair: it is a small fissure, and for this reason, this type of fracture is called Capillary.	Then there is a type of fracture that is hidden in the bone, as fine as a hair, a thin crack; therefore this kind of fracture is called 'capillary'.	0.794579
And there is a fracture that occurs from a fall, or a blow with a stone, or something similar, which causes a layer of the bone to enter inward, creating a hollow in the area: just as happens to copper cauldrons, when they are struck, and a part of them goes inward.	There is a fracture due to a fall or a blow from a stone and the like, making a dent in the surface of the bone and a hollow at the site as occurs in a bronze bowl when a blow falls on it and a portion of it is pushed in.	0.786429
And this most often happens in heads with soft bones, as in the heads of children.	This mostly occurs in heads whose bones are soft, as those of children.	0.8847159
And in all these types of fractures, separate steps are needed, and I will address each of them in its place.	Any of these kinds of fracture may also have splinters, jagged or otherwise; we shall deal with the treatment of all these in their place.	0.5430724
And we recognize all these types of fractures by examining them, and by probing them with tenting, and by removing the corrupted flesh that is upon them.	All these kinds of fracture are diagnosed by laying them bare and investigating them with probes and removing all the lacerated tissues over them.	0.75814325
But the Capillary type is recognized by exposing the bone, wiping it, and applying ink over it: for the fracture appears black.	The 'capillary' kind is diagnosed by laying bare the bone, wiping it clean, and rubbing ink on it, when the fracture will appear black.	0.6834663
In the treatment of the fracture, first consider the symptoms of the patient: then if you see among the symptoms a clear sign of danger, such as vomiting bile, convulsions, loss of consciousness, loss of voice, fainting, acute fever, bulging of the eyes, redness of the eyes, and similar symptoms in various conditions, there is no doubt it is incurable: but if you observe non-threatening symptoms, and you hope for recovery, then begin treatment.	As to the treatment of the fracture: begin by paying attention to the patient's symptoms. If you observe any symptom clearly indicating something dangerous, such as bilious vomit, convulsion, mental derangement, loss of voice, fainting, high fever, protrusion and inflammation of the eyes, and similar symptoms, then leave the patient alone and do not treat him; for in the majority of cases these symptoms undoubtedly indicate the approach of death. But if you find symptoms that do not alarm you and you see hope of recovery for him, then begin treatment as follows.	0.8708797
That is, if the wounded person comes to you immediately when wounded: and it is during the days of winter, then you should take care to remove the bone before the fourteenth day, following all preparations.	If he be brought to you immediately after his injury and it be the season of winter, you should try to remove the bone, at all events before the fourteenth day.	0.75341225
And if it is during the days of summer, then you must hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, before the membrane beneath the bone becomes corrupted, and those symptoms we have mentioned occur.	If it be summer you must hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, before the covering membrane beneath the bone and over the brain be infected, and before the above-mentioned symptoms occur.	0.8597175
But if the bone fracture has already reached the membrane touching the brain, and is accompanied by fragments and pulling, then you must cut away the shattered and damaged part, as I instruct you.	If the fracture has already reached the cerebral membrane with fragmentation of the bone and depression, then you must cut out the splintered and broken part as I shall now describe to you.	0.81277585
This means you shave the head of the wounded: and expose the bone in whatever way possible for you, according to the shape of the wound, and whatever is least distressing for the patient.	Shave the head of the injured patient and lay the bone bare in any way you can, following the course of the injury and in the manner least grievous to the injured man.	0.74024725
If, upon exposing the bone, there occurs a flow of blood, or a warm swelling, then apply what is necessary to it. This is to fill the area with cloths soaked in wine and rose oil: and you let the wound rest until the swelling subsides, and you are safe from bleeding. Then begin treating the bone, and removing it.	If, when you lay the bone bare, you encounter a haemorrhage or abscess, meet the case with suitable remedies; that is, pack the place with dressings soaked in wine and oil of roses, and cleanse the wound until the swelling subsides and you are safe from haemorrhage; then begin the trepanning and removal of the bone.	0.8707622
And this is done according to one of two methods.	This may be done in one of two ways.	0.7913008
One method is to cut the bone with a knife of sharp edge: and this is its form.	One way is to cut the bone with a fine-bladed chisel, this being the figure of it.	0.75403464
Then use another knife after the first, slightly wider than it: and this is its form.	Then after this one employ another chisel, a little broader. It is figured here.	0.6713259
Then use yet another knife, even wider than the second.	Then use yet another chisel still broader than the second.	0.94918895
And the second method is that you have a number of different knives: some of which are wider than others, and some shorter than others; and let the ends of their tips be sharp, and let them be made of Indian steel or hardened steel: and strike lightly upon the knife, so that it does not shake or injure the head.	You should have by you a number of different chisels, some broader than others and some shorter than others; their tips should be exquisitely sharp; and they should be made of Indian iron or best steel. Let the strokes upon the chisel be gentle lest the head be shocked or injured.	0.7878397
But if the bone is strong and hard, then you must drill around it, before you apply the knives, with drills called "non-penetrating drills": and they are called this because they do not go past the boundary of the bone to the tissue behind it; for the drill has a rounded end over the sharp head, like a border, and a small ring prevents it from going deep and passing through the thickness of the bone.	If the bone be strong and hard you should, before you use the chisel, make perforations round about it with drills called 'non-sinking' drills. Their name of non-sinking drills is due to their not piercing the cranial bone through to what is beneath, because the drill has a circular margin beneath its sharp head like a small collar or wheel, that prevents it from sinking in and going beyond the thickness of the bone.	0.8640659
And it is suitable for you to take a large number of these drills, each corresponding to the thickness of the bone, so that for any skull you have the appropriate drill: with the length and width of its sharp tip matching the thickness of that skull.	You must obtain a large number of these drills each of which will suit a certain thickness of bone; so that for each skull you have a drill whose pointed extremity is of a length to suit the thickness of that skull.	0.8232836
And this is the form of three types of drills, or trepans.	Here are figured three kinds of drill, large, medium, and small.	0.42804933
The manner of drilling around the broken bone is to place the drill on the bone, and rotate it with your fingers, until you know that the bone is already penetrated. Then move the drill to another spot, and place between each hole the width of a finger, or about that distance.	As to the manner of perforation round the fractured bone, you apply the drill to the bone and revolve it with your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced, then you transfer the drill to another place, making the distance between the perforations about the thickness of a probe.	0.86645347
Then cut with the knives the bone between each hole: and do this as finely as you can, with gentle precision, as we said, until you remove the bone either by hand or with some other instrument you have prepared for this: like small forceps and fine scissors.	Then with the chisels cut out the bone between the perforations, using the utmost delicacy, as we have said. Then take out the bone, either with your hand or with some other instrument you have ready for the purpose, such as forceps or fine tongs.	0.82925975
And you must take every caution that the drill or knife does not touch any part of the membrane.	You will have to observe the utmost caution that neither drill nor chisel touch any part of the membrane.	0.88596964
When you have drilled around the bone, and it has been separated from the membrane, if it is attached to it and you have removed it, you should shave and smooth the edge of what remains in the bone with another instrument similar to a knife. However, it should be thinner and more delicate than the other knives.	When you have cut the bone circularly, free from the membrane if adherent to it, and have removed it, then you will have to scrape away and smooth out all the roughness in the remaining bone with another instrument, resembling a chisel, except that it must be finer and slenderer than any of them.	0.90487003
If there remain any small bones or fragments, then remove them carefully with whatever instrument you have at hand. Then treat the wound afterward with lint and ointments as we have described.	If there are any little bits or spicules of bone left, pick them out with whatever instrument you can, gently; and then treat the wound with dressings and ointments as we shall describe.	0.93722403
And another method of operation is easy, entirely free from fear: which Galen mentioned and praised highly, and this is his description. It is necessary for you to begin by exposing the part of the bone where the fracture is most severe and apparent: so that, when you have exposed that part, you place under it the end of this lenticular knife, of which this is the form.	The other way of operating is altogether easy and free from danger; Galen mentioned it and greatly praised it; these are his words: You should begin by laying bare that part of the bone where the fracture is severest and most obvious; when you have done so, place under it the tip of this lenticular chisel figured here.	0.8996953
And the lenticular part, smooth, does not cut anything: and its sharp part goes lengthwise on two sides, as you see: so that the lenticular part rests upon the membrane, with its sharp side cutting the bone.	The lenticular part of it should be smooth and not for cutting, the sharp part of it being on both sides longitudinally, as you see; so that the lenticular part is resting upon the meninges while the cutting surface is on the bone.	0.77437973
Then strike on one side of the knife with a small hammer, until you cut the whole bone with ease, as it rotates: and you can be certain regarding the membrane, that nothing will happen to it that would cause you fear at all.	Then with a small hammer strike the tool on one side until you gently cut through the bone in a circle, in the confident knowledge that nothing untoward can happen to the membrane even though the operator be the most ignorant and cowardly of men; yes, even if he be sleepy.	0.7607006
And if the doctor were not the most foolish or ignorant of men, nor asleep, then if anything from the membrane remained attached to the bone in certain places, he would cut it away from there with the tip of his lenticular knife, and free it from there with ease. For it is freed from it without harm, and without fear.	If any membrane stick to any part of the bone, strip it off with the lenticular tip of the chisel and free it gently from it, for it will come away without harm or danger.	0.5981119
And if the fracture of the bone does not reach the membrane, and what is removed from the bone is its surface, and slight roughness and small fragments remain on it: then it is necessary to shave that roughness and remove those fragments with fine rasps, of which you have prepared a number in various sizes, so that you are able to use whichever is most suitable and appropriate in every place, according to what the operation leads you to and the shape of the broken bone. And you should begin your rasping with the widest of those rasps. Then use after it one that is finer.	If it be a fracture of the bone not reaching to the meninges, only the surface of the bone being separated, and there remain some roughness and fine splinters, you should smooth down the roughness and remove the splinters with fine scrapers, of which you should have a number, of varying sizes so that you can use the one best fitted and most suitable, in the light of what is suggested by your operative method and the broken bone itself and its shape.	0.84596705
And you should begin your rasping with the widest of those rasps. Then use after it one that is finer. And do not stop doing this in sequence, until you reach using the finest and most delicate of them all.	When you smooth the bone you must first use the broadest of the scrapers and then a finer one, and so on until you come to use the finest and slenderest of all.	0.7646481
And in each of the remaining small cracks or hairline fractures, and in slight fractures, it is necessary to apply care according to what will bring it to proper alignment.	As to the rest, the little capillary fractures and fine fissures, you will have to apply to each of them that treatment that will bring about a perfect repair.	0.72362983
And this is something that is not hidden from anyone who has any experience in this art and has followed what we have written and demonstrated regarding major fractures.	This is obvious to anyone who has the least practice in this art and is acquainted with what we have written in explanation of the big fractures.	0.7696028
But if the exposed membrane remains intact when you remove the bone, then you should take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound. Then take another cloth folded double or triple, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth: and do this as gently as you can over it, so that the membrane is not burdened.	If the meninges are left bare when you remove the bone, you should take a linen dressing measured to the wound, soak it in oil of roses, and apply it to the opening of the wound; then take another dressing, folded in two or three, soak it in wine and oil of roses and apply it over the first with the utmost gentleness so as not to press upon the meninges; then employ a broad bandage on top, but tighten it only enough to keep the wound covered.	0.8651308
Then place a wide bandage over it: and do not tighten it, except to the degree that it holds the wound only: and leave it with this care for a day or two, until you are free from the risk of a hot abscess. Then loosen it, and afterwards apply medicines that provide excess dryness: such as lily roots, flour of herbs, frankincense powder, birthwort, and the like: and you should make a powder from these medicines, which is sprinkled over the wound while they are dry.	Leave it with this dressing on for a day or two until you are sure there is no abscess; then loosen it and apply desiccant remedies such as lily roots, vetch-flour, powdered frankincense, birthwort, and the like.	0.7044757
And generally, administer any medicine to it whose property is to cleanse without biting. And take care, to the best of your ability, that the wound in your treatment remains clear: let there be no filth of ointment or foulness.	The method is that you make a powder of these drugs and sprinkle it, dry as it is, upon the wound; in short, in these cases use drugs whose nature is cleansing and not irritating.	0.5806254
And take care, to the best of your ability, that the wound in your treatment remains clear: let there be no filth of ointment or foulness. Do not allow any pus to gather there at all: for when pus gathers over the cerebral membrane, it corrupts it and decays it, and a great affliction befalls the patient afterward: and it has already happened in the membrane of the head, when the bone is cleaned from it, especially when its care is neglected, that blackening occurs on its surface.	In this be most diligent, that the wound, while you are treating it, be clean; nor let there be any dirty vestiges of ointment in it or any filth; and let no pus collect in it; for when pus collects on the meninges it corrupts them and renders them necrotic, which causes great harm to the patient.	0.83030236
Therefore, consider then, if the patient suffers from the symptoms we have mentioned, you will know without a doubt that it is dangerous.	Sometimes the surface meninges go black when the bone is removed, especially when the treatment of them is neglected; so observe, and if the patient exhibit any of the symptoms that we have mentioned you may know that he is undoubtedly doomed.	0.45351928
And if blackening occurs only from the medicine applied to it, and it is in the power of that medicine to cause that blackening, then it is necessary to take one part of honey, three parts of rose oil, and dip a cloth in them. Then place it over the membrane: afterwards, treat it with appropriate healing substances until it heals.	But if the blackness be due to some medicament applied to it, which has the power to produce blackness of that kind, then you should take one part of honey and three parts of oil of roses, beat them well up together, spread on a cloth and apply it to the membrane; then treat as necessary until cured.	0.86785114

chapter-3-subchapter-3.txt
On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.	On the repair of a broken nose.	0.80463517
Know that only two upper parts of the nose can break together, or one of them: this is because it consists of two bones, since the lower part is cartilage, it does not break, but only suffers abrasion, twisting, and bending.	You should know that the only portion of the nose that can break is the upper portion in its entirety or in one of its two parts; for it consists of two bones. The lower portion is cartilaginous and unbreakable; what can happen to it is contusion, twisting, or flattening.	0.8538334
If one of its two parts is broken, then you should insert your little finger into the nasal cavity and align the fracture with your index finger and thumb from the outside, until the nose returns to its natural shape: and this should be done skillfully, with ease. And be careful that no pain is caused to the patient by your operation.	If one of the two (upper) parts be broken you should pass your little finger into the nostril and straighten out the fracture from inside, with your index and thumb outside, until you reduce the nose to its natural shape; do it gently, and take care that you do not cause the patient pain in doing it.	0.8389779
But if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and your finger cannot reach it, then it should be aligned with the end of a rod, which has a small thickness.	If the fracture be in the upper part of the nose and your finger does not reach it, it should be evened by means of a probe with some thickness to it.	0.8196471
If the fracture is in both parts, then do the same: and hasten to restore it on the first day of the fracture, if possible. If not, then after the seventh or tenth day, when the swelling has calmed.	If the break be on both sides, follow the same course. Haste must be made to set it on the first day if possible; but if not, after the seventh or tenth day when the effusion has subsided.	0.85101324
Then insert into the end of the nose a linen strip if the fracture is in one part, or two strips if the fracture is in both parts: and let the strip have enough thickness to fill the nasal cavity.	Then introduce into the nasal foramen a linen pad, if it be a unilateral fracture, or two pads if it be bilateral; the pads should be thick enough to fill the nasal foramen.	0.81851155
And some of the restorers of old have said that the strips should be soaked in butter and changed every day. However, this does not seem advisable to me; rather, the strip should be soaked in egg white, prepared with millstone powder. Then leave the strip in place until the bone sets and the cartilage hardens.	Certain of the ancient bone-setters suggest that you should soak the pads in butter and change them daily, but I do not think so; you should rather soak them in egg-white made up into a paste with mill-dust; then leave the pads in until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardens.	0.89193845
Sometimes, instead of a strip, a goose feather wrapped with a soft cloth is inserted into the nose, which holds the nasal fracture more firmly and does not prevent the patient from breathing.	Sometimes, instead of pads, the stems of goose-quills are introduced into the nose after being wound round with a piece of soft cloth, so as to make a stronger support for the fracture of the nose and not to hinder the patient's breathing.	0.8151014
But this is not necessary. If you wish, do this; or if you wish, use the strips.	This is not absolutely necessary; do it if you prefer; or, if you prefer, put in pads.	0.78744674
If, while you are operating, the nose becomes swollen, then plaster the nose with cerate, or with cotton soaked in rose oil, or a little diachylon.	If during your operation an abscess occurs, apply to the nose a wax plaster or cotton wool soaked in vinegar and oil of roses or a little diachylon ointment.	0.8492645
If no swelling occurs, then you should plaster it with sesame flour and frankincense powder mixed with egg white. Then place soft tow on it, and do not bind the nose with anything at all.	If no abscess occurs you should apply externally a plaster of white flour and frankincense made into a paste with egg-white; then put on top some soft tow, but do not bind up the nose at all.	0.8745198
If the nasal bones are fractured into small pieces or are crushed, then you must make an incision over them and extract them with suitable instruments. Then suture the incision, and treat it with something that encourages flesh growth and consolidates it, using suitable plasters or ointments.	If the nasal bones are broken into small pieces or crushed, you should cut down upon them, remove them with a suitable instrument, and then suture the incision and dress with suitable ointments which encourage granulation and scarring.	0.8928638
If a wound occurs between the nose, then it should be treated with strips, and a lead tube should be used until it heals.	If there occur an internal wound of the nose, you should dress it with pads and employ leaden tubes until it heals.	0.83222973

chapter-3-subchapter-4.txt
On the restoration of the lower jaw when it is fractured.	On the repair of a broken lower jaw.	0.8186996
When the lower jaw is fractured, and the fracture is not accompanied by a wound: then observe if the fracture is only on the outside and not split in two, and if it bends inward: in that case, its diagnosis is easy.	When the lower jaw is broken and it is a fracture without an open wound, examine it.	0.5555346
Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert the index finger of your left hand into the patient’s mouth; similarly, if the fracture is on the left side of the jaw, then insert the index finger of your right hand; and with it, gently push the bump of the fracture from the inside toward the outside, using your other hand from the inner side of the bone to align it properly.	If it is merely an external fracture, not broken in two but sunken inwards, which is easily recognized, you should introduce the index of your left hand into the patient's mouth if it be a right-hand fracture; but your right index if it be a left-sided fracture; and with this, from within, push the concavity of the fracture gently outwards, with the other hand outside, regulating the correction.	0.79193187
But if the jaw fracture is already separated into two, then you should manage the cleaning of both parts, aligning them as straight as possible until adjustment is achievable.	If the break in the jaw be total, into two, traction must be employed, in a straight line on both sides, until it can be set.	0.69702375
If any teeth have already become loose or dislodged, then secure those which you believe will stay in place with a gold, silver, or silk thread. Then apply cerate over the fractured jaw. Then place a folded cloth over it, and place a large splint properly made on the cloth, or a piece of leather of equal length to the jaw.	If any of the teeth be loosened or broken away, bind those that you hope may be preserved with a gold or silver or silken ligature; then put wax upon the fractured mandible, and upon that a doubled dressing, and upon the dressing a large and strong splint or a piece of shoe-sole leather, the length of the jaw; then over that bandage in such wise as you conveniently can and as will conduce to drawing it together so as not to loosen.	0.881219
Then bind it from above, according to how the bandage has been prepared for you, so that it is appropriately applied and does not move; and instruct the patient to rest quietly: and provide them with soft broths for nourishment.	Bid the patient hold himself quiet and still, and let his food be soft broths.	0.4717648
If you think that some part of its shape has already changed in any way, then hasten and loosen it on the third day. Then correct what has been altered, and apply a plaster made of millstone powder with egg white, or with sesame flour, after you have removed the cerate: and place soft wool over the plaster.	If you think there is any change of form at all, hasten to loosen it on the third day; then correct the change and apply a plaster of mill-dust and egg-white, or of white flour, after you have removed the wax from it, applying soft tow over the plaster.	0.90302044
As long as the plaster remains attached over it and the bone’s alignment does not change, leave it undisturbed; do not loosen it until it heals: or tighten the fracture. For often this fracture is set within three weeks.	So long as the plaster sticks on it and the bone undergoes no change of state, let it be and do not loosen until it heals and the fracture mends, for often a fracture of this kind mends in three weeks.	0.8633082
If a hot swelling occurs in the meantime, then apply what we have frequently mentioned to alleviate it, until the swelling subsides.	If during that time an effusion occurs, employ those means of allaying this that we have often mentioned, until the swelling subsides.	0.82628036
And if the fracture is accompanied by a wound, consider it. For if a piece of bone or splinter is already separated, then proceed carefully to remove those bone fragments with the instruments suitable for their extraction.	If the fracture be with an open wound, examine it, and if one or more splinters have been detached from the bone, gently remove the pieces of splinter with any suitable instrument.	0.69705
But if the wound opening is narrow, then enlarge it with a lancet according to your need.	If the opening of the wound be narrow, open it up with a scalpel as much as you need.	0.6832931
Then, when you have removed those splinters and none remain, suture the wound opening if it is large; if not, apply plasters suitable for it that encourage flesh growth until it heals.	When you have removed these pieces, letting no trace of them remain, suture the opening of the wound if it is wide; otherwise apply one of the ointments that are suitable for that purpose and will encourage the growth of flesh over the wound, until it heals.	0.84781045

chapter-3-subchapter-5.txt
On the restoration of the clavicle when it is fractured.	On the repair of a broken collar-bone.	0.7396202
The clavicle is most often fractured from the front, near the shoulder, and its fracture occurs in one of three ways.	The collar-bone is very often broken from the end of the humerus anteriorly, and the fracture of it may be in one of three ways.	0.7677916
Either it is fractured and split into two without splinters occurring; this is the easiest type to restore.	It may be broken and separated into two without splintering; this is the easiest to repair.	0.8790597
Or it occurs with splinters in the bone; this is more difficult to restore.	Or else splintering occurs, which is most difficult to repair.	0.70423836
Or it occurs as a fracture with an accompanying wound.	Or it is a compound fracture.	0.6566343
When the fracture is without a wound, the procedure is to have two assistants present, one to hold support near the fractured clavicle, and the other to extend the neck toward that side.	When it is a simple fracture the operation involves having two assistants present; one of them to hold steady the arm adjacent to the fractured clavicle, and the other to stretch the neck in the opposite direction.	0.86703587
Then align the fracture with your fingers until it takes its proper shape; let there be no bump or hollow.	Then level the fracture with your fingers until it is reduced to its proper form and there is neither prominence nor concavity.	0.8802564
If you need more extension, then you should place a ball of cloth or wool under the patient’s armpit, its size according to your needs; extend, raise the clavicle, and press the ball with your hand until you align the fracture as required.	If there is need of still greater extension, place in the armpit of the patient a ball of cloth or wool made to a suitable size; and stretch and lift up the clavicle and squeeze the roll with your hand until the fracture is set in the proper way.	0.9011434
If you cannot pull the end of the clavicle outward because it lies too deep, then the patient should be laid back on their neck, and you should place a medium-sized pillow under their shoulder, and the assistant should press down on their shoulder until the clavicle bone, which is deep, rises upward; then set the fracture and align it with your fingers.	If you are unable to draw the extremity of the clavicle outwards on account of its being depressed, the patient will have to lie on his back and there must be put under his shoulder a medium-sized bolster. The assistant is to press the shoulder down until the depressed collar bone is elevated, and then you can set the fracture and even it out with your fingers.	0.8967385
If you feel a splinter in the clavicle and it moves, then you should make an incision over it and carefully remove the splinter.	If you feel a splinter separated from the clavicle and movable, you must cut down upon the splinter and gently remove it.	0.8378117
But if it is lodged in the bone, then proceed with the incision using one of the chisels you have prepared for this, after you have placed under the clavicle an instrument called a “sifach support,” which is a tool made of wood or iron. And this is its shape.	If the splinter sticks to the bone, you must contrive to cut it with one of the chisels you have prepared for that, having first put beneath the clavicle the instrument to protect the membrane; an instrument made of wood or iron, of which this is the figure.	0.7361352
It resembles a spoon without a concavity.	It resembles a spoon but without a hollow.	0.81739056
Its width should match what you need, depending on the size and thickness of the bone. Its length should be as long as is practical for the procedure.	It should be as broad as you need, having regard to the size of the bone, and as long as you can use at operation.	0.8026891
It has two ends, as you see: one end is wide, and the other narrow.	As you see, it should be provided with one wide and one narrow extremity.	0.67047507
If the wound you incised to remove the bone splinter is wide, and you are free from concern about a hot swelling, then bring together the two edges of the wound with a suture.	If the opening you made when you extracted the splinter of bone be wide and you feel safe against an abscess, suture the edges together.	0.72294813
If the wound is small or you fear a hot swelling, then fill the wound with cloths and small pads according to the size of the wound incision.	But if the opening be small or you fear an abscess, pack the wound with material and pads proportional to the opening.	0.7576624
If a hot swelling occurs, then soak a cloth in rose oil, vinegar, and wine, and place it over the area.	If an abscess occur, soak the dressing with oil of roses and vinegar or wine and apply.	0.8045596
For this reason, you must check the patient every day. Whenever the bandage loosens and you see the splint has already shifted, then adjust it and tighten the bandage.	The whole point is that the splint should not slip from over the fracture; so you should examine the patient every day, and whenever the bandage has loosened and you see the splint has shifted, then put it right and tighten the bandage.	0.80963665
Then place the patient's sleep on his back, and place a small cushion under his head near his sleep at night, so that his support is lifted from his side with him. Thus, the fracture of the collarbone is raised by the elevation of the shoulder.	Make the patient sleep lying on his back, and at night when he is asleep place a small bolster under the axilla so as to raise his arm from his side, for with the raising of the humerus the fracture of the clavicle will be elevated.	0.8556811
Or tie his arm to his neck: and do not loosen the binding, unless an irritation or swelling occurs at the place, for up to twelve days.	Or bind his arm to his neck. Do not loosen the bandage for twelve days unless there arise at the place any pruritus or swelling.	0.90330553
And indeed, the fracture of the collarbone is generally secured and strengthened in twenty-eight days: and sometimes it happens in some people in less time.	The majority of these cases are firm and strong in twenty-eight days, though in some people it takes less.	0.6078379

chapter-3-subchapter-6.txt
¶ On the restoration of a shoulder blade fracture.	On the repair of a fracture of the scapula.	0.7908326
The shoulder blade rarely fractures, and in its broad part: and only its edges break.	The scapula is rarely fractured in the broad part but it does break at its margins.	0.7596165
Therefore, when a part of it is broken, and it breaks in the middle, and it is only recognized by touch: then attempt its preparation according to the shape of the fracture. And restore it to its natural shape by every skillful means possible for you.	When any part of it is broken or it breaks in the middle (which is recognized by palpation) you should attempt the correction of the fracture according to the shape it takes, and its restoration to its natural form, by whatever means you can.	0.6816805
Then place mill dust with egg white on the spot, with soft wool, and place a cushion made of folded cloth over it. Then place over it a broad splint from a thin board according to the size of the entire shoulder blade, or slightly larger.	Then apply over the place mill-dust with eggwhite, and soft tow; and over that a dressing made of a folded cloth; and over that a broad splint made of thin board to the size of the whole scapula or a little wider.	0.92985713
But if there is a hollow under the splint in any part of the shoulder blade, then equalize that hollow with soft wool, until the splint aligns evenly.	If there be beneath the splint a hollow in any part of the scapula, level it with soft tow so that the splint rests evenly.	0.8153957
Then bind it above with a long binding, with decent compression and firmness of the splint, until it does not move from its place.	Then bind tightly over it a long sling and make sure that the splint does not slip out of place.	0.74373126
And inspect the binding every day. Therefore, whenever the binding loosens, tighten it, and align the splint if it has moved from its place: and let the patient lie on his healthy side.	Examine the bandage daily; and whenever it gets loose tighten it and adjust the splint if it has shifted. The patient should lie on his sound side.	0.8761165
And the shoulder blade indeed heals in twenty days, or in twenty-five days.	The scapula mends in twenty or twenty-five days.	0.8092164
When this number is complete, then loosen the binding: and you may be at ease. For it is one of the bones whose healing is not feared, nor its breaking apart.	When this time has elapsed you may safely loosen the bandaging, for this is one of the bones in which there is no danger of fragmentation or cracking.	0.7063433
But if a piece protrudes from the bone and pierces under the skin: then cut above it and remove it. And do what we said for the fracture of the collarbone regarding the calming of a hot swelling, if anything arises from it.	If a splinter of bone protrudes and starts to prick under the skin, cut down upon it and remove it, and do as I said under fracture of the collar-bone, to allay the effusion, if anything of that kind happen.	0.7979501

chapter-3-subchapter-7.txt
¶ On the restoration of a chest fracture.	On the repair of a fracture of the breast.	0.8260492
The chest is sometimes fractured in the middle, and this rarely occurs. Indeed, its ends are mostly fractured and crushed due to accidents.	The breast is sometimes fractured in the middle but this happens rarely; more often it is the extremities of it that are broken and comminuted.	0.86842835
When its middle part fractures, which slopes downward, and severe pain, difficulty in breathing, and cough occur: and perhaps he vomits blood, and a concavity is visible in the broken bone, and it is not hidden from the senses. Its restoration is achieved by having the patient lie on his back: and placing a cushion between his shoulder blades.	The symptoms that occur when it is broken in the middle are that he bows downwards and suffers violent pain, difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and sometimes he vomits blood; and there is an obvious and palpable concavity in the bone.	0.8201802
Then press his shoulders and bring together the ribs on both sides with your hands: and smooth them in alignment, in every way possible and fitting, until the shape of the bone returns to what is required.	Now the way to mend it is for the patient to lie on his back, and you place a pillow between his shoulders; then his shoulders are squeezed, and with your hands you press together his ribs from both sides and skilfully try to equalize them in any way you conveniently can, until the bone is reduced to its proper form.	0.76280266
Then place a plaster and wool over it, and place a splint from a thin board of willow, or poplar, and others similar in lightness, after wrapping it in cloth. Then carefully bind it over the broken bone, so it does not move: and take the bandage around to the back several times, and tighten it with appropriate compression.	Then apply over it a plaster and a pad and place over that a splint of thin willow board or brier or similar light wood, first wrapping it in cloth; then gently bind this upon the fractured bone so that it does not slip; and carry your bandage round about the back several times, tying it firmly; then inspect it constantly, and whenever it loosens tighten it.	0.86366665
Then inspect the binding every hour, and whenever it loosens, tighten it: and if there is a need to loosen it due to itching, or erosion at the site, or pain, or swelling, then quickly loosen it, remove the plaster, and correct what has happened with the appropriate treatment.	If you are compelled to loosen it on account of itching at the place, or pain or swelling, loosen it quickly and remove the plaster and correct whatever has occurred with the appropriate treatment.	0.66164315
Then replace the plaster, if you see it necessary: and attach the compression until it heals.	Then renew the plaster if you think fit, and keep it bandaged until it heals.	0.75199854

chapter-3-subchapter-8.txt
¶ On the restoration of ribs when they are fractured.	On the repair of ribs when they are fractured.	0.8503009
Know that fractures of the ribs only occur in thick areas that follow the back, and at their ends on the front side. And they do not suffer attrition, except because they are cartilaginous. And its detection is not hidden from the senses upon examination with the fingers.	You should know that fracture of the ribs occurs only at the thick parts bordering on the vertebrae, whereas the anterior extremities are only contused, because they are cartilaginous; this is easily diagnosed on examination with the fingers.	0.8262747
And its restoration is done by aligning the fracture with the fingers in the best possible way until the shape is even, as it should be. Then apply plasters, and secure the broken bone with a splint, if it needs one.	They should be set by levelling out the fracture with the fingers in any manner you can so that the form is as it should be; then apply the plaster and bind the broken bone with a splint, if necessary.	0.8441112
And if the rib fracture is inclined inward, the patient experiences severe pain and stabbing, like that which occurs in one who has pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane, and he also suffers from difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting a lot of blood: and this is difficult to treat.	If it be a depressed fracture of the ribs, then the patient will have a vehement pain and a piercing sensation like that of pleurisy, since the bone is piercing the pleura; in addition he will have difficulty in breathing and will cough, and vomit much blood; the treatment of this is difficult.	0.9014878
The ancients have already devised many methods for this: and some of them say to give the patient foods that generate inflammation and bloating, so that the abdomen swells, expands, and pushes the fracture outward.	In this the Ancients practised many devices. Some said that the patient should have food of such a kind as to generate wind and inflation to blow out and stretch the belly and so push out the fracture.	0.7618817
However, we avoid this, so as not to quickly cause a hot abscess if it has not already happened. But if it has already happened, then increase it.	We, however, reject this, since it will excite an effusion if one has not already arisen; and if one has arisen it will increase and confirm it.	0.70483935
And some of them said: place a cupping glass on the site, then draw with strength, and this is more reasonable. However, it is feared that the cupping glass may draw excess fluids to the site, due to the weakened condition.	Some of them said a cupping-vessel should be applied to the place and strong suction be made; this seems more reasonable except that there is a risk of the vessel's drawing superfluities to the place on account of his weak state.	0.77986455
And some of them said: the site should be covered with wool soaked in warm oil, and cushions should be placed between the ribs until they are filled, so that the binding is even when you wrap it around.	Some of them said that the place should be covered with wool soaked in warm oil and that a pad should be placed in the intercostal space to fill it up so as to make the bandaging level when you wind it round.	0.7631513
Then the patient should be treated as for pleurisy with food and medicine.	Then treat the patient with diet and medicines as for pleurisy.	0.9262905
But if a severe condition arises that the patient cannot bear, and the bone pierces the membrane with an injurious prick, and we fear for the patient, then we must cut above the site and expose the fractured rib. Then place on it the instrument that preserves the tissue, previously mentioned: and cut the bone with ease, and remove it.	If the patient is in such a bad way that he cannot bear it, the bone painfully piercing the pleura, and we are afraid for him, then we shall have to cut down upon the place and lay bare the broken rib; then we place under it the instrument to protect the membrane, which has been described, and gently cut out the bone and remove it.	0.8450195
Then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture: and treat it with plasters until it heals.	Then the edges of the wound should be joined, with a suture if large, and dressed with ointments until healed.	0.69533205
If a hot abscess arises in the meantime, then act quickly, soak cushions in rose oil, and place them on the site: and treat the patient with what is suitable for the abscess.	If meanwhile there arise an abscess, quickly soak pads in oil of roses and apply them to the place and treat the patient with internal remedies against abscess too.	0.8077929
Meanwhile, let him also lie on the side on which he sleeps, until he heals.	Let him lie upon the side which is easier for him to sleep on, until it heals.	0.7735839

chapter-3-subchapter-9.txt
¶ On the restoration of fractures of the vertebrae of the back and neck.	On setting the vertebrae of the back and neck.	0.6993587
Fracture sometimes happens to the bones of the neck, and rarely do they suffer attrition: the same is true of the vertebrae of the back. When this happens to someone and you wish to know whether it will heal or not, then consider this. For if you see that his hands are softened, numb, and lifeless, and he cannot move them, nor extend, nor grip them; and when you press them with your fingers and prick them with a needle, he feels nothing, nor any pain: then you know it will not heal, and in most cases, it is fatal.	When a fracture occurs in the bones of the neck, which is rare, as mostly they suffer contusion, as do the spinal vertebrae—when it happens to anyone and you want to know whether it will heal or not, then look and if you see both his hands relaxed and numb and dead and he has no power to move or stretch or close them, and when you pinch them or prick them with a needle he does not notice it or feel any pain in them, you may know, as a general rule, that it will not mend, for he is doomed.	0.88858473
But if he moves them and feels compression and pricking in them when touched with fingers, then you know that the spinal marrow is intact, and the patient will heal with treatment.	But if he moves them both and feels in them the pinching and pricking, you may know that the spinal medulla is still intact and that under treatment the patient will recover.	0.85277045
And if something similar occurs with the vertebrae of the back and you wish to know whether he will heal or not, then look at his feet: if you see that they are softened and what happened in the hands also occurs in them; then, when he lies on his back, he passes gas and waste involuntarily, and when he lies on his stomach, waste exits without control; and when he lies on his back and wishes to urinate but cannot, you know it is fatal. Do not therefore put effort into his treatment.	If anything of this nature happens to the vertebrae of the back and you wish to know if he will recover or not, then pay attention to his feet. If you see them relaxed and in the situation we described in the case of the hands, and when he lies on his back he passes flatus and faeces involuntarily, and lying prone he passes water involuntarily and lying on his back he cannot pass water if he wishes, then you may know his case is hopeless, so do not concern yourself with his treatment.	0.8431134
But if none of that happens to him, the case is lighter.	But if nothing of this kind occur then the case is easier.	0.8362071
And the treatment for what happens in such cases is to attempt to reduce any hot swelling: place rose oil on the affected vertebra alone, or with the yolk of roasted eggs.	The way to treat this latter kind of case is to try to reduce the swelling by applying over the injured vertebra oil of roses, alone, or with roasted yolks of egg; apply three times a day until the swelling has gone down.	0.75154716
Apply this several times a day, until the hot swelling subsides: then place on the spot one of the strengthening, drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage: and instruct the patient to rest in peace and quiet. He should not sleep on the side where he feels pain until he is healed.	Then apply to the place one of the strengthening and absorbent plasters and bind it on; bid him keep quiet and still and sleep only in the attitude in which he has no pain, until he is well.	0.7203007
If a bone fragment has loosened at the site of attrition, or anything else becomes detached, you must cut above the skin and remove it. Then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with sutures. Then treat it with a healing ointment until it heals.	If the injury is accompanied by fragmentation or a separation of part of the bone, you must cut down on it and remove the bone; then bring together the edges of the opening, by suture if it be wide; then treat with granulating ointments until it heals.	0.79703146
If the last bone of the spine is fractured, at the end of the tail: you must insert the thumb of your left hand into the anus and align the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible, in a second adjustment.	If the last bone of the coccyx, which is the sacrum of the tail, breaks, introduce the thumb of your left hand into his anus and reset the bone with the other hand in whatever way is possible and affords the best setting; then apply over it a plaster, and a splint if necessary, and bind it up.	0.73126996
Then place over it, and remove it: and treat the wound as previously described, until it heals.	And if you perceive a fragment in the fracture, cut down upon it, remove it, and dress the wound as before said, until it heals.	0.61310697

chapter-3-subchapter-10.txt
Chapter XI.	CHAPTER TEN.	0.705657
The bones of the hip are rarely fractured. But if they do fracture, the fracture is usually just a breaking at the ends: they split lengthwise and incline inward, causing pain at the site and pricking, and the leg with the fracture becomes numb.	It is rare indeed that hip-bones are fractured, and if they are fractured the fracture consists of a comminution of the extremities of them and a longitudinal splitting and a bending inward; and the patient feels a pain and a piercing at the site, and the leg on the fractured side is benumbed.	0.82125354
The restoration is to lay your hand over it until you can discern the shape of the fracture.	To set it, you pass your hand over it and ascertain what the shape of the fracture is.	0.66188216
If the fracture is only at the ends, align it according to the preparations made for alignment, until it resembles its natural shape.	If it is a fracture of the extremity only, set that fracture in whatever manner is convenient for you until it answers to its proper shape.	0.72725385
But if the fracture is lengthwise or inclines inward, then make the patient lie on his stomach until the restoration of that fracture is prepared. When you have aligned it, place a plaster on it, then a splint from wood or leather over it: and bind it with a compression that does not fear displacement of the fracture nor the removal of the splint.	But if it be a longitudinal fracture or it has bent inwards, have the patient lie on his stomach so as to make it convenient for setting the fracture; and when you have set it apply over it a plaster and over that a splint of wood or leather, and bandage it in such wise that you have no fear that the fracture may extend or the splint slip.	0.91443807
And equalize any hollows with whatever will fill them, until the compression takes hold evenly: instruct the patient to sleep on his back or on his healthy side.	Level out the cavity of the lumbar region with some filling so that it may take the bandage evenly, and bid the patient sleep on his back or on his sound side.	0.6525117
If a hot abscess develops, then cease any extension and restoration until the hot abscess subsides: place on it what soothes it, as described before, then return to restoring it: and bind it as necessary.	If there occur an effusion, then refrain from bandaging or setting it until the effusion subsides; and apply to it something to allay it as before said; then return to setting it and bandaging it as it should be.	0.798646
But if it occurs in the sciatic bone, or is shattered, remove it.	If there be any splinters in the bone or anything crumbles away from the extremities, it must not be pulled out or touched, but set externally as we have said, and the bandaging should be left until it heals.	0.5088276

chapter-3-subchapter-11.txt
On the restoration of a fracture of the elbow.	On setting a fracture of the humerus.	0.7333114
The elbow is that which lies between the forearm and the top of the shoulder blade.	The humerus is what lies between the elbow and the head of the scapula.	0.8572794
If it breaks, then its restoration is according to one of two methods.	If it is fractured it may be set in one of two ways.	0.77366984
One of which is: to take a flat piece of wood of medium thickness, in the following shape.	One is to take a smooth bow-shaped piece of wood of medium thickness, like this.	0.78270555
And two bands are tied at both ends.	You tie two bands at the two ends and then it is hung from above.	0.71593606
Then it is hung from a high place, and the patient sits on a seat. Then he stretches his broken arm over the wood until it reaches its middle, where the wood is curved.	The patient is to sit on a seat; then his broken arm is folded upon the piece of wood in such a way that his axilla fits into the middle of the curve of the piece of wood.	0.7835843
Then hang something heavy over it so that the assistant stretches it downward. Then the doctor aligns the fracture with his hands until the bone returns to where it should be.	Then hang a heavy weight from the arm, or have an assistant pull it downwards; then the doctor should straighten out the fracture with both hands together until it is properly reduced.	0.74198556
The other method is that the patient lies back on his neck, and his hand is hung from his neck with a band. Then instruct two assistants: one to hold above the fracture with his hands, and the other to hold below, and each stretches in his direction.	The other way is to make the patient lie back and to suspend his hand from his neck by a band, then you instruct two assistants. One is to grasp with both hands the arm above the fracture, and the other the arm below the fracture; and each should make extension toward himself.	0.93409425
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then tie a band below the fracture and another above, and each of the two assistants stretches in his own direction.	And if you wish to extend more strongly, tie a band below the fracture and another above, and let each assistant pull toward himself.	0.93336654
If the fracture is near the end of the shoulder, then one band should be placed below the middle, and another below the fracture toward the forearm.	If the fracture is near the extremity of the shoulder you will have to put one band beneath the axilla and the other below the fracture near the elbow.	0.8641846
Similarly, if the fracture is near the elbow, then a band should be placed on that spot and on the elbow itself.	Similarly, if the fracture be near the elbow you will have to put a band over the place and over the elbow itself.	0.9531305
Then align the fracture with ease, without effort, until the fracture is aligned as it should be and applied well; then secure it, if there is no warm swelling.	Then gently and without violence straighten out the fracture until it is restored to its proper shape and fits together well, and then tighten it if no abscess occur.	0.8378325
If there is a warm swelling, then release the binding until the seventh day. And place soft wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil on it until the swelling subsides; then secure it: the method of securing it is to place a plaster over the fracture.	But if an abscess occur, leave the bandaging until the seventh day and apply raw wool soaked in vinegar and oil of roses until the abscess subsides; then bind it up.	0.81014127
Then place a wrapping of new cloth over the plaster. Then the arm is set over the elbow, and the patient places his open hand on his shoulder.	The method of binding it is to apply a plaster to the fracture; then wind round the plaster a bandage of new material; then bind the forearm to the humerus, placing his hand open on his shoulder.	0.73941886
And place a cloth, and bind it over the elbow, so that the arm stays in place instead of splints, unless something prevents you, nor is anything altered by the broken bone.	Then apply pads and bandages to the arm and forearm so that the forearm serves instead of splints, if there is no contra-indication and you see no pathological change in the broken bone.	0.6911
If you fear something may be altered by the broken bone, then use splints: place over the fracture a splint that is wider and stronger than the other splints. Place a finger’s width between each splint, and the length of the splints should cover the fracture with an addition of three fingers on each side.	But should you fear any such change then use splints. The way to use these is to place over the fracture itself a splint that is broader and stronger than the rest; and leave a space of a finger's breadth between splints; the splint should be of a length to suit the fracture with the addition of three fingers' breadth all round.	0.8750865
Then bind tightly over the splints with the binding mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.	Then bandage over the splints in the manner mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.	0.863184
And make the binding tighter over the location of the fracture. And the farther the fracture extends, the less tight the binding should be.	That is, you should bandage more tightly over the fracture itself and more lightly as you get away from the fracture.	0.6120726
If therefore you see the position of the splints and the binding as we have said, at the time when you immediately restore the limb, then do so; and if you fear a warm swelling, then release the binding and splints until the seventh day, as we have said.	If you decide to put on splints and bandage, as we have said, at the time you set the limb, do so. But if you fear an abscess, leave the splinting and bandaging until the seventh day as we have said.	0.8013387
Then examine the binding every three days to ensure that no itching or swelling occurs, or that food is not prevented from reaching the limb due to the excessive binding. Therefore, correct everything according to what we have said.	Then examine the bandaging every third day lest there be itching or swelling at the place; or nourishment be prevented from reaching the limb on account of excessively tight bandaging; treat all these in the proper manner according to our prescriptions.	0.87437665
If, however, you have confidence that nothing will happen as a result, then do not loosen the binding until after three days or more.	But if you are confident that nothing of this sort is happening then do not loosen the bandaging until after many days.	0.84137607
Let the patient sleep on his back with his hand on his stomach, and place a cushion filled with wool evenly under his elbow.	The patient should be made to sleep on his back with his hand on his stomach, and under the humerus there should be placed a cushion evenly filled with wool.	0.88352424
And monitor every hour of the night or day to ensure that the shape of the broken limb is not disturbed or that the binding does not loosen. Therefore, correct it all with your skill.	And examine it at all times of the day and night lest the shape of the broken limb suffer any deformity or the binding loosen; do your utmost to put any such thing right.	0.8268796
And provide the patient’s food in the order we prescribed, so that at first it is light food, until the bone begins to heal; then it is appropriate to increase his food.	You should also direct the patient's diet along the line that we have given earlier; namely, at first the food should be light until the bone has begun to knit; then you should order heavier food.	0.82628727
For it is customary for the elbow and leg to be secured for forty days; then it should be loosened, and a bath given, and treated with ointments that restore it.	Now it is the nature of the humerus and of the leg to knit in forty days; then they should be loosened and the patient should go to the bath and be treated with suitable ointments.	0.78462696
But if the fracture is severe or rough, then do not loosen the binding and splints for fifty days, or even up to two months.	If the fracture be ugly and contused, do not unfasten it for fifty days or even two months.	0.86010826

chapter-3-subchapter-12.txt
On the restoration of a fracture of the arm.	On setting a fracture of the forearm.	0.7548257
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two forearm bones.	The forearm consists of two bones and is sometimes called 'the two firesticks'.	0.80524004
One of which is small: it is the one that follows the thumb. And the other is large, and is located beneath the small one from the lower part.	One of these bones is small and is in line with the thumb, the other is large; this is the one placed lower, under the smaller one.	0.8450591
Thus, perhaps the larger bone alone breaks, or the smaller one; or perhaps they break together.	The larger alone may be broken, or the smaller alone, or both broken together.	0.83674645
When the smaller bone is broken at the upper part, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is easier.	When the small upper bone (radius) is broken it is easy to set and its mending is rapid.	0.7663489
And when the lower bone is broken, its fracture is bad, and its healing difficult.	When the lower bone (ulna) breaks it is bad and its mending is difficult.	0.7831981
And it is worse when both bones are broken together.	Worst of all is when both bones break together.	0.84546596
If, therefore, the broken bone is the smaller upper one, it is fitting for the doctor in its restoration to apply a gentle extension until it is aligned.	If the broken bone is the radius, the doctor when setting it must use light traction, gently, until he has it straight.	0.6751261
But if the larger bone is the one that is broken, then it is necessary to apply a much stronger binding.	If it is the ulna that breaks, he must employ stronger traction on it.	0.6835362
And it is necessary to position the hand appropriately for its restoration, and extend it on a cushion. And the thumb of the hand should be elevated above all the fingers, and the joint lower than all the other fingers, or the rest; and the patient should sit upright, and the cushion should be placed in front of him, or at his level, so that the patient does not experience discomfort.	During setting and extension the hand must be disposed on a cushion, spread out with the thumb uppermost, higher than all the fingers, and the little finger downmost, while the patient sits cross-legged upon the floor. The cushion should be on a level with him so that he does not suffer discomfort.	0.8153108
Then the assistant extends the arm from below, either with his hand or with a band. And another assistant extends it from above in the same way.	Then let an attendant extend the arm from below, either by hand or by means of a band, while another attendant extends it from above similarly.	0.91449267
Then the doctor aligns the bone until he restores it to the best shape possible.	Then the doctor may straighten the bone so as to restore it to the best possible shape.	0.9219688
If there are splinters in the bone fracture, then try to return each fragment to its place with your skill.	If there be any splinters in the fracture he must do his utmost to restore each splinter to its place.	0.77557963
But if a separated splinter appears in it and pricks the skin, and you have no hope of restoring it, then cut above it and remove it according to the method we have previously mentioned.	If a detached splinter appears there and is piercing the skin and you have no hope of restoring it, cut down upon it and remove it in the manner we have mentioned earlier.	0.90505093
If, however, the fracture is accompanied by a wound, I have already dedicated a specific chapter to it; therefore, take the treatment for it from there.	If the fracture is accompanied by a wound, we have devoted a separate section to this, so take the treatment of it from there.	0.85862327
If, at the beginning of your restoration, a warm swelling occurs, then line a cloth with a salve made from rose oil and white wax, at a medium consistency between thick and thin, and bind the cloth gently over it until the swelling subsides; then remove the salve and place a plaster prepared from mill dust mixed with egg white. Then place the splints, and the splint that is placed over the fracture should be somewhat wider and stronger.	If, when you begin to set the bone, an effusion occurs, smear a cloth with the wax made from oil of roses and white wax, of medium thickness, and bind the dressing on gently. When the effusion subsides, remove the wax and apply the plaster prepared from mill-dust and egg-white, then apply splints; the splint that goes on the actual fracture should be a little wider and stronger than the rest.	0.91425896
And know that the number of splints for the arm is six in most cases, whether the fracture is in one forearm bone or both.	You should know that the number of splints for an arm is, as a rule, six, whether the fracture be of one bone or of both together.	0.85030866
Then place your binding tighter and stronger over the site of the fracture, and somewhat more toward the upper or lower part of the fracture; or make the binding slightly looser, as previously mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.	Then bandage more tightly and strongly over the site of the fracture, and, as you wrap the bandage above and below the fracture, bind little by little more loosely according to the instruction given at the beginning of the book.	0.8075639
And let the cloths that are wrapped over the fracture be soft, moist cloths; they should not be hard or rough. And the thread with which it is bound should be of proper linen, medium between thin and thick, as we have described.	The dressings wound round the fracture should be gentle and soft, not very hard, while the cord for binding is best made of linen of medium thickness as we have prescribed.	0.7395108
And examine the limb and the binding after several days. If anything occurs that requires correction, such as itching of the limb, then it is necessary to wash the limb with warm water until the itching subsides, and let the limb be unbound until it calms down, then reapply the binding.	Some days later, examine the limb and the bandaging and if anything has happened that should be put right, such as pruritus in the limb, the limb should be bathed in warm water until the pruritus has subsided. Let the limb be unbandaged for one night so that he may rest, then put the bandage on again.	0.8810433
If the binding has already loosened, and the bone has already shifted, or similar issues arise, then correct it all with your skill, and examine it again.	If the bandaging has become loose and the bone has shifted or anything of that sort, correct it all diligently.	0.73837566
For if nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive binding, then you should loosen it slightly and leave it for several days until nourishment reaches it again, then rebind it.	Look also to see if nourishment is being prevented from reaching the part on account of over-bandaging, in which case you will have to loosen it a little and leave it for a few days until nourishment flows to it; then bind it up.	0.74801856
If none of these issues we have mentioned occur to the patient, then it should not be loosened until after twenty days or around that time.	But if none of those things that we have mentioned happens to the patient, it should not be loosened until after about twenty days.	0.8829144
Then the patient’s hand should be suspended from his neck. And let his neck be kept straight, and protected from agitating movements by its own strength. And have him sleep on his back.	Then the patient's hand is to be suspended from his neck, the arm being level, and he should guard carefully against agitated movements, and should sleep on his back.	0.89147896
And know that this fracture heals in thirty or thirty-two days, and perhaps in twenty-eight days. All of this depends on the conditions of constitutions and the arrangements of strength.	You should know that this fracture of the arm mends in thirty or thirty-two days, and sometimes in twenty-eight, depending on the individual's constitution and the condition of his strength.	0.81534266

chapter-3-subchapter-13.txt
On the restoration of fractures of the hand.	On the repair of fractures of the palm and fingers.	0.79097205
Know that fractures rarely occur in the palm of the hand and in the joints of the fingers. And it does not happen except by repeated trauma.	Fractures of the metacarpus and of the small bones of the fingers very rarely occur; the only frequent occurrence is contusion.	0.66233075
When, therefore, a fracture or injury of the hand occurs, it is necessary for the patient to sit squarely, and a seat should be placed level in front of him. Then place his hand extended over it.	When a fracture or crushing of the palm of the hand occurs the patient should sit cross-legged with a chair of the right height in front of him, on which he should put his outstretched hand.	0.8350037
Then let the assistant stretch the broken bones, and the physician should align them until they come together well.	Then an assistant is to extend the broken bones while the doctor straightens them so as to achieve a proper union.	0.84484726
Then it is necessary to apply a plaster and lint, unless a warm swelling appears. Then place a splint over it according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped it in a linen cloth.	Then a plaster and a dressing should be applied, if an effusion do not occur; then a splint over that, measured to the site and wrapped in a soft cloth.	0.7964025
If, however, the fracture is near the lower part around the palm’s center, then make a spherical pad from cloth and instruct the patient to press on it with the fractured palm; then secure it with a long cloth.	If the fracture be lower down, near the inner part of the palm of the hand, make a ball of cloth, bid the patient grip on it with the fractured palm of his hand, and then bind it up with a long bandage.	0.8309512
And the splint should be made of soft leather, so that it can be applied closely to the hand’s body; and bind it as necessary.	The splint should be of leather that is somewhat soft, so as to fit into all the folds of the palm; and bandage it on suitably.	0.77748287
If the fracture is on the outer side, then it is necessary to place a splint on top and another underneath the hand, with the hand open and straight. Then apply a binding, wrapping the hand, and extend between the fingers with a bandage.	But if the fracture be on the outside you will have to put one splint above and another beneath the palm of the hand, to keep the hand opened and straight; then put on the bandage, carrying it round the hand and in and out between the fingers.	0.8684727
If a fracture occurs in one of the finger joints, then if it is the thumb, it should be aligned as necessary. Then bind it with the palm; and if desired, place a small, straight splint to elevate the fracture and prevent movement.	The fracture may occur to one of the small bones of the fingers. If it be the thumb, then set it in the proper way and bind it down to the palm of the hand; if you like you can apply a small straight splint to it to keep the fracture straight so that it does not shift.	0.877421
If, however, the fracture is in the other fingers, such as the middle, index, pinky, or ring finger, then it should be aligned and bound with the healthy finger next to it; or all can be bound together in sequence, which is better. Or place a small splint over it, as we said for the thumb.	If the break be in any of the other fingers, such as the middle or index or little finger or the ring finger, straighten it out and bind it to the sound finger next to it; or let them all be bound up one to another, which is better; or apply a small straight splint, as we said for the thumb.	0.9019191
And consider your restoration, and after the setting, treat any warm swelling that arises accordingly, as previously described.	While you are setting it, and afterwards, look out for an effusion and counteract it with what is required if anything of this sort occur, according to what has been repeatedly prescribed.	0.59950906

chapter-3-subchapter-14.txt
On the restoration of a fracture of the hip.	On setting a fracture of the femur.	0.7640889
The hip bone is often fractured and is noticeable by the way it turns inward and outward.	The femur is often broken, and this is readily discernible, for it will rotate forwards or backwards.	0.725222
Its restoration is done by binding one band above the fracture and another below it. And the patient should lie face down.	It is set by binding a bandage above the fracture and another below, while the patient lies flat on his face.	0.85249954
Then let the assistant extend each band on its side evenly, and this is done when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.	Then each assistant should make an even extension in his own direction, by the bandage. This is when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.	0.8032066
If the fracture is near the hip’s root, then place the band on the side of the hip so that the extension goes upward, and place another band below the fracture.	But if the fracture is close to the root of the thigh, you should tie on a soft bandage of wool or something similar, at the root of the thigh toward the groin, so that extension may be applied above, and another bandage below the fracture.	0.74907964
Similarly, if the fracture is near the knee, then place the band close to the knee so that the extension goes downward.	Likewise if the fracture is near the knee the bandage should be near the knee, so that extension may be made downwards.	0.91295844
Then the physician should align the bone with both hands until it returns to its natural shape, and the bones should join well.	Then the doctor should straighten it out with both hands until he has reduced it to the pattern of the natural form and the bone unites neatly.	0.9012975
Then it is necessary to apply a plaster and a binding, if there is no swelling in the member. If swelling occurs, then leave it for a few days until the swelling subsides, then return to your treatment.	Then you will have to apply the plaster and bandage if there is no effusion in the limb, but if there is an effusion leave it for a few days until the swelling has gone down, then resume your treatment.	0.9042084
You should wrap a hard binding over the fracture, that is, a binding band, and fold it two or three times, leaving an excess. Then wrap the leg until it reaches the heel at the base of the buttocks.	As to the bandaging, you should wrap a firm broad sash two or three times round the fracture, leaving some over; then bind the leg up so that the heel is brought to reach the root of the buttock.	0.82048726
And insert a long cord between the hip and the leg near the knee downward, so that the ends of the cord emerge from the upper part of the two sides. Then wrap the excess of the binding over the thigh and hip.	Then pass a long cord in the space between the thigh and the leg, low down near the knee, and let the ends of the cord come up on either side, then bind the rest of the sash over the leg and the thigh.	0.88374364
Then place splints on the hip at the site of the fracture and place one splint on the thigh bone.	Then apply splints to the thigh at the very site of the fracture and put one of the splints on the leg-bone.	0.9376316
Then fill the gaps between the thigh and hip with soft cloths to balance the binding.	Then pack soft material in the space between the leg and the thigh to make the bandaging even.	0.8391173
Then begin a firm binding from the middle over the fracture site with three or four wraps. And as you extend the bandage farther from the fracture site, let the binding be looser, softer, and gentler.	Then start with three or four turns of a strong bandage in the middle over the site of the fracture, and as you get away from the site of the fracture bind lighter and softer and looser.	0.9210515
Then tighten the two ends of the cord that you inserted between the hip and the thigh. Then tie both ends to the three splints above. Then move both ends of the cord downward until you reach the ankle of the foot. And with both, secure the ends of the splints on the other side, so that the binding does not move out of place.	Then turn to the two ends of the cord which you previously passed between the thigh and the leg, and with the cord bind the adjacent splints above, then carry the ends downward until you end up at the great tendon of the foot and with them bind also the extremities of the splints at the other end so that the bandaging will not shift from its place.	0.8765336
Then release the bandage over it while it remains, so that there does not occur corrosion, nor swelling, nor inflammation to the limb, or anything similar. But if something happens from it. Then proceed quickly with its release, and correct all that happened from it, according to what we have said many times.	Then let the bandaging remain on as long as no pruritus or abscess or effusion or anything of that sort happens to the limb; but if any of these occur loosen it quickly and put right whatever has taken place, in the manner we have often mentioned.	0.9006417
If there is a piece of bone in the bone itself that is sharp: then it is necessary that you smooth it, if it is possible for you. And if not, cut upon it and remove it, and treat it with that which was previously mentioned, until it heals.	If there be a penetrating fragment of the bone, you must reposition it if you can; but if not then cut down upon it and remove it and treat the wound in the sort of way mentioned previously, until it heals.	0.81721526
And sometimes this fracture of the hip is bound, with splints added to it, as we have said for the arm and thigh.	This fracture of the thigh is sometimes bandaged without bringing the leg alongside with splints, in the way we spoke of for the humerus and the forearm.	0.769125
However, in the restoration of it being thus fractured, limping does not happen to the patient. But if it is restored alone, without the other leg being applied to it, then it is necessary that he to whom it belongs limps, always.	But setting after the former manner does not cause the patient any lameness; whereas if the femur is set alone without binding the leg to it the patient will inevitably be lame for always.	0.76931244
And know that the hip is set in fifty days, or a little more or less; all of it depends on the diversity of temperaments and other conditions.	You must know that the femur knits in fifty days or a little more or less, according to the different constitutions and other circumstances.	0.79759675

chapter-3-subchapter-15.txt
On the restoration of the fracture of the kneecap.	On setting a fracture of the patella of the knee.	0.7417483
Know that a fracture of the kneecap rarely happens, but it often suffers abrasion.	You should know that the patella is rarely fractured, but crushing often occurs.	0.8445867
If indeed a fracture occurs, then it is nothing other than a crack or hole in its parts. And it is either with a wound or without a wound. And it is all felt with sensitivity.	If a fracture does happen to it, it will be either a splitting or a shattering which may be simple or compound; and all these can be palpated.	0.6750852
And its restoration is such that the parts which are disrupted are aligned with the fingers, until they are joined and connected as evenly and easily as possible.	Now the way to set is for the separated parts of it to be put right with the fingers, so that they unite and join as far as straightening and gentleness and skill can serve.	0.7334475
Then place a plaster made from sesame flour, or mill flour, with egg white; place a round splint over it if needed, and bind it with a bandage suitable for it.	Then apply the plaster and put upon that a circular splint, if need be, and over that a suitable bandage.	0.7341908
Then consider all the instructions we have described for the other fractures, like the hot swelling and similar; thus, treat each occurrence with what is suitable for it, until it heals.	Then keep an eye on it for all the conditions described for the other fractures, such as an effusion and the like, meeting whatever arises with what is good for it, until it is healed.	0.8161515

chapter-3-subchapter-16.txt
On the restoration of the fracture of the leg.	On setting a fracture of the leg.	0.794797
Know that the leg has two bones, one of which is thick and called by the name of Cruris, and the other is thin and called Focile.	The leg consists of two bones. One of them is thick and is called 'leg bone' (tibia). The other is slender and is called 'fire-stick' (fibula).	0.6641183
And each of these bones can suffer fractures similar to those that happen to the two bones of the arm, and for that reason its restoration is carried out just as the restoration of the arm, and the operation is the same.	Both of these are liable to the same kinds of fracture as occur in the two bones of the forearm, therefore the repair of them will be like that of the arm, and the operation is one and the same.	0.88496846
But if both bones are broken together, the leg turns in all directions.	If both bones are broken together, the leg will turn in all directions.	0.9162688
And if the thinner bone is broken, the leg turns toward the front.	If the fibula is broken there will be a forward deformity of the leg.	0.64445746
And if the thicker bone is broken, you will find it below; and it is among those things that are not hidden from you.	If the tibia be broken, and that low down, it will be obvious to you.	0.52080303
Then apply extension, alignment, and binding of splints evenly according to it.	Employ levelling and extension and binding on of splints similar to that (sc.	0.57393193
However, if the fracture of the leg is a severe fracture, having much swelling, the extension should be less and gentler with your relief.	But it will be necessary, if the fracture of the leg be a serious one with much fragmentation, for the extension to be gentler and lighter; and you must employ the utmost gentleness in setting it.	0.80103654
And indeed in the leg there is a part of the operation beyond the arm: and it is such that when you arrange the splints and complete all your work, then take two strips of pine wood, which is used in the making of sunshades placed under the planks, and they are made from palm leaf stems, and choose those with small thickness, and they should not be from the thinnest; and their length should match the length of the leg from the knee down.	The operation on the leg involves one more process than that on the arm, namely, that when you have set the splints and have finished the task, you should take two strips of pine wood such as are used for roofing upstairs rooms, being put in the gaps of the planking, or they may be palm stalks; pick out such as are somewhat thick and not too thin; they should be as long as the leg from the knee down.	0.82380396
Then wrap each one in cloth with two wrappings according to its length. And place one part of the leg on one side and the other on the opposite side, and they should extend from the knee to the lower part of the foot.	Then wrap each of them in a cloth folded into two longitudinally, and put one on each side of the leg; they should reach from the knee to the extremity of the foot.	0.8822987
Then bind the two strips at three places, at both ends and in the middle. For when the bandage is prevented, the leg leans to the right and left and stays in a good position.	Then tie the two strips in three places, namely at the two ends and in the middle; this binding prevents the leg from bending to right or left and it will be held in a good straight position.	0.9029466
And already a wooden cradle should be prepared according to the length of the leg, and the leg is placed in it to keep it from moving.	Sometimes a 'gutter-splint' is used, made of wood according to the length of the leg; the leg is placed in this and it keeps the leg motionless.	0.60190547
And most certainly it is necessary to do this in a fracture when there is indeed a wound with it.	This is particularly necessary in a compound fracture.	0.5496452
Then observe the leg every day and diligently guard it from abscess, swelling, or any other conditions. If, then, anything of those should happen, then apply to it what is necessary until it heals, if God wills.	Then carefully examine the leg every day and use the utmost care to guard against effusion or swelling or other like things; and when anything of this sort happens employ the means to meet the case until it heals.	0.8361293

chapter-3-subchapter-17.txt
On the fracture of the bones of the foot and toes.	On fracture of bones of the foot and of the toes.	0.98874545
A fracture does not at all occur in the heel.	The heel is never fractured; but the bones of the foot sometimes are.	0.56982076
But a fracture sometimes occurs in the bones of the foot, and a fracture happens in the toes only rarely, and they generally only suffer abrasion in most conditions.	The toes too are rarely fractured; but mostly they get crushed.	0.64080524
If a fracture occurs in the bones of the foot, and you see those bones lifting over each other, then the patient should place his foot on prepared ground, as if walking.	If a fracture occurs to the bones of the foot, and you see the bones riding over one another, let the patient plant his foot flat on the ground as if walking.	0.9186015
Then stand, and place your foot over the elevated part of those bones; afterward, press down or tread upon it, and align it until it returns to its proper place.	Then stand and put the sole of your foot on the prominent bones and with your foot put pressure upon them and level them to their proper place.	0.7967049
Then place a plaster and tow on top, and put a small board under the arch of the foot, with two flat ends.	Then apply a bandage and some tow on top, and put under the inner part of the sole of the foot a small board with two flat heads.	0.90545934
Then bind it with a suitable bandage around the foot, after wrapping it with cloth and other things needed.	After you have wrapped them in material and so on, bind them tightly to the sole of the foot.	0.6226008
After three or four days have passed, then release the bandage. For you will find the bones aligned, whether fractured or dislocated. Thus, the procedure for them is as you see.	When three days or four have passed, loosen the binding and you will find the bones in position; whether they have been fractured or dislocated, the operation is (the same,) as you see.	0.8850423
If some toes are broken, then restore and align them as I have described to you for the restoration of the fingers of the hand. Then place a splint along the length of the toe, slightly wider than it, and then put under the foot the board I mentioned, and bind it with a suitable bandage.	If one of the toes be broken, reposition and straighten it in the way that I described for the fingers; then apply to the broken toe a splint of a length corresponding to the toe and a little wider than it. Then under the sole of the foot put the board that I have just described, and bandage it on firmly.	0.9185053
If, however, two, three, or more bones are broken, then place a splint over each toe, of its respective size, wrapped in linen cloth, and bind the board to the bottom of the foot, standing on one end of the board outside the arch of the foot, so that it holds with good support.	If the broken bones number two, three, or more, then apply over each toe a single splint measured to it, wrapped in soft material, and bind the board on the sole and let the flat portion of each of the two heads extend beyond the end of the sole of the foot, so that it may be held firmly.	0.8696509
And it is suitable for you not to forget but to consider everything I have told you in the other fractures regarding the injuries we have described, and apply what is appropriate for each incident.	And you must not forget to pay attention to all those contingencies that we have mentioned to you in other fractures; meet each contingency with the means proper to it.	0.74697125

chapter-3-subchapter-18.txt
On the fracture of the woman’s vulva, the pubic bone, and the man’s member.	On fracture of the female pudenda and of the pubic bone and of the male organ.	0.84872365
When a woman’s vulva is fractured, have her sit in a square position. Then tilt her back slightly, and let her be held from behind.	When a woman's pudenda are fractured, make her sit cross-legged, then bend her backwards little by little, being supported from behind.	0.8367388
Then let the midwife fill her vulva with cotton until it is full, and let it become spherical within the vulva.	Then let a midwife pack the vulva with cotton wool so as to form a kind of spherical packing in the vulva.	0.7157928
Then shake the woman, and slowly lift her back. For the cotton will come out until it is at the entrance of the vulva like a sphere, and the broken bone will return.	Then shake the woman and by degrees elevate the dorsal spine, for the cotton wool will emerge until it is like a sphere at the opening and the fractured bone will be reduced.	0.78292096
Then place a cushion under her back. When she wishes to urinate, remove the cotton with ease, then let her urinate; then replace it as you first inserted it, and let her return to her original cushion.	Then put a pillow upon her back and when she wants to pass water gently remove the cotton wool so she may do so, then put it back in the same way in which it was put in at the first. Then she should return to her pillow as before.	0.8485083
Let her do this for seven days, or about that, for the bone itself will be restored.	She should do this for about seven days, then it will be mended.	0.72208667
And if you wish, take an eggshell bladder, and bind a reed tube over its opening, and insert the whole bladder into her vulva. Then blow forcefully into the tube until the bladder inflates inside the vulva, for the fracture will return.	If you prefer, take a sheep's bladder and bind a hollow reed to the opening of it; introduce the whole bladder into the pudenda and then blow hard into the tube so that the bladder is inflated within the passage and the fracture will then be reduced.	0.8378668
Then fill it with cotton, and let it remain for a few days, as we have described, until it heals.	Then pack with cotton wool and let her wait a few days as we have described, until it be healed.	0.93043196
And when the pubic bone of a man or woman is broken, then administer its restoration and alignment as we have described for the hip bone.	Now when a man or woman has the pubic bone broken you can use for the setting and repair of it the method we gave for a fracture of the hip.	0.78493845
And it is not hidden that in these close fractures, which rarely occur, especially for someone with some study or practice.	The correct practice in these uncommon fractures, which very rarely happen, will be obvious, especially to one who has some experience and understands well this book of mine.	0.61696446
And understand my book well, for the fracture itself shows you in many circumstances the proper way to its restoration and bandaging; therefore, understand.	For the fracture itself will in most cases indicate the correct way to repair it and bind it up, so use your intelligence.	0.65214014
But when the man’s member is fractured, take the neck of a goose and insert the member into it. Then place a wrap made of cloth around it, wrap it, and let it rest for three days, or about that, and it will heal, if God wills.	When a man's organ is fractured, take a goose's neck and introduce the penis into it; then let it be wrapped and bandaged and left for about three days until it be healed.	0.7971328

chapter-3-subchapter-19.txt
On the Restoration of Bone Fractures When There is Also a Wound	On the repair of fractures accompanied by wounding.	0.6874709
If someone experiences a fracture with a wound, especially if it is severe, like in the hip bone or its support, or something similar, you should act quickly and immediately perform bloodletting if the conditions for bloodletting are present, as previously mentioned.	When a man has a compound fracture, especially when it is a large bone such as the femur or humerus or the like, you should at once venesect him if the conditions are suitable for venesection as set out above.	0.7701463
If the wound is bleeding, then you must proceed to cut it and apply powdered dried sage over it, if nothing else is available.	If there is bleeding from the wound you must hasten to stanch it by sprinkling it with powdered vitriol if you have nothing else at hand.	0.7631885
Then begin to repair the fracture on the same day; do not delay unless an abscess develops.	Then begin on the reduction of the fracture the very same day; do not put it off unless an abscess occur.	0.9180543
But if a hot abscess forms, then postpone the repair until the ninth day, until the abscess subsides. Do not approach it at all on the third and fourth days, for you could cause harmful complications.	But if an abscess does occur, leave the reduction until the ninth day so that the abscess may subside, and in no circumstances touch it on the third or fourth day, for you will bring evil consequences on him.	0.8698391
If the broken bone is protruding from the exposed skin, then you must attempt to realign it and level it with your hands with gentle pressure and slight extension.	If the fractured bone be overriding the skin you must try to reduce it and to straighten it out by hand, gently and with moderate extension.	0.8571614
If alignment and extension with your hands cannot be prepared, then realign it with this instrument. The instrument is made of iron, with a length of about seven or eight fingers, and its width corresponds to the size of the wound. Because of this, the physician needs to have three or four of them, depending on the amount required for treating any type of fracture.	If reduction and straightening by hand is unsuccessful, then reduce it with this instrument; it is made of iron, seven or eight fingers' breadths long, and wide in proportion to the size of the wound; that is why the doctor should have three or four of them in the sizes he may need for treating every kind of fracture.	0.9104791
It should be round, with a slight thickness, so that it does not compress under pressure during the procedure; it should have a sharp end, with an edge at its tip. The upper part should have thickness from the middle to the bottom.	It should be round and somewhat thick so as not to bend when pressure is put upon it at the time of operating. It should be sharp-ended with a bend at the end; the upper part should be of some thickness, but from the middle to the lower part it is a good bit thinner.	0.8879437
And this is its shape.	This is its form.	0.8461569
In this procedure, the sharp, curved tip should be placed over the protruding bone end and pushed once, until the bone returns and is somewhat aligned.	You must place the sharp incurved end of it over the end of the protruding bone, and push it firmly with it.	0.5359446
Try, therefore, to align the ends of the fracture with each other.	When the bone is repositioned and straightened in some measure, try to straighten the ends of the fracture, one to another.	0.5267903
If the ends of the fracture are delicate and the instrument does not hold it well, then you should cut the end of that bone until the instrument can hold it.	If the fractured end be very thin and the instrument does not grip it firmly you will have to cut off that end so as to give purchase for the instrument.	0.79416937
If you cannot realign it completely with the method we described, then cut it with the appropriate tool we mentioned or saw it with one of the saws in whatever way is possible for you.	If you cannot reduce the bone at all by the means we have described, cut it off with any of the osteotomes we have mentioned that is suitable, or saw it off with one of the saws as best you may.	0.8006796
Then scrape off any roughness and small splinters remaining on the bone.	Then strip away any remaining roughness of the bone and fine pieces of shell.	0.8965378
When the bone is realigned, and the patient experiences intense, piercing pain afterward, know that the bone has not returned to its natural position.	If, when you have reduced the bone, the patient feels severe and troublesome pain, you may know that the bone has not returned to its natural site.	0.84146273
Do it, therefore. For you provide great relief to the patient when the restoration you perform on the bone is complete.	If you can restore it to its natural site, do so, for you will render the patient a signal service.	0.5027688
Then soak a cloth in black astringent wine. Especially if it is summer. Do not place a poultice or anything containing oil on the wound, to avoid causing rot and decay in it.	When your setting of the bone is complete, soak a dressing in dark sharp wine, especially if it be in summer, but do not put wax or anything oily upon the wound lest it cause putrefaction or corruption.	0.8104453
Then apply splints at the moment you finish the bone restoration. Leave the wound exposed, making an opening in the bandages with scissors to match the size of the wound.	Then apply splints the moment you have finished setting the bone; and leave the wound open, that is, by making with scissors an opening in the coverings the size of the wound.	0.90394676
Take every precaution not to tighten the wound with the fracture. For foolish doctors have often done this and caused death, erosion, or “zuchem” (that is, discharge) in their patients. Let your binding be soft and gentle, different from the usual binding for fractures.	And take the utmost care not to bandage up a wound with a fracture; for many ignorant doctors have done that, thereby causing their patients either death or ulceration or a defluxion; so make your bandage soft and loose, as opposed to that of other fractures.	0.7942114
If the wound is severe or large and you fear certain bad complications we have described, and there is pain in the area, then you should not place splints over it. Instead, make bandages from firm cloth in place of splints, and bind it with them.	If the wound be severe or of great size and you fear for it some one of the grave accompaniments such as we have described, and the patient feels a disturbing pain at the place, then you should not put on splints; but instead of splints make wrappings of a stiff material and bind them on.	0.88989985
After one or two days, if you see that pus is starting to form in the wound, then remove the cloth you placed over it with the wine. Then apply linen bandages and ointments that we customarily use to treat wounds, such as tetrapharmacon ointment and similar ones.	If, after one or two days have passed, you see that the wound is beginning to suppurate, remove the dressing with wine that you had put on it, and then apply the pads and ointments with which it is our custom to heal wounds, such as Tetrapharmacon ointment and the like.	0.9236941
Observe the wound every day, morning and evening, until it stabilizes and heals.	Every evening and morning you will have to loosen the bandaging and carefully examine the wound until it knits and is healed.	0.7793087
The limb should be positioned so that the pus can flow downward easily.	You must also place the limb in such a position as to let the pus flow down easily.	0.84286475
If many days pass and the wound does not heal, nor does the pus cease, then you should know that there are small bone fragments within. Therefore, it is necessary to probe the wound with a probe. Remove and extract any of those bone fragments that are loose. For those that are not loose but pierce the tissue and cause pain, try to cut and remove them by any means possible.	If, after many days, the wound is unhealed and it goes on suppurating, you may know that there are some little fragments of bone there; so you will have to examine the wound with a probe; and those fragments that are loose take and extract; and those that are not loose but nevertheless pierce the limb and cause pain, attempt to cut them out and extract them by whatever means you can.	0.9051905
If the wound develops zuchen, ekileten (that is, necrosis), or any other form of rot or decay, then you must treat each of these conditions with the appropriate remedy, as previously discussed in its respective chapter.	If a defluxion or ulceration or other kind of corruption or putrefaction happen to the wound, you must meet all these occurrences with the proper remedy described before in its place.	0.7482352
What I must emphasize, and what you should bear in mind when a bone breaks and protrudes over a limb, such as the hip bone or its support, or other large bones, is not to attempt to pull it; often this causes death. Instead, leave it until it decays.	One thing that is necessary is that you should comply with my words and keep them in mind: when a large bone is broken and protrudes from the limb, such as the femur, the humerus, and the other bones of the long limbs, do not meddle with pulling or extracting it, for this often causes death; but leave it to suppurate.	0.84664845
It may indeed fall off by itself after twenty or thirty days.	It may come away of itself in twenty or thirty days.	0.8950876
Then treat the wound if you see fit; if not, leave it alone.	Then dress the wound if you find occasion; if not, let be.	0.8027189

chapter-3-subchapter-20.txt
On the treatment of knotting in the scar of a fracture.	On the treatment of the callus that remains from a fracture.	0.7612338
This knotting often occurs in the scar of a healed fracture. Especially when near the joints, it distorts the shape of the limb. It may even prevent the limb from functioning naturally.	This callus often occurs after the healing of a fracture, especially one near a joint, and thereby the shape of the limb is spoilt; and sometimes there is limitation of the natural function of the limb.	0.83896506
Therefore, if the knot is recent, apply medicines with astringent properties, such as aloe, frankincense, myrrh, sarcocolla, acacia, and similar substances.	Examine it, and if the callus be soft, apply astringent remedies to it, such as aloes, olibanum, myrrh, balsam of sarcocol, acacia, and the like.	0.7450391
Take some or all of these, mix them with astringent wine, egg white, or vinegar, and apply them over the knot in tow, binding them tightly.	Take some or all of these; beat them up with a dry wine or egg-white or vinegar, apply to the callus on some tow and bind up firmly.	0.9117633
Leave the binding on and do not loosen it for many days. Then loosen it, reapply another, and repeat until the knot disappears.	Leave the bandaging on for many days; then undo it and repeat until the callus is removed, God willing.	0.7787751
Or bind a lead plate over it firmly. Lead has the property of removing all such concerns from the limbs.	Or bind on it a firm sheet of lead; for lead has the property of taking away lumps from limbs.	0.81802034
If the knot has hardened into stone and is constricting, and there is an urgent need to remove it, then cut it from above and remove the protruding excess, or shave it down with certain rasps until it is gone, and treat it until it heals.	But if the callus is stony hard and its removal is urgent, incise the place and cut away the superfluous prominence, or pare it away with a scraper until it is gone; and dress the wound until it heals.	0.7489899

chapter-3-subchapter-21.txt
On the treatment when restoration leaves the limb thin and not in its natural state.	On the treatment of a fracture when, after repair, the limb remains unnaturally thin.	0.793175
When a bone fracture is restored and the limb remains thin and weak afterward, this happens only for several reasons. One reason is the frequent loosening and improper binding of the ligament, or due to the excessive tightness of the bindings, which prevents nourishment from reaching the limb; or due to excessive embrocation at the wrong time, or due to a lack of blood in the patient's body and their weakness.	When a fractured bone has been repaired but the limb remains thin and weak, this may be due to many causes: the bandaging being too often loosened and not properly tightened; or excessive binding-up so that nourishment cannot flow to the limb; or excessive fomenting; or excessive and premature movement; or the thinness and weakness of the patient's blood.	0.8690701
The treatment is to feed the patient and to soften their body until blood increases in it. And administer baths. Introduce joy and cheerfulness to the patient.	The treatment of this consists in the nourishing and restoring of his body so there be plenty of blood; and the use of the bath; and cheering the patient and making him happy, and so on.	0.7685375
Then place pitch on the limb, so that the pitch draws much nourishment to it. And continually apply embrocation with warm water until nourishment flows and the limb returns to its natural shape.	Then apply pitch to the limb so that it may draw much nourishment to itself, or continue the massage to the limb with tepid water, so that nourishment flows in the limb and it returns to its normal shape.	0.83784866

chapter-3-subchapter-22.txt
On the treatment of broken bones when they heal crookedly.	On the treatment of fractured bones when they mend crooked and are inhibited from their proper functioning.	0.75090843
When, after healing, a crookedness, protrusion of the broken bone, or a knotting occurs in the limb and this distorts the shape of the limb, but does not prevent it from its natural function, then do not follow the advice of anyone who suggests breaking the limb again.	When a limb that has been set has some distortion after healing, or the bone that was broken has some prominence or callosity, so that the limb is deformed, but there is nevertheless no limitation of its natural movement, then you should not listen to those who think that the bone should be broken again.	0.7777276
Many foolish doctors and restorers in our land have done this.	In our parts there have been many ignorant doctors and bone-setters who have done this.	0.8099338
This procedure is indeed highly blameworthy, leading to death or great fear, as it is potentially fatal.	The operation is most blameworthy and leads to great dangers, death itself not being the worst possibility.	0.70999455
But if the limp and knotting are recent, then they should be massaged with warm water in which softening herbs, like marshmallow leaves and root, and sweet clover, and similar herbs, have been boiled. Apply a plaster made with a softening plaster, such as properly prepared dyachilon.	But if the distortion and callosity be recent you should massage it with an infusion of the herbs that have an emollient quality, such as leaves and roots of the marsh mallow, and melilot and the like: and apply one of the emollient plasters such as carefully prepared diachylon.	0.8108525
Or take marshmallow root mucilage, mix it with chicken fat or sesame oil, and apply it as a plaster.	Or take mucilage of the root of the marsh mallow and beat it up with chicken fat and oil of sesame, and let a cataplasm of these be applied.	0.8292715
Or take fat figs, grind them with pigeon dung, and similar ingredients known among medicines that reduce hardening.	Or take a fat fig and beat it up with pigeon's dung; and the like remedies that are termed 'inhibitors of scarring'.	0.78393275
Sometimes, the knotting loosens with gentle, prolonged, and careful rubbing done with wet hands. Move the limb in every direction at all times.	Sometimes also the callosity is resolved by long-continued gentle friction with the hands; and constant movement in every direction should also be applied.	0.7790258
If the crookedness is longstanding, has become strong, and has turned to stone, and there is a need to treat it with metal tools, then it is necessary to cut above it, to separate the bone union, and to remove the excess from the knot or bone with fine cutting tools, applying ease and care.	But if the deformity be long-standing and fixed and hardened and you are compelled to treat it operatively, you will have to cut down on it from above, and free the junction of the bone, and with fine chisels cut away the redundant callus or bone; be gentle in this, with diligence and care.	0.7731414

chapter-3-subchapter-23.txt
On the discussion of dislocation.	Discourse on dislocations.	0.83932126
Dislocation is the displacement of a joint from its natural position. Thus it is prevented from movement, and the limb’s form is disfigured. It causes the patient severe pain and injury.	A dislocation is a displacement of any of the joints from its place, whereby the movement of the joint is hindered, the member is deformed, and the patient is caused violent pain and hurt.	0.83741987
Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to quickly restore it and not delay at all.	When anyone sustains a dislocation he should hasten to have it reduced, not delaying it at all.	0.68393
For if delayed, the area may become inflamed, and perhaps hinder the reduction of the dislocation.	For if it is delayed the place will swell up and the reduction will be thereby made difficult.	0.73294103
For this reason, it should not be moved or extended when it is inflamed. Since often it causes spasms and harmful pains.	So it should not be delayed, nor moved or extended during the time it is swollen, for that often leads to spasm and excruciating pain.	0.86134005
But when this happens, you must promptly perform bloodletting on the patient. Then leave it until the inflammation subsides.	Instead, when this occurs, you must hasten to venesect the patient, and then let be until the swelling has subsided a little.	0.79076767
Then rub the limb with warm water and oil. Then it should be reduced with ease.	Then massage the member with hot water and oil and let it be gently reduced.	0.81870437
And treat every limb with the appropriate remedy, which will be discussed in its proper place.	And treat every member with the things that will be mentioned in their place.	0.69335735
Indeed, I have already organized the chapters on dislocation, just as in fractures, from the upper part of the body to the lower.	I have disposed the chapters on dislocations in the same order as the foregoing ones on fractures, that is, from the upper part of the body to the lower part.	0.8371691

chapter-3-subchapter-24.txt
On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.	On the treatment of a dislocation of the lower jaw.	0.9936913
The two sides of the jaw rarely dislocate.	It is rare indeed for the jawbones to be dislocated.	0.66081554
When both are dislocated, it occurs in one of two ways. Either they are displaced slightly, becoming somewhat loosened, Or they are entirely dislocated, so that they fall toward the chest, causing saliva to flow uncontrollably, preventing the patient from closing the mouth, and causing the tongue to interfere with speech.	Their dislocation may be in one of two ways: either they may shift slightly from their place and be a little relaxed; or they may be completely and utterly dislocated so as to be relaxed down toward the breast so that the patient's saliva runs out and he cannot control it; nor is he able to close his mouth, and he stutters in speaking.	0.8613648
When the dislocation is minor, it often returns to its normal position on its own with minimal intervention.	If it be only a slight displacement it will go back in most cases spontaneously without much trouble.	0.67194295
But if the dislocation is complete, it is necessary to reposition it quickly, without any delay. To do this, an assistant should hold the patient’s head still, while the physician inserts the thumb of one hand along the root of the jaw’s dislocation, on one side if only one side is dislocated. Or, if both sides are dislocated, the physician should insert both thumbs simultaneously.	But if the dislocation be complete and total it is necessary to set about the reduction of it at once without any delay. This is done thus: an assistant holds the patient's head and the doctor introduces into his mouth the thumb of one hand at the root of the jaw, if it be a dislocation on one side, or both thumbs if it be a bilateral dislocation, with the rest of the fingers outside to keep it straight.	0.8884123
Instruct the patient to relax the jaw, as if preparing to chew from side to side. Then the physician should gently push the jaw, guiding it back into its position.	Then let him bid the patient relax his jaws and allow them to move in any direction; while the doctor sets the dislocation, thrusting the jaw until it return to its proper place.	0.7825313
If repositioning is difficult, especially when both sides are dislocated, then apply warm steam with water and oil until the jaw can be repositioned more easily. Do not delay the procedure.	If the reduction be difficult, especially if it be a bilateral dislocation, administer a fomentation with hot water and oil, so that the reduction of both sides may be facilitated. And on no account delay the reduction, as we have said.	0.77453876
Once the jaw is realigned and the patient can close the mouth without looseness, place small cloth pads over the area, with a plaster made of wax and rose oil.	When the reduction and straightening have been done and the patient's mouth closes and is not relaxed, then apply to both sides dressings steeped in wax prepared from wax and oil of roses.	0.70447046
Then gently secure it with soft bindings.	Then bind it up gently, with a loose bandage.	0.8468094
The patient should sleep on their back with the head held steady between two pillows to prevent any movement to the sides and should avoid any chewing motions. Food should be given in soft sips until pain subsides and the jaw stabilizes; then, the patient may eat freely but cautiously.	The patient should sleep lying on his back with his head held between two pillows so that he does not move it either to right or to left; nor should he burden himself with chewing but should be on a diet of broth of corn starch until the pain is gone and the jaw is firm; then he may eat whatever he wishes.	0.78981036
The patient should avoid straining the jaw during eating, drinking, and yawning until the jaw is stable and healed.	Let him use it gently; let him not work his mouth heavily in eating or drinking or yawning until the jaw is firmly knit and healed.	0.64759874
If both sides of the jaw are severely dislocated and cannot be repositioned, fevers, continuous sweating, diarrhea, and possibly vomiting of bile may occur.	If the reduction of both sides is hard when it is a simultaneous bilateral dislocation, and there is no return to the proper position, then thereby in many cases fevers and perpetual headaches occur; sometimes the patient's belly is loosened and he vomits actual bile.	0.6517302
When these symptoms appear, know that it is likely fatal, and often the patient dies within ten days.	When you see this you will know that he is doomed; in most cases in which this happens death follows in ten days.	0.6959587

chapter-3-subchapter-25.txt
On the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and shoulder joint.	On the reduction of a dislocation of the clavicle and of the head of the humerus.	0.8612883
The clavicle does not typically dislocate inward due to its connection with the chest. Occasionally, it dislocates outward, which is evident to the touch.	The clavicle is never dislocated inwards because of its continuity with the breast-bone; but sometimes it is dislocated outwards, and then it is detected by palpation.	0.8438649
To restore it, have the patient lie on their back and extend their arms. Then press the area with your palm firmly, which should reposition it.	The replacement is thus: the patient is to lie on his back and stretch out both arms; then with the palm of your hand press heavily upon the place and it will go back.	0.7785127
Afterward, apply a plaster and cloth pads, and secure it.	Then apply to it the plaster and pads, and bandage it up.	0.8755067
The ends of the bones extending toward the elbow, connected to it, rarely dislocate. But if it is dislocated on any day, then it should be reduced and aligned as we have said, and what is prepared for you.	As to the extremity of the clavicle, which is close to the shoulder and joined to it, it is only rarely dislocated; but if ever it is dislocated you must reduce it and set it straight as we have mentioned, by any convenient means.	0.7704917
Then place a plaster over it, along with cushions and a bandage. And instruct the patient to adhere to calm and rest until healed.	Then apply the plaster, pads, and bandages, and bid the patient keep quiet and still until it is healed.	0.84251827
And with this same treatment, the shoulder extremity is reduced when it is also separated from its place.	By this same treatment you may also reduce the head of the humerus when it is displaced.	0.73555815

chapter-3-subchapter-26.txt
On the reduction of shoulder dislocation.	On the reduction of a dislocation of the humerus.	0.8815253
Know that the shoulder is dislocated only in three ways.	You should know that there are three ways in which the humerus may be dislocated.	0.7441956
One of these is that it dislocates downward toward the side of the armpit. The second is that it dislocates toward the chest. And sometimes it dislocates to the upper part of the shoulder: and this occurs rarely.	One is a dislocation down into the axilla, another is a dislocation toward the breast; it may also be dislocated upward, which is rare.	0.8262645
And it does not dislocate backward, because of the shoulder blade. And it does not dislocate forward, because of the nerves.	It is not dislocated backward, because of the scapula; nor is it dislocated forward, on account of the tendons.	0.83460045
And indeed, it most often dislocates and exits downward toward the armpit, especially in those who have little flesh. For it exits from them quickly and re-enters quickly.	Mostly it is dislocated and displaced down into the axilla, and particularly in those of a spare build; in such it quickly comes out and quickly goes back.	0.7986429
However, in those with much flesh, the opposite is true, namely, it exits with difficulty and re-enters with difficulty.	But in those of a fleshy build it is the opposite; it comes out with difficulty and goes back with difficulty.	0.8446411
And sometimes, a blow or fall happens to certain people, and the shoulder is inflamed with a hot abscess, and because of this it is thought that it has been dislocated.	Sometimes a man suffers a blow or a fall, so that the upper arm swells up with an effusion, whence he forms the opinion that there is a dislocation.	0.73660797
Therefore, you should examine it until you are certain of it, and then proceed with its treatment.	So you must examine it to make sure of it and then proceed to treat it.	0.9174723
And the dislocation is recognized when it is downward toward the armpit, and you can distinguish between a dislocated shoulder and a healthy shoulder. For you will find a clear difference between them, and you will find a concavity at the head of the shoulder, and under the armpit, upon touch, the head of the shoulder feels almost like an egg: and the patient cannot bring his hand to his ear or move it in all motions.	A dislocation down into the axilla may be diagnosed by comparing the sound and the dislocated humerus; for you will find an obvious difference between them; you will find a hollow at the head of the humerus, and in the axilla the head of the humerus may be palpated like an egg, and the patient is unable to lift his hand to his ear, and full movements are restricted.	0.8548677
And similarly, if it dislocates toward the chest or upward, then you find it clearly by touch, nor is it hidden.	Similarly if it is displaced toward the breast or upward you will find it obvious to the touch and not hidden.	0.9367339
And the reduction of this dislocation is indeed easy when it is recent, or the patient is a child.	The reduction of this dislocation will be quite simple if it be only recent or the patient be a child.	0.8650795
And its reduction is achieved by the assistant raising his hand upward. Then place your thumbs under his armpit, and lift the joint forcefully upward to its place, and the assistant raises his hand and extends it upward. Then place it downward, for it returns quickly.	To reduce it, his hand should be lifted up by an assistant, then you should put both your thumbs under his axilla and lift the joint up powerfully into its place, while the assistant lifts and stretches his hand upward; then he puts it down and the dislocation will at once go back.	0.8675837
But if it does not return by what we have said, and many days have passed since the dislocation occurred, then it is necessary for the patient to bathe in warm water, and to receive an ointment that softens and soothes, as if the roots of marshmallow, fenugreek, and melilot are boiled in water and applied.	If it is not reduced by the means we have stated, being a dislocation of many days' standing, the patient should take a hot bath and use relaxing and softening fomentations, such as decoction of marsh mallow root and fenugreek and melilot.	0.8259541
Then the patient should lie on his back, and a sphere and wool, balanced between softness and firmness, should be placed under his armpit.	Then the patient should lie on his back and you put under his axilla a ball of wool of moderately hard consistency.	0.8163266
Then the physician places his heel on the sphere, lifts the head of the shoulder with force, and pulls the patient's hand downward.	Then the doctor should put his heel on the ball and grasp the patient's hand and draw it downward, while pushing the ball with his foot, and it will straightway be reduced.	0.76948655
And if you wish, reduce it according to this method: have a taller man than the patient stand at the side, insert his shoulder under the patient's armpit, and lift his armpit upward until the patient is suspended in the air. And another assistant should pull the patient’s hand downward toward his abdomen. But if the patient is light, then something else should be suspended with him to weigh him down, for the dislocation will return immediately.	Or, if you prefer, reduce it in this way: get a man taller than the patient to stand on one side and pass his shoulder under the patient's axilla and lift it up until the patient is suspended in mid-air, while another assistant pulls the patient's hand down towards his lower abdomen (if the patient is light it will be necessary to hang a weight from him); then the dislocation will straightway be reduced.	0.896183
And it is also reduced according to another method: this is, a long piece of wood is fixed in the ground, with a rounded head in shape, like the handle of a mortar, which should be neither thick nor thin. Then, after placing soft cloths over the head of the wood, it is positioned under the patient, who should stand along the length of the wood.	It is also reduced by another method: that is, to fix in. the ground a long spar of wood; its head should be of a round shape like the pestle of a mortar, neither massive nor slender; then after a soft pad has been put on the head of the spar it should be placed under the axilla of the patient, who should be standing alongside the spar; then let his hand be drawn downward on one side and his body on the other, powerfully.	0.8715936
Then his hand is stretched downward on one side, and his body is extended from the other side with strength, for the joint quickly returns to its place.	Then the joint will immediately return to its place.	0.6306546
But if its reduction is difficult with everything we have described, then use this method: take a piece of wood with a length equal to two forearms, a width of four fingers, and a thickness of two fingers, with a rounded head to ease its entry into the depth of the armpit, according to this shape.	If it proves difficult to reduce it by any of the means we have stated, employ this treatment: take a wooden spar some two cubits in length, two fingers thick, and four wide; it should have a round head to facilitate its introduction into the hollow of the axilla; of this shape.	0.8374264
Then tie soft cloths over the rounded head so that the wood does not harm the patient.	Then you bind on the round head soft rags so that the wood will not hurt the patient.	0.9521489
Then place it under the patient’s armpit so that his hand or arm stretches downward over the wood, and the wood is tied over the support, arm, and the end of the hand.	Then it is placed under the patient's axilla, and his whole hand and arm are stretched down over the spar, which is to be bound down to the upper arm, the forearm, and the tip of the hand.	0.83023274
Then place the arm over the width of a step of a ladder, extend the hand downward, and let the rest of the body be suspended from the other side. For the joint re-enters immediately.	Then let the arm be placed cross-wise over the rung of a ladder and the hand stretched downward, and let the rest of the body hang down on the other side; then the joint will very quickly go back.	0.8729894
When its re-entry is thus completed by whatever means possible, then it is necessary to place a sphere of equal size made of wool under the armpit. Then apply a plaster prepared from mill dust with frankincense and egg white over the whole shoulder, as it is wrapped above.	Once it has gone back properly, in whatever way is possible, there should be put under the axilla a ball of wool of moderate size; then apply the plaster prepared from mill-dust with olibanum and egg-white, all round the shoulder.	0.8542584
Then secure it under the armpit with an appropriate bandage, wrap the ligament over the plaster, and fasten his hand to his neck, leaving it unmoved for seven days.	Then firmly bandage the ball under the axilla and carry the bandaging round over the plaster. Sling his hand from his neck, then let him be left without moving his hand for a week.	0.71965545
And it is necessary to keep the patient’s food light until the limb is strengthened, for it aids its healing more quickly.	The patient's diet should be light until the limb gets strong, for that will hasten the cure.	0.8559394
Then after seven or five days, a larger amount may be given, and it should be exercised with motion. If it thus becomes firm and does not soften, then it is healed.	After five or seven days it can be unfastened and he can make trial of its movement; if it is firm and not slack then it is healed.	0.80553687
But if the joint dislocates many times, due to humidity affecting it or for another reason, then it is necessary to apply cautery with three openings, as mentioned previously in the chapter on cautery.	If the joint is frequently dislocated, on account of a humidity arising in it or some other cause, then use should be made of the cautery with three prongs spoken of earlier, in the book on cauterizations.	0.8088187
If all this is done, and the ligament is loosened after seven days, and the joint does not become stable, and the plaster and bandage are reapplied over it multiple times, and it does not stabilize, and it falls and cannot be lifted upward, then you should know that the nerves attached to the head of the shoulder are now either severed, stretched, or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.	If you do all this and loosen the bandaging after a week and the joint is still not firm, and you repeatedly plaster it and bandage it, and it is still loose and comes down and dislocates and you are unable to raise it up, then you may know that the tendons at the head of the humerus are either cut through or stretched or loosened; in which case you may know that the joint will never stay firm in its place.	0.86506236
The reduction of a dislocation that occurs toward the chest and breast or to the back is done with pressure and extension with the hands until it returns, and the remaining bandage and care is applied to it until it heals.	As to the dislocation toward the chest and breast, and posteriorly, the reduction of this is done by thrusting and extension with both hands until it goes back. And apply the usual bandaging and treatment until it is healed.	0.8499727
If, after healing, heaviness in the limb occurs and slowness in its movement, then the patient should use the bath frequently, until that heaviness is lessened and it returns to its original nature.	If, after it has healed, a callosity arises in it, and it is slow in movement, the patient should take frequent hot baths until that callosity is softened and the member returns to its original condition.	0.8180157

chapter-3-subchapter-27.txt
On the treatment of elbow dislocation.	On the treatment of a dislocation of the elbow.	0.9822215
Know that the elbow joint dislocates with difficulty and likewise returns with difficulty as well; and it indeed dislocates in all directions, especially to the front or to the back.	The elbow is with difficulty dislocated and with difficulty put back. Now dislocation may be in all directions, and particularly forward and backward.	0.82019097
And its dislocation is not hidden from you, for it falls within sight and touch, however it may be dislocated. And when you compare the dislocated elbow with the healthy one, it becomes clearly apparent to you. For the joint is concave, and he cannot bend the arm or touch his shoulder with it.	Whatever way it is dislocated it will not be concealed from you, because it is both visible and palpable, and whenever you compare the dislocated elbow with the sound one it is quite openly and plainly manifested; for the elbow joint is hollow and the patient cannot flex the forearm back or touch his shoulder with it.	0.83488303
And it is necessary to act quickly and reduce the dislocation immediately, before a hot swelling occurs.	You must hasten and reduce the dislocation as rapidly as possible before an abscess occur.	0.74474055
For if a hot swelling occurs, its reduction becomes difficult, and perhaps it will not heal completely, especially when it is displaced backward. For it is worse than all types of dislocation, and causes more severe pain; and often death follows it.	For if an abscess occur the reduction of it is difficult and maybe it will never be healed; especially when it is a posterior dislocation, for this is the worst and most painful of all the kinds of dislocation, and often it is fatal.	0.843224
And its restoration, when it is among those that can be reduced, is done by extending his hand with both hands, with his arm stretched out, and the physician’s hands placed above and below the elbow, and he presses the joint with his thumbs together or with the base of his palm until it returns to its place.	Now when it is one of those that can be reduced, the way to reduce it is for an assistant to perform a two-handed extension of the patient's hand, the patient's forearm being opened out, while the doctor's hands are above and below the elbow joint and he thrusts the joint with both thumbs together or with the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.	0.84765136
Or if the dislocation is to the front, then it is reduced by bending the hand with his hand, until he strikes the dislocated elbow with the base of his palm.	If it be an anterior dislocation, it may go back if the hand is bent sharply back until it strikes its own shoulder with the root of the palm.	0.7463759
But if the dislocation does not yield to the reduction, then apply strong, forceful traction; two assistants should extend the arm, while two others hold him in place so he does not move during the extension.	If the dislocation does not respond to reduction, apply very strong and powerful extension. For this, let two assistants pull on the arm while two other assistants hold the patient against the extension.	0.82898533
Then the arm is rotated in every direction, after a long folded cloth or wide bandage is wrapped over his hand.	Then the arm should be rotated in all directions after the limb has been wrapped in a long folded cloth or a broad wrapper.	0.88417155
And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, he should anoint it with oil, as this aids in the lubrication of the joint, making it easier. Then he presses the joint with strong force until it returns.	When the doctor begins manipulating the joint he should anoint his hands with oil so as to assist, by its lubrication, the movement of the joint; then he should thrust the joint powerfully until it goes back.	0.852584
And after its reduction, it is necessary to apply a plaster to it, containing astringency and drying agents with egg white, and bind it with an appropriate bandage. And suspend the arm from the patient's neck, and leave it for several days.	After its reduction he should apply to it a plaster having some styptic and absorbent qualities, with egg-white; and put on a firm bandage and suspend the patient's arm from his neck and leave it for some days.	0.8211101
Then loosen it. If the joint is thus stabilized in its place, then release the bandage from it and leave it.	Then undo it; and if the joint remains fixed in its place, then untie the bandaging and leave it.	0.8519281
And if you see that the joint is not properly tightened, then repeat the plaster and bandage, and leave it for several days until it is secure. Then release it.	If you see that the joint is not thoroughly firm, replace the plaster and bandaging and leave it for a few more days until it is firm; then untie it.	0.8640883
But if heaviness occurs after the joint reduction and there is stiffness in movement, then apply moistening in the bath, gentle rubbing, and compression until it is softened, or place the fat of a ram’s buttock over the joint. Then bind it and leave it on there for a day and a night. Then remove it, and immerse him in the bath. When he begins to sweat, then rub the joint with moderate friction.	If, after the reduction and unbandaging of the joint, it becomes stiff and is difficult to move, soften it in the bath and apply gentle friction and massage until it is softened, or apply to the joint the tail of a fat-tailed sheep; bind it on and leave it on for a day and a night; then remove it and send him to the bath, and when he sweats apply moderate friction to the joint; then replace the tail and again and again, alternating with the bath, until the joint softens.	0.8450019
And if you wish, place fresh cow dung, heated with butter, over it and bind it.	If you prefer, apply to it, and bandage on, fresh cow-dung lightened with butter.	0.78525233
Do this a few times. For it will then be softened, and return to its natural state.	Do this a number of times and it will soften and return it to its original state.	0.8892218

chapter-3-subchapter-28.txt
On the treatment of the dislocation of the wrist.	On the treatment of a dislocation of the wrist.	0.9889741
The wrist is often dislocated, that is, the joint between the arm and the hand.	The carpus of the hand is often dislocated.	0.5949881
Unlike other joints. However, speed is necessary in the reduction of its dislocation at the hour it becomes dislocated, before the area swells or a warm swelling occurs there.	Unlike other joints, the reduction is easy, but there should be haste to reduce it as soon as it is dislocated, before the place swells or an abscess occur.	0.82434237
And the reduction of the dislocation is achieved by placing the wrist of the injured hand on a table, with an assistant extending the hand; and the doctor places his palm over the prominence of the joint and pushes it until it returns to position.	The way of reducing the dislocation is to place the patient's wrist upon a board while an assistant stretches the hand, and the doctor puts the palm of his hand upon the prominence of the joint and applies pressure on it until it goes back.	0.8888964
However, it must be observed if the palm has already shifted toward the inner side of the hand: in that case, the patient places the back of his hand on the table during the extension and reduction; and if the dislocation moves toward the back of the hand, then the hand is placed with its inner side on the table, so that the doctor's hand falls on the prominence of the joint.	But he should examine: if it is a displacement toward the ventral aspect of the hand, the patient should place the back of his hand upon the board for extension and reduction; but if it be a luxation toward the dorsum of the hand, then the inner part of the hand should be laid upon the board so that the doctor's hand may come upon the prominence of the joint itself.	0.8641156
If it immediately returns, this is good; if not, then bind it with a plaster that soothes swelling, and leave it without repeating the process.	If it go back at once, good; but if not, bandage it with a plaster that settles swelling and let it be.	0.837659
For if it cannot tolerate it, and you cannot complete the reduction after several days have passed, the joint will remain twisted; it does not harm the patient except that the hand becomes weak and cannot grip anything. Then you know that the nerves are severed or damaged.	Do not revert to it, for it will not tolerate that, and you will not be able to effect its reduction after some days have passed. But the joint will retain its deformity; and the patient will in no wise be harmed except if his hand is slackened so that he be unable to grip anything; then you may know that the tendons are either severed or bruised.	0.88256043
There is thus no treatment except to cauterize it near the affected area. And perhaps this will not help at all.	In this situation there is no method but to strengthen it by cauterization; this sometimes helps but sometimes is of no use at all.	0.59091854
Therefore, if the wrist does not return, then place upon it the plaster we have described. Then bind it, and leave it for five days; afterward, unbind it and leave it, and exercise the hand.	When the reduction of the joint is complete, apply to it the plaster we have described, then bandage it and leave it for five days; then loosen it and try out the hand.	0.796672
If, however, it is deprived of motion, and any heaviness occurs in it, then soften it with warm water and rub it occasionally until it softens.	If movement be hampered and any hardness occur in it, soften it repeatedly with hot water and sweating until it be softened.	0.87465656

chapter-3-subchapter-29.txt
On the treatment of the dislocation of the fingers.	On the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.	0.9983785
When one of the fingers is dislocated in any direction, or one of the fingers toward the back or the inner side of the hand, then extend the finger and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.	When one of the fingers is dislocated dorsally or ventrally, then extend the finger and thrust the dislocation with your thumb until it goes back.	0.8951162
Then support the head of the finger, suspend it toward the side to which it was dislocated, and leave it for two days.	Then bind the head of the phalanx, suspending it in the direction in which it was dislocated, and leave it for two days.	0.8222617
Then suspend it, and extend it until it aligns straight on that day.	Then unbind it and extend it so that it may straighten out all that day.	0.81874514
Then at night, bind it according to the instructions; during the day, keep unbinding it, exercise it with movement, and bind it at night.	Then at nightfall bind it in just the same way. Continue to loosen it by day and to exercise it with movement, bandaging it by night.	0.85356903
Do this for several days until it becomes firm.	Do this for some days until it is knit.	0.89366055
Similarly, if it dislocates toward the inner side of the hand, bind it toward that side, and perform the initial procedure until it heals.	Do the same with it if it is a ventral dislocation, binding it in that direction, and treat it as explained above until it is healed.	0.6965748
And do likewise when it is dislocated toward other parts.	Do likewise with dislocations in other directions.	0.78081936

chapter-3-subchapter-30.txt
On the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.	On the treatment of dislocation of the spinal vertebrae.	0.9618801
When someone experiences a complete dislocation of the vertebrae of the back or neck, or if many vertebrae are displaced from their places, then there is no treatment, as death quickly approaches the patient.	When any of the vertebrae of the back or the neck are completely dislocated or a number of vertebrae are displaced, there is no treatment in this case for death is hastening toward the patient.	0.8873557
A sign of this is that the patient’s stool passes involuntarily, and they cannot control it; often, certain limbs are weakened as a result, or both of their legs, or both of their arms, or one of these; or a single vertebra is displaced from its place.	The sign of this is that the injured man passes a motion involuntarily, being unable to hold it back; often too some of his limbs go limp, either both legs or both arms or one of them.	0.8881788
Often it is displaced, and displacement frequently occurs in four directions.	If, as often happens, a single vertebra is displaced, the displacement may be in any of four directions.	0.7120963
Thus, that which is displaced backward is called a hump.	When there is a displacement backwards it is called 'curvature of the spine'.	0.5163281
The treatment for this is to consider, if the hump appeared in childhood, then there is no cure, and no recovery is possible at all.	As to its treatment: examine it; if the curvature dates from childhood then there is no treatment or cure at all for it.	0.7195312
But in cases that occur due to an accident, blow, or similar causes, the ancients have already described lengthy methods of treatment. Most often, this does not return with success.	As for the sort that occurs from a fall or a blow or the like, the Ancients indulged in lengthy dissertations thereon, giving many kinds of treatment, the greater part of which is of no use.	0.6554547
However, I have now shortened that, whose small portion excuses much of it due to my closeness to the aim; and in my explanation in which I set it forth, I have crafted its instrument differently from the way they presented and explained it.	But I have abbreviated from it, making a little which will serve in place of their much, consisting in my clarification and exposition of the sense. I have also depicted the instrument differently from their account and their explanation.	0.8430486
Thus, I say that in a hump which occurs at the front, there is no treatment or recovery from it.	I say then, that in a curvature occurring forward there is no technique or cure for it.	0.8112533
And likewise, for one that occurs on both sides as well.	And likewise in a curvature laterally.	0.60821587
Of these, only the one occurring on the back itself can be treated by the method I describe: the patient is stretched face down on a level platform near a wall, with damp padding spread beneath him, so his chest is not injured.	The only curvature that can be treated is that of the dorsal spine exclusively, by the means I now describe. The patient should be stretched prone upon a level bench near a wall, and a soft palliasse should be spread under him so that his chest may not be hurt.	0.7482219
Then place a straight piece of wood fixed in a hole in the ground at the end of the platform near his head, and another piece near his feet at the other end of the platform, with an assistant holding the wood without fixing it in the hole. And another assistant holds the other.	Then put a straight spar, set in a hole in the ground at the end of the bench where his head is, and another spar where his feet are at the other end of the bench. Let an assistant hold this spar, which is not to be firmly fixed in the hole, while another assistant holds the other in the same way.	0.88601565
Then wrap a soft, strong bandage over the patient's head and under his chin; extend the end of the bandage to the wood near his head and tie it there.	Then wind round the patient's chest and beneath his axillae a soft strong wrapper, and stretch one end of the wrapper to the spar at his head, and tie it to it.	0.8729036
Then fasten another bandage above his hips, above his knees, and at his ankles. Then gather all the bandages and tie them to the other piece of wood near his feet.	Then bind other wrappers: over his hips, his knees, and by both tendons of Achilles; then bring the wrappers together and tie them to the other spar at his feet.	0.84323263
Then let each assistant pull their respective bandages toward the wood, and the two pieces of wood should not move from their places where they are set, although they should not be fixed, as we mentioned.	Then each assistant extends the spar with the tie towards himself; the two spars will not shift from their places in which they are planted, but, as we have said, they are not to be fixed.	0.8355135
And the physician should place his palms on the vertebra with strength until it returns, or place a board on it. Then he should press down on the board with his feet until it returns.	Meanwhile the doctor is to press hard with both his palms upon the spine until it goes back; or he may place a board upon it and apply pressure to the board with his feet until it goes back.	0.8773175
If it does not return with this treatment, then take a board about three arm-lengths long. And carve a spot in the wall, which we mentioned is near the patient, for the end of the board to fit into. Then place the middle of the board over the vertebra. And the physician places his feet on the other end.	But if it does not go back under this treatment then let a board be taken, about three cubits long, and let a place be hollowed out in the wall, which, as we said, should be near the patient, into which you put the end of the board; then place the mid-point of the board upon the hump, and he—the doctor—should place both his feet on the other end and strongly thrust upon the spine until it is forced back into position.	0.89178175
Then, if you wish, work with a winch that turns by hand: and set two pieces of wood in the ground near the patient's head at the end of the platform, each one arm-length tall; and place two pieces near his head at the end of the platform.	If you wish you may operate by means of a winch turned by hand; thus: you fix in the ground at the head of the patient, at one end of the bench, two wooden spars each one cubit long; and the same at the lower end, at his feet; there should be the distance of a span between the spars (of each pair).	0.8827235
And let the distance between each piece of wood be one palm; and a hole has been made in each place, through which the winch operates; each piece of wood should be firmly fixed in the ground so that it does not move at all.	In each spar there should be a hole in which the shaft may run, and each spar should be firmly fixed in the ground so as not to move at all.	0.7741157
Then insert a round rod; it is the winch on which the bandage is wound through the two holes in the two pieces of wood.	Then you introduce a round piece of wood, the shaft on which the rope is wound, into the two openings of the two wooden spars.	0.86079335
And at its end is a hole in which a piece of wood is fixed, one palm-length, and likewise in the other two pieces of wood.	At one end of each shaft is a hole into which is firmly fixed a piece of wood a span long by which it is wound. Likewise with the other two spars.	0.7828237
Then tighten the bandages you fastened on the patient’s chest with the winch located near his head, and the bandages on his legs with the winch near his feet.	Then bind the wrapper that you have bound round his chest to the shaft at the patient's head, and those bound round his legs to the shaft at his feet.	0.9155275
Then let an assistant stand by each winch, turning it with the handle that rotates the winch, while the physician aligns the vertebra, as we have described.	Then have an assistant standing at each shaft to turn with his hand the handle by which the shaft is revolved, while the doctor straightens out the curvature in the way we have described.	0.91443145
This is the structure of the winch, as follows.	This is the figure of the winch, the bench and the patient.	0.45633107
Then, after the vertebra returns to place and the area is aligned, apply a drying plaster with egg white. Then apply wool. Afterward, place a splint of wood on top of the plaster, about three fingers in width, or around that. Its length should cover the area of the hump and extend over the healthy part of the vertebra.	After the spine has been restored and the place has been straightened it will be necessary for you to apply an absorbent plaster with egg-white, then packing, then over the plaster apply a flat splint about three fingers wide and long enough to cover the site of the curvature and several sound vertebrae on either side.	0.78588235
Then fasten it with the bandage we mentioned. And let the patient consume a light diet until he is healed.	Then let it be bandaged as is needful and let the patient follow a mild diet until he is cured.	0.7498261
If some prominence remains in the area at the end of healing, then softening and soothing medicines should be applied, along with the use of the board we described, for an extended period. At this point, a lead sheet is applied there.	If after he is healed there still remains some prominence at the site, it will be necessary to employ remedies to relax and soften the parts, together with the use for a long time of the flat splint we described; in this case a leaden plate may be employed.	0.8496877
Sometimes a prominence occurs at the back of the vertebrae of the spine, and it is thought to be a dislocation, but it is actually just a bone that now protrudes. Therefore, treatment should not be attempted with this remedy, as it may cause death.	Sometimes there occurs a prominence at the end of the dorsal vertebrae, from which one may form the opinion that there is a dislocation, whereas it will be a superfluous bone that has become prominent; do not interfere with it by this treatment, for death may result.	0.82906514

chapter-3-subchapter-31.txt
On the treatment of a dislocated hip.	On the treatment of a dislocated hip.	1.0
Know that in the joints of the hip and the shoulder, only dislocation occurs; they are not subject to the minor displacements and depressions that happen in other joints.	You should know that a complete dislocation alone is sustained by the hip and shoulder joints; they do not sustain the lesser displacements, with concavity, as do the other joints.	0.85402924
And the hip joint can be dislocated in four directions. That is, it may be dislocated forward and backward.	Now the hip joint is dislocated in four directions, interior, exterior, posterior, and anterior.	0.6114335
Most frequently, it dislocates inward; and it rarely dislocates forward or backward.	Most commonly it is dislocated interiorly; and rarely is it dislocated anteriorly or posteriorly.	0.93399215
The treatment for an inward dislocation is this: when you place the patient's healthy leg together with the affected one, it appears longer, and the knee protrudes more than that of the healthy leg. The patient cannot bend his foot near the groin, and the area near the groin is swollen with a hot abscess because the head of the hip has already reached there.	The indication of an internal dislocation is that when you compare the patient's sound leg with the injured leg it will be longer and the knee will be prominent as compared with that of the sound leg; nor will it be possible for the patient to flex the foot back on the groin; and there will be an obvious swelling near the groin because the head of the femur has moved there.	0.77093387
The sign of an outward dislocation is that its symptoms are the opposite of these.	The sign of the occurrence of an external dislocation: the symptoms will be the exact contrary to these.	0.8033916
The sign of a forward dislocation is that the patient extends his healthy leg completely; however, he cannot bend it without pain in the knee. If he tries to walk, he cannot step forward on it; he retains urine, his groin is swollen, and while walking, he steps on his heel.	The sign of an anterior dislocation is that the patient can stretch his leg out fully but cannot flex it without feeling pain in the knee; and if he tries to walk he will be unable to walk forward; and he has retention of the urine and his groin swells, and in walking he hobbles upon his heel.	0.9426906
The sign of a backward dislocation is that he cannot extend the knee, nor bend it before bending the groin. His leg is also shorter than the other, the groin is softened, and the head of the hip is near the place of the hip bone.	The sign of a posterior dislocation is that he cannot extend the knee, nor can he flex it before flexing the hip; also the leg will be shorter than the other, the groin will be relaxed, and the head of the femur will be evident at the lumbar region.	0.91388726
The reduction of each type of dislocation is to be considered if the dislocation is old and has become chronic in the patient. Then if you attempt the reduction and it stays in place, it is not in need of further treatment. Therefore, it should not be presumed to require treatment at all.	As to the reduction of the various forms of this dislocation, you must examine the case and if it be an old dislocation which the patient has suffered from for a long time and the reduction of which has not been contrived and which remains as it was, there is no treatment for it at all, nor should any be attempted.	0.7807311
In the case of a recent dislocation of one of the four types, proceed by rotating the joint, extending it inward and outward, and moving it right and left; it may return to place and need no further treatment.	But in that case whose dislocation is recent, whichever of the four kinds of dislocation it be, hasten to rotate the joint and extend it internally and externally and move it to the right and the left; for often it will return and no further treatment will be needed.	0.8601647
If it does not return in this way, then a strong assistant should be prepared to extend the patient's leg from below, either with his hands or with a band placed above the knee on his leg. Another assistant should extend the arm from above, inserting his hands under the patient's armpits. Then he should tighten a soft band over the base of the hip and hold the other end of the band.	But if it does not go back thus, you must have ready a sturdy and powerful assistant to extend the leg from below, either with both his hands or with a wrapper bound upon the leg above the knee; while another assistant pulls from above by putting his hands under the patient's axillae; then you should bind a soft wrapper upon the root of the thigh, with a third assistant to hold the end of the bandage.	0.8875285
The extension should be either from the front part of the groin to the upper chest or from the back to the spine.	Then extension should be made either anteriorly from the direction of the groin to the direction of the clavicle, or posteriorly toward the dorsal spine.	0.7870409
All extensions should happen at once until the patient is lifted from the ground with his body hanging.	Let them all make their extension simultaneously so the patient is lifted up bodily and remains suspended.	0.6851194
This type of extension is the general method for all four types.	This kind of extension is common to all four kinds of dislocation.	0.8580799
If the dislocation returns in the manner described, it is good; if not, then each type will need its own specific treatment, as I will now explain.	If the dislocation goes back by the way we have said, good. Otherwise, each kind must have the special treatment I shall describe.	0.8628638
In the specific reduction for an inward dislocation, the patient should lie on his healthy side. Then place a band over the base of the hip, between the head of the hip and the place under the groin. Then extend the band upward from the groin area to the upper part of the body, toward the chest.	When it is an internal dislocation then the special reduction is for the patient to lie upon his sound side; then apply a wrapper to the root of the hip in the space between the head of the femur and the part below the groin; then carry the bandage upward from the groin toward the upper part of the body, in the direction of the clavicle.	0.8729061
Next, another strong assistant should take hold of his arms and press the thick area of the affected hip, extending it forcefully outward. For now, it returns to its place.	Then another powerful and sturdy assistant is to take hold of his arms while the thick part of the afflicted thigh is clasped and strongly extended outward; then it will return to its place.	0.87236047
And this method is the easiest of the other types of treatments for returning this limb to its place.	This kind of treatment is easier than the others for the reduction of this limb.	0.6590911
But if it resists you and does not yield in this way of treatment at all, then the patient's two feet must be bound together with a strong, soft band over both heels and both knees; each should be separated from the other by a length of four fingers, and the affected leg should be extended two fingers' length longer than the other.	But if you find it refractory and it does not answer to this method of treatment, then the patient's two feet will have to be bound together with a strong soft bandage round his two ankles and his two knees. The distance from each to the next should be four fingers, and the injured leg should be stretched two fingers beyond the other.	0.89780945
Then suspend the patient over the top of a beam that is within the house, at a height of about two arm-lengths from the ground.	Then the patient is to reach upward and grasp any beam that may be in the house; he should be about two cubits from the floor.	0.7553808
Then instruct a strong young man to support the head of the hip; another youth should be suspended with the patient, and another youth should push, pressing the hip with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.	Then tell a powerful servant to clasp the head of the hip and another servant to hang from the patient; and the other servant, the one who is clasping the hip, should thrust powerfully; then the hip will speedily go back.	0.7881149
For its specific reduction when the dislocation is outward, the patient should lie on a platform, as we described for someone with a hunch. And let a band be bound over his affected leg and across his chest.	The special method of reduction in the case of an external dislocation: it will be necessary for the patient to be lying on a bench after the manner described for the one with a curvature of the spine; but wrappers are to be tied only on the injured leg and the chest.	0.7123692
Then place two pieces of wood, one by his feet and the other by his head. Then place an additional wooden piece securely fixed in the middle of the platform, over which wet cloths are wrapped so it does not harm the patient; and place the wood between his thighs so that he is not pulled downward during the extension.	Then the two spars are to be set in position, one at his feet and another at his head; and have an additional spar firmly fixed in the middle of the bench and wrapped in soft cloth so as not to injure the patient; this spar is to be between his thighs so that he will not be dragged down during extension.	0.9058837
Then let each assistant extend in their respective direction, and the physician aligns the reduction with his hand.	Then each assistant is to pull in his own direction while the doctor sets the hip with his hands.	0.8396769
If it responds to the reduction, that will be good.	And if it goes back, good.	0.6075485
And if not, place him on the board and press it, as we described for a hunch, evenly. However, the patient should lie on his healthy side.	But if not, place the board upon it and put pressure upon it just as we prescribed for curvature, except that the patient will have to lie upon his sound side.	0.84451985
And when the dislocation is forward, the patient’s leg should be quickly extended; this follows the same procedure on the platform: and the physician places his right palm over the affected groin. Then, with the other hand, compress it, and with that compression, push it downwards toward the knee.	When it is an anterior dislocation, extension will have to be applied forcefully to the patient's leg, on the bench, exactly as described; the doctor should place the palm of his right hand upon the injured groin and then apply pressure with the other hand, directing the pressure so as to make extension downward toward the knee.	0.87829185
And if the dislocation is backward, then the patient should not be extended downward, but instead lifted above the ground. In this case, he should be placed on a hard surface, as should also be done if his hip dislocates outward, according to what we described about his lying on both hips: he lies face down, with the bands extended, as we recently described.	If it is a posterior dislocation the patient must not be raised above the ground and extended downward; rather must he be placed upon something hard, in the manner that we prescribed for an external displacement of the hip: he is to lie prone on the bench with the bands tied as we said before.	0.8736135
And it is necessary to apply compression with a board over the area where the joint is displaced, once the reduction is completed as it should be.	It will also be necessary to apply pressure with the board to the site to which the joint has been displaced.	0.6767919
The sign that it has returned will not escape you: it is when you extend both of the patient’s legs and observe them to be equal, and the patient moves his leg and extends it without difficulty. Then you will know that the limb has returned as it should. Then join the two hips, apply a plaster, and secure it with a support, called a "wheel," so that the hip does not move in any direction. The patient should remain at rest for three or four days.	When the proper reduction of the joint is completed—the signs of reduction will be plain to you; namely, that you extend both the patient's legs, and when you see that both legs are of equal length and the patient can draw up and stretch out the leg without difficulty, then you may know that the limb has gone back as it should—then bring both thighs together, apply the plaster and bind with a sash so that the hip does not move in any direction; and the patient is to keep perfectly quiet for three or four days.	0.8498943
Then loosen the band and the plaster, and compare the leg with the other; if you see them equal in position, then you will know that the dislocation has been fixed: release the patient to walk.	Then loosen the bandage and the plaster, and compare the leg with the other. If you see that they are both the same size you may know that the dislocation is cured and you can allow the patient to walk freely.	0.8585975
And if you observe any softening, then go back, apply the plaster again, and bind it with the same tightness as before, and leave it again for three days.	But if you see any slackening then repeat: replaster and rebandage as you did at first, and leave for another three days. Then unfasten.	0.7880441
Then loosen it and have him walk slowly on both legs for a few days until he regains full strength.	Then unfasten. He should be cautious about walking on it for some days, until it is thoroughly strong, God willing.	0.6580843

chapter-3-subchapter-32.txt
On the Dislocation of the Knee.	On dislocation of the knee.	0.93694174
The knee is dislocated in three ways. It dislocates outward, inward, and downward, specifically backward.	The knee is dislocated in three ways; it is dislocated interiorly and exteriorly and inferiorly, that is, posteriorly.	0.9012784
And it does not dislocate forward.	It is never dislocated anteriorly.	0.7158136
The sign of its dislocation is that you instruct the patient to bring his leg toward his hip. If it does not adhere to the hip, then know that the knee is dislocated.	The sign of dislocation is to bid the patient flex his leg on his thigh, and if it does not reach the thigh you may know the knee is dislocated.	0.8682833
The method of restoring all types of its dislocation is to have the patient sit upright so that he can extend his leg over it if he can, and press your back against his face, placing his foot between your feet.	The way of setting all the types of dislocation is to make the patient sit down with both legs extended, if he can, with an assistant sitting behind him to hold him by the middle and incline him slightly backward.	0.8109422
Then clasp his knee with your palms and straighten them between your fingers over his knee. Then press both sides of his knee with your palm with strength. And another assistant extends his foot until the knee returns to its place.	Then do you yourself sit on his thighs with your back to his front, and put his leg between yours; then the palms of your hands should be applied to his knee, and join them together by twining the fingers; then with the palms put strong pressure on both sides of his knee while another assistant extends his foot until the knee goes back to its place.	0.8909881
The sign of its return is that the leg joins with the hip smoothly, not with difficulty.	The sign of its return is that the leg can be flexed back easily and without hindrance upon the thigh.	0.7969594
Then apply a plaster, and make the leg adhere to the hip. Then bind them together with a band for three or four days. Then loosen them.	Then apply a plaster and flex the leg on to the thigh and bandage them together for three or four days; then loosen them.	0.9170928
And the patient should not walk for a few days until it heals.	He should do little walking for some days until it gains strength.	0.57729346
But if its reduction is resisted, then perform a strong extension with bands, as previously described in the treatment of the hip, until it returns.	But if you cannot effect reduction by this method, apply powerful extension by bandages as we have described above for the treatment of the hip, until it goes back.	0.8385799

chapter-3-subchapter-33.txt
On the Treatment of the Dislocation of the Heel.	On the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.	0.91218615
The heel sometimes shifts slightly, and sometimes dislocates fully. Its dislocation occurs either inward or outward.	The ankle is sometimes slightly displaced, sometimes fully dislocated, the dislocation being either internal or external.	0.90317655
The sign of its dislocation is that you see the heel swollen, protruding toward the direction in which it is dislocated.	The sign of its dislocation is that you will see the ankle swollen, and projecting on the side to which it is dislocated.	0.9059382
The treatment of its slight displacement is an easy reduction: it involves gentle extension with the hands, aligning it until it returns.	As to the treatment of its displacement, the reduction of it is easy: if it is gently extended with the hands and straightened, it will go back.	0.83090824
For treating a full dislocation, have the patient sit upright, and a very strong assistant should hold him from behind at the middle of his back.	As to treatment when it is dislocated completely, you should make the patient sit upright with a strong and sturdy assistant holding him about the middle from behind.	0.8543219
Then grasp his foot with your right hand from the top, and with your left hand from the lower part of the foot at the ankle.	Then hold the dorsum of the foot with your right hand, and with the left grasp the foot from below about the heel.	0.8531753
Then pull the foot toward you with your right hand. Then do the same with the left hand twice.	Then draw the foot toward you with your right hand, then with the left, twice.	0.9197482
Then extend with the left hand, and push the instep of the foot with the right hand toward the leg without strain.	Then extend it with the left hand and thrust the metatarsus with the right hand without violence toward the leg.	0.83235556
Do this twice, as we described.	Do this as we have described, twice.	0.973662
Then, on the third time, push the instep of the foot toward the leg, while you pull the ankle.	Then thrust the metatarsus toward the leg a third time while exerting traction at the heel.	0.8589558
If it returns within one or two attempts in this way, and you see the foot aligned, that is good; if not, then repeat the procedure, for it will return.	If it goes back in one or two attempts thus, and you see the foot is straightened, well and good. If not, repeat the operation and it will go back.	0.9243448
But if the reduction resists with the method we described, then have the patient lie on his back on the ground, and firmly fix a stake in the ground so that it falls between his hips, having already wrapped it in cloth so as not to harm the patient.	If you find it impossible to reduce it by what we have said, make the patient lie on his back on the ground and firmly fix in the ground between his thighs a stake wrapped in material so as not to hurt him.	0.7984022
Then one assistant should hold his hip, and another assistant should extend the foot, either with his hands or with a band tied around the ankle. Then let each assistant pull against the extension of his counterpart; and let the stake stand between the patient’s hips, holding him so that his body is not drawn downward during the extension.	Then an assistant should grasp his thigh and another assistant should extend the foot, either manually or with a cord tied round the narrow part of it; the assistants should pull one against another, with the stake upright between the patient's thighs holding him so that his body will not be dragged down with the extension.	0.9514393
Then the physician adjusts the dislocation with his hands, and another assistant holds the healthy leg downward. For the dislocation returns quickly.	Then the doctor should straighten out the dislocation with both hands, while another assistant holds down the sound leg; then the dislocation will speedily go back.	0.87786436
When the dislocation returns and its proper alignment is evident to you, then apply a plaster and cotton, bind it firmly with bandages, and tie the foot with a band to the leg.	Then when the dislocation is reduced and the soundness of the reduction is manifested to you, apply a plaster and packing, bandage firmly and bind the foot downwards.	0.8009018
It is necessary to be cautious regarding the nerves above the heel from the back, to ensure the bandage is not overly tight, which could injure them.	You will have to be careful of the tendon above the ankle at the back, not to bandage tightly over it so as to injure it.	0.8522389
Then leave it undisturbed for two or three days. If the bandage loosens, tighten it again; then loosen it on the third or fourth day. Restrict the patient from walking for forty days. If he tries to walk before this time has passed, there is no assurance that the dislocation will not recur and worsen, making it beyond healing.	Then leave him for two or three days; and if the binding works loose, tighten it up. Then on the third or fourth day loosen it, but the patient is to abstain from walking for forty days, for if he tries to walk before this lapse of time you cannot be sure that the dislocation will not collapse and corruption set in and thereafter be incurable.	0.93876916
If a hot abscess forms, apply the treatment previously described in another section for cooling the inflammation, and apply embrocation until it is reduced.	If an abscess occur you must allay it by the application of such dressings and embrocations as we have already described more than once, until it is gone.	0.6013005

chapter-3-subchapter-34.txt
On the Dislocation of the Toes and their Treatment.	On the treatment of dislocation of the toes.	0.7573377
The dislocated toe must be aligned with gentle extension without strain, which is not difficult but rather easy.	Any that are dislocated must be straightened by means of gentle extension, without violence; that is not hard but positively easy.	0.80466527
If the dislocation is in one of the joints of the top of the foot, have the patient place his foot on a flat surface, such as the ground or a board, as though he were standing.	If the dislocation be in one of the joints of the dorsum of the foot, the patient must set his foot on level ground or upon a board, standing as though walking.	0.8820381
Then, stand and place your foot over the protruding part of the joint. Press down with strength until the joint returns to place, and you see it aligned, without protrusion.	Then you must stand and put your foot on what protrudes of those joints, and put strong pressure upon it with your foot until it goes back and you see that it is evened out and there is no prominence at the place.	0.83889174
Then place a board beneath his foot that covers the entire sole, with two ends. Then bind it with a moderate binding for three days. Then release it and have him refrain from walking for several days until it strengthens and stabilizes to prevent re-dislocation.	Then put under the sole of his foot a flat splint with two heads to take the whole foot, and bind it on with a tight and secure bandage for three days; then loosen it; but keep him from walking for a good many days until it binds and you are sure it will not revert, God willing.	0.88424456

chapter-3-subchapter-35.txt
On Types of Dislocation with Wounds or Fractures.	On the kinds of dislocation that accompany a wound or a fracture or both.	0.7624699
When such an injury occurs, and one attempts to treat and restore it, often death results. Thus, only those who are wise in the art, experienced, compassionate, patient, cautious, not reckless nor presumptuous, should undertake such a treatment. They should begin with medicines that reduce hot abscesses alone and leave the patient to divine judgment. Unless you see or hope for relief from suffering with mild symptoms and a sign of possible recovery. Attempt the reduction immediately at the onset, before a hot abscess forms.	When anything of this kind happens and you attempt treatment and restoration, death is a frequent sequel. Therefore such treatment should be undertaken only by a person that is skilled in the art, has long experience, is dexterous, sympathetic, cautious, and not reckless or over-bold. To begin with he should apply only remedies for the allaying of abscesses and then leave the patient to Divine providence, unless, of course, the injury is light enough to give some hope of his escaping death; in which case you should set out to reduce it at once before an abscess arise.	0.9122962
If the limb returns as desired, then apply treatment to calm the abscess, and treat the wound with suitable drying ointments.	If the part goes back as you wish, employ the treatment for allaying abscesses and dress the wound with suitable desiccant ointments.	0.8624429
If the dislocation includes a fracture and small fragments of bone have separated, attempt to remove these fragments, and follow the previously stated instructions for simple ailments as discussed in their respective places.	If it be a dislocation with a fracture and there occur splintered fragments in the bone, try to remove them, following therein the instructions relating to the simple diseases we have mentioned before in their place.	0.9104005
Exercise caution according to your ability, and guard yourself from entering the path of fear, as my previous counsel advised.	Use your utmost diligence; keep clear of entering upon a course with a dangerous outcome, as I have enjoined on you before.	0.6970583
For this will be better for you before your Creator, more enduring to your honor, and safer for your body among your peers in your time.	For this will best ensure the continuance of your prestige and safeguard your good name, God willing.	0.57025576

