Oh, sons, as you have completed this book, which is the last of medical science, through the fulfillment of its end and due to its expositions, explanations, and declarations, it seems to me that you have fully grasped this treatise, which is a part of the greatest operation, namely surgery.
For the greatest operation, being largely neglected in our region and time due to the loss of its science and practice, only a few small descriptions remain in the books of the Ancients, which have been distorted by subsequent errors and misunderstandings, as their intentions were closed and the power and art of it elongated.
And it appears to me that you have revived the order of this treatise through its second method of exposition and declaration and abridgment; and so that the forms of cautery tools and other surgical instruments be added to the explanations, and in preparation for them, which is a necessary cause.
The cause why it is not possible for a good artisan to master his art in our time is that the art of medicine is intricate and requires extensive study of anatomy, understanding the growth of members, their shapes, connections, and separations; knowledge of bones, nerves, and ligaments, their number, and their extraction; as well as an awareness of pulsing veins and static ones, and the locations where they are ejected.
And for this reason, Hippocrates says that the name is fitting, as he emphasizes in his work, especially in the art of healing.
We have already discussed this at the beginning of this book; for whoever is ignorant of what we have said about anatomy, will not be exempt from making mistakes that may lead to the death of people, as you have seen many such individuals who have been trained in this science but lack practical experience.
You see a foolish doctor who has incised a scrofulous abscess in the thigh of a woman and cut some arteries in her thigh so that much blood flows out, causing the woman to die from it among her possessions.
And you see another doctor who put a stone from a man who had been suffering in his state, and the stone was large, he came to him and extracted that stone with part of the bladder, so that man died on the third day.
And you have already called for help to extract it, and you see that because of the size of the stone and the disposition of the disease, he will die.
And you see another doctor who is highly paid by a duke of our land for surgery, and he treated a black castrated man who had a fracture in his thigh; due to the doctor's ignorance, he extracted the fracture over the wound, using poultices and bands with strong tension, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
And then loosen it according to their desires, and apply rest, and use poultices for some days and command that we loosen the ligament; and thus also for the foot, when the pain has passed, and prevent its recurrence.
And you have been called to loosen the ligament, and once achieved, there is tranquility and thus an end to their pains.
However, if the corruption is already confirmed in the member, it cannot be checked, and the corruption will not cease to spread throughout the member until the danger of the disease passes.
And there is another doctor who perforates a cancerous abscess, and it becomes an ulcer after some days, until the evil of it is multiplied under his control.
Which causes is because the acrid cautery is pure of melancholic humor; then it does not cover that it will reach him entirely, but rather to be in the member where it suffers most.
And for this reason, my sons, it is necessary for you that the operation on the patient should be divided into two parts: one part is associated with health, and the other with risk to the most important conditions.
And you have already encountered this throughout all parts of this book where various operations are described which involve error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to pay attention to these things and to set them aside, so that the ignorant do not take them as a basis for speaking and slandering you.
So take up your weapons with diligence and the protection of God, and your patients with ease and firmness.
And use the best means for the grace of God, leading to salvation and glorious success, abandon the terrible illnesses which are difficult to cure, and set aside your weapons that make you fear, so that your faith and your name may not fail; for greater glory remains to you, both now in this world and forever after in your sanctity.
Different parts of the body already dissected in some of their signs: Do not treat evil illnesses with evil remedies, so that bad doctors do not become famous.
And you have already divided this book into three chapters.
Begin the division of the book, and first, the first part. The first chapter is ordered on the feet, in the forms of instruments and in the tools of cautery, and what is necessary for the operation.
Division of the second part. The second chapter deals with incision and piercing, and also with cupping glasses, plaisters, and the extraction of arrows and similar objects, all chapters are ordered according to the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the treatment of twists and similar conditions; a carefully arranged chapter on internal foot issues and the shapes of instruments.
Understand what I have said about the quality of the youth of that cautery and the documents of it, and in what circumstances cautery is prohibited.
Therefore, it is said that the discourse on the quality of cautery youth and the documents of it is a long and prolix speech, subtle for knowledge, and secrets hidden; and much has been spoken about it by many wise men, and there are disagreements among them, and I will content myself with a small part of their discourses, fearing prolongation.
And therefore it is said that cautery will relieve every kind of universal connection, whether it is of material or immaterial nature, except for two connections, which are connections having material as their cause.
In the connection that is dry and has material as its cause, opinions differ; some say that cautery is beneficial for it, while others say the contrary, that cautery is not appropriate for a condition caused by dryness and heat, since the nature of fire is dryness and heat, and it would be inappropriate to treat a condition that is dry and hot with a cautery that is also dry and hot.
And those who say the contrary argue that cautery is beneficial for any dry and hot condition found in the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of a man and its moisture to the connection of fire, you find the body of man to be harsh.
And they say, through the argument of those who hold this view, that they have already discovered this through experience in certain cases.
However, it is not appropriate that this comes to pass when someone who has already been exhausted and trained in the art of cautery for repeated practice, who knows the diversity of the composition of people and the disposition of their ailments in their bodies, the causes of those, and the accidents that befall them, and the span of time of those.
In other cases, there is no cause for fear, especially in the case of painful and wet ailments, as all doctors are in agreement about these, and they do not disagree with the application of cautery to relieve them.
And know, my children, that the secret of healing by cautery with fire and the excellence of it, lies in cautery as a medicinal tool, for fire is simple; its action only affects the member being cauterized, without hurting other members nearby, except perhaps with a slight pain.
The action of the medicinal fire reaches those members where it is applied, and strongly attracts to the diseased member that is hard to heal, and strongly assists in its recovery.
Light, because of its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not do this but rather surpasses itself; it is already known to us by experience and by the long service of studying the art regarding the truth of causes; and for that reason I am excused from the length of speech. And if it were not that it is hidden in my secret thoughts about light, and its quality in the operation on bodies and its expulsion of ills, demonstrated by philosophical discourse, which would be sharpened in your minds.
And know, my children, that the time for cauterization and immobilization is best in the spring season.
And you say that cauterization is convenient at all times, in order to overcome the damage caused by the passage of time with the healing that results from cauterization, and most especially when cauterization is for pains or necessary injuries, sharp and immediate, which do not suffer delay for fear of further harm, it is better to cause a lesser injury at once than to allow greater harm to occur over time.
And so do not sit on your feet, sons, for it is only the common people and foolish doctors who are attracted to that illness which is healed by cautery; it does not completely heal, and that complication persists.
And the cause is not treated thus as they believe, for cautery is but a place of medicine that alters the composition and dries up the humors which are the cause that pains come about.
Yet, one may use cautery superfluously over medicine because of the desire for its strength and virtue in operation and the greatness of their lord.
And it is possible that their illness may return at some point in time, according to the constitution of the illness and the location of their affliction, and the strength of it, and what is prepared within them from the addition of superfluities and humors, and what has been gained by them from food and similar causes; for the illness which cautery is administered to may be a subtle illness in few members with slight superfluities and humors, so that when cautery is performed for pain and similar symptoms as those, it is possible that that pain will not return, but this is done in small doses.
And it is often said in popular speech that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, which is false, for those who do not understand it believe that there is no cure that profits from medicine or any other cause through cautery.
And the cause is quite the opposite; and the understanding that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when one applies the methods of cure to certain ailments, and those medicines do not work, and then at the end of the cause, one administers cautery, which does work for them. And from here it follows that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding of the vulgar and too many of the folk physicians.
And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this but because of the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance.
And they say that the place of cautery does not cause pain, which is not absolutely true, for you have already seen and experienced that it does not do so unless in certain bodies; cautery on that part is good and better than as they said; however, when you make a cautery with fire from gold, it is not declared to you, because the gold becomes according to the quantity you want due to the heat of the fire, and you prepare to receive friction; and if you adjust the fire upon it, the gold melts in the fire, and some sheets fall into the fire for the craftsman to catch by the occupation of that.
And for that, cautery with iron should be made more lightly and precisely to ensure the correctness of the operation.
And you have already organized this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and you have organized those from the head down to the feet, so that now I am asking him what he wants from it.
**First Chapter**
This cauterization confers moisture and cold to the affected area, which is the primary cause of many rheumatic conditions, known as 'corissa', affecting the head, neck, and ears, leading to flux, sleep disturbances, dental pain, throat issues, and generally, all ailments resulting from coldness—also causing paralysis, apoplexy, and similar symptoms in such maladies.
The method of this cauterization involves, first, evacuating the disease from the body using a laxative on the head for three to four nights, depending on the severity of the illness, the patient's age, and their general health.
And then, instruct them to shave their head and lay down on a warm bed, placing their hands on their chest.
And then place your palm's edge near the base of the nose between their feet. However, if the affected area is hard to reach, mark that spot by probing it with a pointed cautery, whose shape is as follows:
Then place that over the healthy area without probing, descending in such a way that the patient's hand is slowly restricted, and you remove it.
Then gently lift your hand and examine the area; if you already see any bones exposed, as well as some quantity of blood, raise your hand again, and if it doesn't return to that spot, or another from that one, while it is still cold, then you should check for what I have told you.
Then take a small amount of salt, dissolve it over the area, and leave it for three days.
And then place your hand over the area soaked in fire, leaving that on the inside to be destroyed, the wall of fire. And then treat the area with a four-part remedy until it is healed.
And it is said that when the Roman plague opens up, the limb gets better and more youthful, so it is better and more rejuvenating.
And they say that some of them use cautery on the bone within the joint, and hold the cautery until some part of the bone's specific nature is dried up.
And then clean this that is attached to the bone, and then cure it.
And they say others use fire to reach the deepest part, strengthening the bone entirely until it does not break, and this is the way to perform this small operation: And they believe that from that place vapours of the head are expelled.
And if the wound is left open for a long time, it should be treated until it is healed and solidified.
I do not have the expertise to view these two types of cautery instruments as a whole, but according to certain people's ways of fearing; and let this be left aside, it is better for me to speak of health when it is present, because the head is exposed due to the solution of its continuity, as we have witnessed in the other members, and especially when the nature of the patient's headache is feverish.
And the specific type of cautery instrument that is used first is more safe and better for me; and from that, to that work for health.
Second chapter.
On the head cautery.
When chronic and prolonged pain occurs in all parts of the head and this is a prolongated malady, one uses weapons, splints, compresses, emplasters, guasts, cats, and sheep, and most importantly, if the head of the malady has already been cauterized with a cautery that does not counteract any of those causes, then consider that if the nature of the malady is strong; and there is no extreme or great harm, then cauterize it with another cautery, leaving the first one a bit. And then cauterize that over the edge of their head with a cautery, within which the wound is open. Cut the wound and expose the amount of bone we have found, and cauterize that with a cautery at the back part of the head in the place called 'vas', - and it is that place where the wind is stopped. And apply your hand to it, do not expose the bones, for this disease causes great pain that is different from the pain of all other burns on the head.
And you should apply this cautery at its proper place, for you know that the cautery which is used to burn the horns of the head and the back of the head is a milder cautery than the one which is used to burn the middle part of the head; and this is the form of it.
Capital chapters.
On the treatment of old migraines.
When a severe headache begins at the temples or there is pain within the skull, it is necessary to purify the head with medicinal remedies and also administer other treatments as I have mentioned regarding the various diseases; if these do not prove effective, then cauterization should be applied in two ways: either with acute burning medicines or with iron.
You may use cautery or medicinal fire to take a hot piece of wood, cut it and burn the ends from both sides. And then you should incise the site of pain in the temple with a scalpel, until it is felt to be deep enough, making sure it remains hidden.
Then you should tighten it gently with a bandage for three hours; and afterwards remove the bandage, apply the remedy, and place your hand over the affected area for two or three days until the pain subsides.
And then apply that as a poultice until it heals.
And if you choose to do this with some medicinal fires, as I have written in the two previous treatises on medicinal fires, then...
Prepare the cautery according to this manner: ignite the cautery of which this is the shape:
It is called a claw clamp because its head has the shape of a claw with some curvature, and in the middle part there is a small prominence.
And then place your hand over the area of pain, and hold it there—so that the ark (or force) left by the cautery does not pull—and slowly turn the iron at a controlled speed.
And if the quantity of blood stuck by the specific nature of the wound is such that it equals or exceeds the capacity of the artery left behind, then raise your hand so that the artery is not pulled and no more blood flows out.
Then clean the area with salt water and place a bandage over it, leaving it for three days; then apply plenty of ointment around it, and tend to it until it heals.
And if you see, burn the end of the knife with a cautery, and be careful not to incise an artery in this new wound.
Capital quarter.
On the cauterization of ancient wounds.
When you treat a wound as we have said in the previous treatment and in the division of illnesses, and if the cure does not take effect, and the illness persists, then know that you must ignite the cautery knife until it becomes white, indicating its effectiveness on the pain's source along its length, or where it is; rest your hand for a moment and press firmly to pierce the artery and reach within the bone.
However, it is essential for you to prevent the mandible from further movement, as it is impaired due to chewing, and ensure that the fracture is not twisted, damaging the nerves or causing spasms.
And if it concerns the care and vigilance against the flow of blood from an artery that is ruptured, for in the rupture of it there is fear, especially to him who ignores what he does and is not diligent or hopeful; and lets the operation begin in him at the outset.
And now return to the recollection of the regimen for managing accidental arterial blood flow according to your manner in your place within this book.
And if you see that this illness does not respond to the cautery and the patient's condition is bearable, cauterize in the middle part of the head as we have described, and cure the wound until it is healed.
And if you see fit, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on arterial stretch using tweezers, and this is better cauterization and more effective.
Chapter Five.
On the treatment of ear pain.
When there is pain in the ear caused by cold and it is treated with laxatives as mentioned earlier, and if the pain persists, apply hot cautery; this is known as 'puncta', and its shape is as follows:
And the cautery point is placed near the fire, and it is moved around the entire ear as if it were turning, or in any way necessary to alleviate the pain. Apply the cautery along the edge of the ear gradually, until the area is numbed by the heat.
And if the cautery is applied with these points over the entire ear, and when it is done, treat the areas as they heal.
Chapter .VI.
**On the cauterization of tortuous (varicose) veins.**
The tortuous veins that are cured and require cauterization are nothing but the species (varicose veins) that come from phlegm, as we have discussed in the divisions of ailments.
Careful cauterization is required for the species that should be treated with drying or spasm of the nerve.
When treating that species of tortuous veins with jerks and contractions and no relief follows your treatment, you must cauterize the malady in three places: first, the base of the auricle (ear), second, a small spot on their temple, and third, the union of two lips.
And hold the hot cautery against the opposite side of the affected part, for softening occurs only in the area that appears healthy.
The method of cauterization is as follows: cauterize the base of the auricle directly, placing a small amount of cautery over the forehead, and on the temple, its length corresponding to the length of the finger, and hold your hand over the cautery until the quantity of heat from the cautery is sufficient for the nature of the condition.
This is the form of the cautery, and it is specifically a type of cutting tool, whose shape lies flat on the table. However, it may be even more subtle, as you will see with your own eyes; and take care to avoid excessive roughness in its use.
And then be careful to care for the area that has been treated until it heals.
Chapter .VII.
On the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and its treatment does not accord with what we have said, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize it with four cauteries: first, on all the corners of their head; second, on the middle part of the head as we have said; and third, on the buttocks. And the manner of the cautery is done as it has been said above.
And it is cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and this is more important; and then, it is treated with what you have prepared.
Chapter .VIII.
On the cauterization of an oblivion made by flame.
You should give the patient in the beginning large doses of herbs and pills, which serve to cleanse the body.
Then completely shave the patient's head and place a poultice on their chest according to the description in the tractate on poultices.
And repeat this several times, as it is the manner of cauterization. And do this according to the order of those methods I have already mentioned.
And thus, if for those reasons it is good for them; otherwise, make three cauterizations to him in the last part of his head, which are descending from the higher part of the head to the lower part of the neck. And between each cautery, hold the thickness of the skin, and then carefully apply the cautery according to the procedure.
If you have additional aid and the patient can endure it, make the cautery on the middle part; but if you need greater assistance, cauterize both edges.
Carefully tend to the inside until it is healed; and apply the olive cautery according to the shape as previously described.
Chapter IX.
On the cauterization of parasites and the softening of the entire body.
Understand the process in the softening of the head as we have discussed; then carefully shave the patient's head, and apply cautery in the middle part of the head with a cautery, and cauterize all the edges of the head, and cauterize on the back part of it, and make three cauteries on the spinal bones of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the case of softening the body from too much heat and the illnesses are tolerable but the pain is severe, apply four cauteries on the spinal columns of the back, then cauterize inside until the intense pain of the patient is relieved, and raise your hand. Then take care that it heals properly, and this should be done with olive cautery.
Chapter X.
On the cauterization of epilepsy.
Epilepsy is not cauterized unless it is due to phlegm.
And therefore, it is important to purify the patient's brain from the beginning when they have had fever and other cures that we have mentioned in the previous division where the illness is severe and there is tolerable resistance to medicines.
And if it is a child who does not endure medicines, then administer liquids and soft foods to them, for several days, as a benefit from the diet.
Then shave the head of the patient, and apply a cautery to that place with a cautery in the middle part of the head according to the previous manner, and apply another cautery at the back of the head, and over each of the corners of the head where it was cauterized. And if the disease is severe and resistant, then apply cautery as follows, having a paralytic and softening effect on the body over the spinal columns of the neck and the back.
And apply the olive cautery as mentioned above.
If the patient is a child, then apply gentle cautery according to this manner.
Chapter .xi.
On the cauterization of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupt corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with cauteries as we have said in having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess of fluid leading to melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then it is necessary to give him something that purifies his brain according to what has preceded in the division.
Then shave the patient's head, make a slight cut on the circle (scalp) with a proper knife, and then press it in the middle of the head.
And the patient should feel relieved, and held from every side.
And then apply a remedy; it is more worthy to be used before sheep. And heat that over the fire for a gentle warmth for a measured time, which gives relief when it is most needed. Then take that one in the middle part of the head of the patient in the circle and loosen it so that it becomes chilled.
And do this to the patient once a week for an entire week, following his diet until he is healed; or if you prefer, apply points with a small cautery according to what is most suitable for him, as long as you have your hand on such an instrument: this is a special kind of cautery that moistens the brain equally.
Then apply that cloth soaked in the border or in gray of gullina.
**Capital XII.**
About the extraction of water from the kidney.
When you recognize the onset of water in the kidney through the signs mentioned in the previous division, it begins and causes the patient to drink water that purifies the head, and attention should be paid to complete hydration.
And do that soaking in a bath with herbs for several days.
Then command the patient to wash their head and cauterize the affected area with a hot iron at the middle of the head; and cauterize with two irons over two temples if it is the onset of water in two kidneys, or one side if it is the onset of water in one kidney.
Cut with a cautery all the veins and arteries that are left in the leg; and the cauterizes should be at that length in the breadth of the temples.
And be careful of blood flow when cauterizing; and if you see blood flow from it, stop any further medication that is within your reach.
And come to possess knowledge that is derived from arteries and the removal of those, as well as the prevention of blood flow.
Sometimes, the neck is cauterized between two bones using two cauteries, thereby producing a certain effect.
**Chapter XIII**
**On the Cauterization of Ancient Tears**
When tears from the eyes are chronic and through veins and arteries that appear in the external manifest location of the head, it is determined that this is a result of dilated blood vessels, then cauterize that part with a cautery as we have described in the chapter on starting hot water compresses in the eyes, and apply a cautery in the middle location of the head and two cauterizations at the base of the skull where there are two temples, and two cauterizations at the base of the skull between two bones. And if there is additional indigestion, then cauterize that across the entire surface of the coa (liver) area on the extremity of the upper eyelid with a small cautery.
Chapter XIII
On the cauterization of nasal discharge.
When you treat a patient as we have described in the previous section and your treatment does not benefit them, then prepare and make the patient drink certain herbs for three nights; and shave their head, and apply a cautery with a middle-sized cautery made of olive oil. And then apply the cautery to that, using a claved cautery on each of the two eyelids, leaving the hairs intact.
And be careful not to burn that.
And the form of this claved cautery is as follows.
Chapter XV.
On the softening cautery of the eyelids for the eyes.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or moisture, apply a cautery to that eyelid using this claved cautery; and this is its form:
And if you, apply the cautery to both eyelids with a small claved cautery across each, and they should be elongated from the tempora. And the length of each cautery should be according to the quantity of the hernia.
And do not press too hard with the cautery, but according to how much the third part of the eyelid is adhering.
**Chapter XVI.**
On the cautery of the eyelid, when the hairs turn inside out and press on the eye, apply the cautery to the affected area.
When the hairs of the eyelid turn inside out and press on the eye, apply cautery to them in two ways: either by making incisions or by using a medicinal fire.
If you use a fire cautery, command the patient to look away from it as it cuts its hairs, ensuring they do not catch fire; and if you must hold them down, tighten the bandages around their eyes until the hairs have grown back.
Therefore as they are cleaned and dried, then place the patient's head in a low position, and carefully examine the socket of his eye, signaling it according to the shape of a dead leaf, and begin at the sign closest to the hair.
Then apply some wet, white wax or a mucus of bird down to the eye.
Then heat the cautery whose shape is like this.
And then cauterize along the shape that has been signaled, little by little, in repeated passes, until the surface of the wound is completely covered, just as if it were with a sheet of myrtle, clearly visible.
And the sign of the health of the treatment is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the hairs of the eye raised up since the puncture of the eye.
And so lift your hand and place it there for three days, then return to the side with the border until the pain is gone. And then apply care to that with ointment until it is healed.
If it returns for any reason and the eyelid becomes softened, then make another cautery over that just as you had done originally.
If the hairs are in the eyelid, then cauterize it until it is raised to its natural position and healed so that the hairs do not grow back.
But with cautery and medicated fire, these are the commands you give to the patient that the hairs become prolonged and healed, and then make a bandage in the shape of a fir tree leaf from cloth.
And then take a known soap and a living fire, mix these causes together, and make it into a paste so that it is not cold; spread this from it over the paper which is made thus in the form of a myrtle leaf, and place that on one or both wounds; leave the wound edge bathed in an albumen of egg, and the patient's head in the hot air.
And now let me speak of the medicine, and apply it gently, lest the patient feel the bite of the medicine, for its bite is like fire.
And so, as you continue with this, you must observe if the patient perceives the bite of the medicine; if they do, cease the medicine and apply it again later, but in a milder way; then, when the bite has ceased, wash the wound with water. And consider how often the eyelid is lifted, just as it is cleaned daily by fire or incision, as this is important; and if it does not return to the application of the medicine at the site where the medicine was not absorbed properly, it will undermine your operation and cause the wound to contract.
And then place your hand over the affected area until the pain of the adhesion is eradicated, and treat it with a defusing ointment or another until it heals.
And it is necessary for you to perform your operation with great care so that no part of the medicine falls out, and if after a few days the eyelid becomes softened due to any cause from the hair in the socket, then apply your medicine again to that area which has become softened from the eyelid, and indeed just as you did at the beginning, and envelop it until it heals.
And this is the form of the myrtle leaf.
And you know that the eyes of men vary in size and shape, and therefore your treatment should be adapted accordingly.
And let the path of correction not be hidden from him who studies this art.
Chapter .xvii.
On cauterization of the fistula in the tear duct of the eye.
When you treat a fistula with the method we have described for the division of ailments and your treatment does not succeed, then know that you should cauterize it in this manner: command the patient to sit with their head inclined towards the side, and hold their head with a minister between their thighs in such a way that it is not hurt or agitated by their own head.
And then apply a hot compress or a paste of alum and chickpea flour on the eye of the patient.
And then prepare the cautery, which is shaped as follows:
which is curved, just like a cane or a quill, from one end where the cautery is made.
And if you see, they penetrate into the other extremity. And if you want to get out this way with an attempt.
Yet he who is experienced is better at the work of healing.
And then press the fistula if it is open, and try to clean and dry that. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from that.
Then place over it the hot cautery, and with your hand protect the part from the heat of the cautery at the beginning of the nose, so that neither your hand nor the patient is disturbed, and apply the cautery on the hairy parts of the nose and burn that.
And therefore if at the beginning of applying the hot cautery it penetrates into the bone, that is good; otherwise, repeat the cautery one or two more times, as necessary; leave it in place for three days, and then apply a compress with a drying ointment until it heals.
If after passing ten days it does not heal, then apply the sharp, corrosive medicine again until the bone is exposed and treated as appropriate in its chapter.
There is another way to treat fistulas, which some masters also use: enter the site of the fistula and close it; then place your hand over that fissure gently, in the shape it has, and pour a quantity of melted lead there; hold your hand firmly but do not harm the patient with it so that the melted lead does not burn the patient's skin; cover the area where you have applied the lead to the fistula site with white cloth or water, for the lead will adhere to the site of the fistula and heal it through a miraculous cure.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cautery and treatment, it is good; otherwise, it will be necessary to apply a poultice and reduce the fistula to the body according to its proper place.
**Chapter XVIII**
**On the Cauterization of the Hernia**
Mouth injuries often cause fissures in the lips, especially in children.
Therefore, if you treat those fissures as we have said in the previous sections and do not take advantage of your treatment, then use a small knife to make a cut as follows:
and the depth of the cut according to the thinness of the knife.
Place your finger carefully in those cracks so that the cautery reaches the depth of the cracks.
And then carefully remove that compress when it has healed.
**Chapter XIX**
**On the Cauterization of Fistulas in the Mouth**
When, during the extraction of an uvula, or in the palate or in the roots of teeth there is an abscess that is broken and ancient, and a fistula remains, and if you treat it but do not complete the healing process, then know that you must apply a cautery according to the amount received by the fistula. Place the ignited iron into the opening of the fistula, and with your finger, bring it to the deepest part, doing this once or twice; then care for it as we have said regarding treatment until it is healed.
And thus, if the wound is clean and healed, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to expose the location and host the corrupted bone as described in its chapter.
**Capitol XX:**
On the treatment of teeth and the softening of arteries.
When arteries are softened by moisture and teeth are decayed, and these conditions are treated with medicines rather than surgery, then the patient's head should be placed on the thigh, and the shape of the cautery should be adapted so that you place the flame over the tooth, inserting the burning cautery into it, holding it very close to achieve the desired effect without causing excessive pain.
Then lift your hand, and repeat the application of the cautery several times as desired.
Then have the patient gargle with salt water for an hour, after which they should spit it out, for the decayed tooth will be held firm, the softened gum will tighten, and the corrupt moisture will be dried up.
Chapter .xxi.
On the treatment of tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to coldness, or there is a frost or worm in it, and the treatment with medicine does not help, then cautery is performed on that part in two ways: either with a cow's hair cautery or with fire.
Cautery with cow's hair involves taking a strand of cow's hair and twisting it in a funnel-shaped form, then grasping it and wrapping it around the upper part of the tooth, immersing it in hot oil, and applying it to the aching tooth until it is numbed.
And repeat this several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you see, dip a cloth or piece of cloth in the wound on that side, place it over the aching tooth, and place the burning iron on it until the iron reaches the depth of the tooth's cavity.
However, the use of fire for cauterization is to address the wound of iron or hot metal, and it should be done gently in the heart of the wound, ensuring that the heat does not reach the patient's mouth.
Then shape the cautery as required, place it over the tooth, and hold your hand over it until the cautery cools down; repeat this several times as the pain may resurface on the same day or the next.
And ensure that the patient opens their mouth wide, holding the cautery for an hour and then spitting it out; this is the form of the cautery.
And apply the cautery as you have managed to do according to what is possible for you.
And this is the shape of the cannula:
Chapter .XXII.
On cauterization of extrophules.
When extrophules are filled with flecma and cold humors that are resistant to digestion by medicines, and you wish to drain them slightly, then apply the cautery in a way that follows their shape, having two hollowed ends so that the fire of the cautery can enter from one end and exit from the other. Once this is achieved, place the burning end over the affected area once, or as many times as necessary, until it reaches the depth of the extrophule.
And if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the amount of the abscess, then bandage it for three days and keep pressure on the affected area until the swelling has subsided from where the fire has burned.
Then apply the appropriate treatment with ointments and bandages until it heals.
**Chapter XXIII**
On cauterization of raw and constriction of the throat.
When humidity appears on the surface of the lung, especially when it is chilled by congestion, it is necessary to evacuate the illness at the beginning with medicinal laxatives, and then cauterize that part of the throat where the infection has occurred.
And be careful not to burn the skin with the cautery or dislocate the patient's bones, but only slightly.
And cauterize it with another cautery as needed at the joint of the neck on the last spine of the patient. The cautery of the spine is done in the manner previously described.
Then take care of what has been described above until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII
On cauterization for lung maladies and cough.
When cough and lung maladies are caused by excess humidity, and the patient has no fever or phlegm, and it is an ancient malady, then cauterize as follows: make two incisions with a cautery over the furcula in the places where the lungs shake and rise; and another cautery in the middle of the foot between the big toe and the next toe; and both cauteries should be done as described above.
And if you wish, your puncturing cautery can be the pointed cautery called a point, the shape of which precedes the puncturing of ear pain.
And make incisions within these; then carefully tend to that area with the remedies that precede its healing.
And now, the cautery has three prongs for cauterization to that area; once, you can make three incisions according to this form:
Chapter 25.
On cauterization of the titillitis, which is the head of the assistant.
When the head of the assistant is dislocated due to lubricating humidity and is not held in place during its return, you should reduce its dislocation until it is in its usual position, then place the patient on their back or side; and raise the limb that was displaced from within the thigh towards the upper parts above with your left hand, if the joint is dislocated towards the inner part.
And then apply the cautery, which has two points; this is its form:
Then cauterize the wound where that one penetrates into the other side; and the figure of cauterization will appear when using three cautery points.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count, and that's how the cauterizations are made.
Then place the entire cautery over the wound with salt, and make the patient lie in tranquility, and do not move the limb for some time until it is healed.
And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and it persists, then make a cauterization over the muscle with a hot cautery or a pointed cold cautery, for the joint is confirmed, the moisture is dried up, and the illness is healed.
Chapter .XXVI.
**On the Cauterization of the Stomach.**
When inflammation of the stomach occurs and moisture fills a space within that extends from its opening, and if you continue with treatment methods without considering this, then know that the illness will weigh heavily on the patient's back, spreading to their limbs and organs, and it is appropriate to cauterize these three places: first, leave a mark on the foot with a single cautery as thick as a finger; second, make two cauteries on each side of the back at the costates, forming a triangular shape; and stretch between those that are not properly aligned, which will cause decay.
And if the depth of the cautery is equal to two-thirds of the thickness of the skin.
And the shape of the cautery should be according to this form. And if you wish, cauterize with a larger cautery at the middle point of the stomach in this shape; and this should be a circular cautery according to this form.
And the stomach should be cauterized by puncturing it according to the desired amount of cautery, and then cauterize those points; and afterward, care for the cure that is preceded until it is healed.
Chapter 27.
On the cauterization of varicose veins.
When pain in the vein ends due to cold, or moisture, or excessive windiness occurs, and the disease is treated as we have said, and it does not subside, then know that the disease must be lifted over its base, and three cauterizations should be made according to this form and with this amount on the vein beneath the hipbones, so the patient lies in the supine position.
And the space between each cauterization should be according to its thickness, and the cauterizations themselves should be according to the length of the body on the right side.
And do not apply the hot cautery directly to your skin.
And if the amount of this (substance) that is adhered corresponds to the quality of the specific kind of kidney stone, and it is not properly adjusted; and if the illness stands on the feet of the patient; or if it is not standing, then it sits, which has already spread its things and raised its arms.
And with this cautery, you can cauterize with a cut-edge cautery, when it is in your subtlety and caution in the art.
And be careful not to over-process the cauterization, and let the specific nature of all the kidney stones adhere so that everything in the body is affected and reaches the intestines, because the kidney stone here is subtle; and know this.
Chapter .XXVIII.
On the perforation of an abscess in the leg with cautery.
When an abscess forms in the leg and you wish to determine whether it is within the muscle or around it, if it is within the muscle, the patient experiences severe pain and swelling.
And if it is around the muscle, the pain is intense and various doctors may have already attempted to treat it without success.
Therefore, he should consider how the disease is affecting its head; then he should feel the place of the abscess; and next, apply the cautery which resembles a wedge, whose shape was previously described on the other page. And cauterize that cautery until all the wound is healed, so it reaches the bone, and it becomes clean.
Then take care of that one for the healing of other hernias until it is healed.
And use only those cauterization techniques that are described in the study of medicine, and most importantly, those which have proven effective in treating various ailments; however, this may be daring for this operation, but it is better to follow those guidelines.
Chapter .XXIX.
On the cauterization of pleurisy.
The ancient cautery of the pleural fever is said to be performed by applying this method: take a long, thin, pointed cautery from the school of Aristology, and it should be of the thickness of the finger.
And then immerse it in oil and apply heat to it, and cauterize the area between the continuation of the furcula and the collarbone with a cautery; place two small cauterizations beneath guiding them slightly towards the part where the beard is left, and two cauterizations sloping between the fifth rib and the cartilage, slightly towards the back parts; and another cautery in the middle location of the foot; and another over the stomach, and three cauterizations in the back parts; and a cautery in the area between the two shoulders, and two cauterizations on both sides of the foot, leaving the cautery between the two shoulders.
And do not cover your hand with the cautery, but let it be visible on the body in action.
And they also speak of ancient practices that are similar to men using hot iron cauterization, burning and applying this to the area between the ribs, in order to reach that apostema (a medical term for a specific point) and ensure health, as we have said regarding the apostema of the foot.
Do not be afraid to use this cautery in such an incision, for it often happens at the site of the fistula where there is no cure.
It appears that the text you've provided is incomplete or missing some context. The reference to "Capitol .xxx." suggests a possible connection to a legislative or governmental document, but without additional information, I cannot offer a precise translation or interpretation. If this is part of a larger text, providing more context would be helpful for accurate assistance.
**On the Cauterization of Hemorrhoids**
When treating the pain of the bowels with what we have said about treatment in division and you do not apply your cure, use cautery on it according to three methods, all of which are correct; one is to make three or four punctures along the length of the bowel according to the shape of the cauterization marks on the leg.
And between each cautery, the thickness of a finger or slightly less, and the manner of cauterization is the same manner we have said regarding the cauterization marks on the leg entirely.
And do not apply your hand to the cautery; the illness should be on its side.
And another method of cauterization is when you ignite the cautery having two points, which we have mentioned in the chapter on the dislocation of muscles, and raise the cord which is in the right side of the bowel where it bears the weight of the illness on the left side.
And your elevation, by which you lift the spine according to the length of the body, so that cauterization is made according to the extent of the body.
Then properly insert the two instruments, with hot words, into that space where those penetrate the spine from the other side.
Then extract the cautery; and thus four cauterizations are made.
And if you see, cauterize with a cautery having three instruments.
Then properly take care of the cauterizations so that they do not become inflamed for too many days, as it is more comfortable than other causes preceding in the treatment.
Chapter XXXI.
On cauterization of dropsy.
Cauterization should not be applied to dropsy but directly to the infected tissue.
When treating dropsy using the methods we have discussed, if your treatment does not improve the condition, you should apply cauterization in four places around the affected area, and also apply a cautery to the stomach, another to the thigh, another to the ribcage, two between the spinal columns of the back, one directly on the right foot, and another over the stomach. And the depth of the cautery should be determined according to the severity of the condition.
Then apply the cautery gently so that it does not burn for too long.
And do not evacuate the hernia from treatment with cautery alone, but add to it two intentions, and it will be celebrated with aid in healing.
The shape of the cautery used to cauterize the abdomen should be in the form of a claw according to its previous shape, and it is that which is cauterized on the back is an olive according to the shape that precedes it.
Chapter .xxxii.
On the cauterization of feet and parts (of the body).
When the feet are swollen in water and filled with amber liquid, cauterize the foot on the back of the ankle, between the big toe and the little finger, without touching these joints, and raise your hand with the cautery without twisting it; then raise your hand even higher, and do not return it to its original position until the amber liquid has drained.
This is the cautery according to this form: Then make two cuts on both thighs, and on each cut make a hot cautery with the end of the cutting instrument. And the cautery should be according to the length of the thigh: one on both sides and the other in the middle part of the thigh; and on each thigh two cauterizations.
And the wound should remain open for a long time so that no water remains in it.
Then cure those causes that we have mentioned.
Chapter .xxxiii. (Note: "xxxiii" likely indicates the chapter number, not a translation.)
On the cauterization of abdominal parts.
When abdominal pain is due to cold and moisture, it is the digestive and retentive virtue that becomes inflamed, which are found in the stomach and intestines, and it is treated with methods of cure without causing any harm, and sometimes patients who suffer from severe pain undergo hot applications of virtues, then a large cautery is applied over their stomach as previously mentioned in the cauterization of the stomach, or circular cauteries and four cauteries around the subtle circuit, or a fine-pointed cautery; also cauteries on the acidic over the great alkalines, or two cauteries.
And if the excessive moisture and the illness tolerate it, then apply a cautery over the anus and intestines, tightly binding two cauteries close to the stomach and near the groin, as this is a perfect cure for young people from which one does not stray.
**Chapter .XXXIV.**
**On the Cauterization of Ancient Hemorrhoids.**
When hemorrhoids of ancient origin or a thick humor or corrupt humidity are present and treated as mentioned in the previous sections, but the natural cure does not take effect, then cauterize with three cauteries over the pus around the small of the back, and with a cautery on the navel for two days.
If it appears that the patient's stomach is chilled and their food is not digesting well, and their face becomes pale, then cauterize over the stomach with a large cautery as previously mentioned; also apply a cautery to the tongue, and another cautery to the patient's chest with a clavicle cautery, leave the cauteries open for some time, and then dress them until they heal.
It seems like the text provided is a collection of medical procedures without context or full sentences, making it difficult to provide an accurate translation. The references to "joint pain," "hernia," "emorroydas," and cautery suggest treatments for various ailments common in medieval medicine.
Of cautery for hernias, it is appropriate to remove them.
When you remove hernias, you use the cautery that is shaped like a ray. Then insert that flame into the removed hernia, and finish with your hand inside so that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
And do this once or twice, for if the hernias are too numerous, cauterize each one of them as we have mentioned, and then treat those with hot compresses until they heal.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on something, it is better to do so gently.
**Chapter XXXVI** (Note: The numbering seems to be out of context, as it doesn't match the previous text structure. Assuming "Capitol" refers to a chapter in the treatise.)
On the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in the natural openings of the body.
When nature does not obey the work we have described in its proper place, and the patient is frightened by this, then it is healed with cautery.
Therefore, when one sees a fistula in nature that is ancient, filled with corrupted humidity, it is then most fitting to attempt to heal it gently, and accordingly, one should try to understand the quantity of the depth of the fistula as indicated by the aforementioned attempt.
Nearby, the cautery should be like a ray. And place that ignited cautery into this fistula, according to the quantity in which it intersects the attempt.
And apply the cautery repeatedly until those corrupt bodies are burned through once or twice or three times, according to the amount of your need.
And be careful of burning nerves and veins; if a fistula goes to the bladder or intestinal cavity, be vigilant of all those places; and do not perform this unless the fistula is in fleshy tissue and you think it will not penetrate.
And then care for the area until it is healed.
And if the area is sealed and all foreign matter has been removed from it and it heals thus for a long time, then know that it is completely cured.
And if the foreign matter is not from its place, then know that it is penetrating or corrupting its position, and it falls to those causes of which there will be remembrance in its location.
Chapter .xxxvii.
On the cauterization of ulcers.
When in the ulcers there is pain due to cold or excessive ventilation, and for this reason the posture of the patient becomes deformed, then it is necessary to cauterize those over the ulcers with a cautery on each ulcer, using a clavicle from which relief is sought.
And we strongly cauterize according to a slight space, so that there will come three layers of healing, and thus they will be later in recovery.
Chapter .xxxviii.
On the cauterization of the bladder.
When the bladder becomes weakened and softened by friction and moisture such that the illness cannot retain urine, apply a hot iron to the opening where it discharges over the bladder; the hairs of the penis begin to fall out, and cauterize with an iron on the right side and another on the left.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the severity of the pain; apply a cautery at the lower part of the back, or use two cauteries if necessary.
And the iron should be struck as it is required.
**Chapter XXXIX** (Note: The number is written in Roman numerals, indicating the chapter's position.)
**On the Cauterization of the Major Blood Vessels** (Translation of the heading.)
When fever and excessive moisture appear, conception is prohibited, and the patient's menstruation becomes corrupt, making it difficult to induce labor, and pain occurs during childbirth, then the area should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said regarding the cauterization of the bladder; or with two cauteries, one on each side, using a clavel-shaped cautery.
Chapter XL.
On the cauterization of ankw (hip) dislocation.
When moist mucus infiltrates the hip joint and causes its dislocation, and this condition is characterized by one leg being prolonged over the other when compared between them. And the area of the dislocation is compressed against the patient's body.
Then apply the cautery to the hernia at the opening of the anus, making it circular like a ring, for you will have already tried to tighten the circumference of the opening as it is turned, and thus the opening falls in the middle of the ring.
And the cautery of which was mentioned previously, its shape is in the cauterization of the stomach.
If this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three large olive-shaped cauteries.
And make the cautery according to the intensity of the pain from all parts of the body, and carefully tend to that which is healed.
Chapter XLII (42)
On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain appears in the lower limbs, caused by friction and moisture, the treatment is with water as mentioned above, and this is ancient. You should remove the illness from the body using pills made of foul or artificial substances or similar remedies, and then apply a cautery to that area.
And the method of applying the cautery in that case depends on two methods: either a cautery with medicines that burn, or a cautery with fire.
It follows two methods scientifically, of which one is to cauterize that area across the width of the leg using three triangular cauteries in this manner; and make sure they go deep enough. And the space between each cautery should be in proportion to the thickness of the said area, and whether the cautery is olive-sized or large.
Some times, the cautery should be applied to the middle part over the root of the anus so that there are four cauterizations.
And if you wish, cauterize the circle from which the form proceeds in the cauterization of the herniated anus, one that is circular and burns away the impurity of all the surrounding tissue.
And this is the manner of cauterization in chronic cases where pain is fixed to the anus and not extended into the thigh.
If it is extended into the thigh, then cauterize that as two cauterizations on the thigh over the area where the pain originates; and one cauterization on the calf four days apart from the inner side.
And if the cauterization is with a knife, then the depth of the cauterization should be according to the amount of impurity in the tissue.
And if the illness spreads that the pain is extended to the point nearest the feet, then apply a cautery here where you see it with three or four or more points as needed for that.
And if the illness causes pain that seems to radiate from the side of the body, then apply a cautery here with a cuticular cautery.
And be careful in all cauterization so that you do not harm nerves or cause great injury with the cautery, and thus do more harm than good to the patient from this illness.
And you have already seen one of those whom cauterization is performed on the ankle and completed with the cauterization, and the bed of fire inflated within that the tumor had achieved the foot, and fire perforated and corrupted all the foot. And apply a strong acidic solution of the belly, and do this for death.
And if the pain is in two parts simultaneously, apply cautery to each according to this manner.
And certain sages in the art of cauterization have said about the use of a pointed cautery, which is the manner of this practice: make it resemble a circular iron ring, whose circumference equals that of a palm; and its sharp edge should be according to the thickness of a date palm stem or perhaps a bit less.
And within that circle, another third should be drawn; and the space between them should be the thickness of a night's rest; and those circles should have two parts; and the length of those lines should be a nodus or two noduses, and make on the margin of the iron ring a proper design in the shape of the circles; this is its form.
Then light it in the fire until it curls and sparks, and place it gently on the affected part, with the illness laid upon its side. And so cauterize that area with three pointed cauteries at once.
Then dress the wound with a poultice and leave it open for three days; apply a hot compress to it, and keep the wound uncovered for too many days; and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasis says: O, my children, we have little experience with this type of cautery due to the fear surrounding it, and because few have found which ones work best over time.
Apply the best cauteries to him who suffers, and find the right place for them.
The best cautery should be considered as medicine; make two circles with a perforated armature made of iron, in which the keyhole of the door is placed; let the length of the wall be such that its diameter equals the width of their [the cauteries'] handles or, if you prefer.
And if the space between certain parts of the body is such that it equals the thickness of the finger, place cushions on both sides and ensure they hold each other in this manner.
Then apply pressure to the area where the patient feels pain on their side, and take a cloth dipped in cold water, forming it into two circles, and its quality should be like fire; hold it there for an hour, and let the patient endure the burning and tightening - as if it were fire - until the burning ceases.
Then raise your hand with the tool and remove the cold water from the affected area with warm water.
Then apply this treatment for three days, and continue until the pain and swelling have subsided, and do this for several more days, as it helps to prevent future occurrences. This is best for younger patients.
And then apply the appropriate ointment until it heals.
If the pain is extended within the thigh or leg, make them lie in a position that retains water as it is done with a compress.
And this is the manner of water treatment, and you have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Prepare a mixture of alkali and crushed material from both sources, then place them in a new container, piercing the opening with a small tool according to the quantity that goes inside.
Then place the bottom of the container in another container filled with fresh water, and add two parts of the mixture to one part of hot water, pressing it firmly with your hand, and leaving the mixture to settle into the fresh water in the other container.
And then adjust all that water, and pour it over another living cause and another renewing alkali, so that it becomes a powerful healing agent, which is administered in many medical operations and in the cauterization of other members, as fire does.
And among these medicines are some that use cautery widely, thus quickly and skillfully, and mix them in such a way that they become more effective.
A wise man from ancient times describes an operation and cure for the pain of water (edema) and sciatica, and magnifies its great benefit, saying that no other treatment is needed, as it heals completely with this method; he recommends immersing oneself in warm water to experience it immediately.
And it is that near a certain tree (or plant), if it is not available, a fresh fig should be used; many times it is pressed against the affected area, whether in the water or on the object causing pain, or on the leg, and it should be left for some time.
And it should be left for a period of three hours or for as long as the disease requires release from compression.
Then immerse him in water and, when the body is heated, insert the hot object into the sole, for the pain ceases and healing occurs.
And know that it is not appropriate to use cautery in these remedies unless it is for the evacuation of the body.
You may already know that when the narrow vein of the foot is cauterized with a goat's blood, it benefits the patient; and the cautery should be applied to him in this manner: take wool and dip it in old oil, and place it between the toes and on the sole.
And take a dry goat's vein, inflame it over fire until it becomes carbonized, and place it on the wool and leave it until it is stretched. And then repeat this process, and do not cease to do so until the pain in the joint disappears entirely.
And this type of cautery is called the cow cautery.
Chapter .xlii. (This indicates the title or heading of a section in the medieval treatise.)
On the cauterization of joint pain. (This appears to be the topic or heading for a section discussing the treatment using cautery.)
Sometimes the pain in the back is caused by various reasons, such as injury or blow, or excessive sweating, and for similar causes, through the infusion of a cold and moist material.
And cautery does not help but in this sole species, which is caused by the infusion of cold and moist material.
Therefore, to achieve evacuation of the malady, create pills that resemble them and apply them over the area where the pain is located along three lines according to its extent, using cautery on each line as much as needed based on the patient's tolerance and the virtue of the treatment.
And cauterization should be done with a pointed cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or four, using the claw-shaped cautery according to this form:
Chapter .xliii.
On cauterization begins with jaundice.
These symptoms often first appear in small children; and the sign of the onset of this malady in children is that their joints become stiff, and elevation and movement cause them pain.
And it examines the last spine of the back and the nodes of the spine that already begin to rise above the other spines.
And so when you see this and want to prevent it, you cauterize it with a circular cautery in the following shape: that takes the cautery across the entire length of the spine.
And if you wish, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery in two or three lines. And the points should be proper between them.
And then tend to the area, ensuring it is healed as we have said.
Be careful that cautery is not applied to a swelling caused by a spasm of nerves.
Chapter XLIV.
On the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And thus, when gout is caused by cold and is not relieved by treatment, then cautery should be used to alleviate the pain.
It is because you cauterize the proper evacuation in the circulation of the joint of the foot using various cautery tools.
And take a olive-shaped cautery whose form is as follows:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pain intensifies within the bones or other joints, and this persists frequently, then cauterize that over any joint with three or four of these pointed cauteries, using this olive-shaped cautery.
And if you find that these cauteries are necessary for you, then cauterize and do not press too hard with the cautery, merely touch the surface of the skin.
And if the pain persists within the bone and its surroundings, then administer the cauteries as we have mentioned in our previous chapter.
And if the pain is only in the joints, it is called arthritis; then make points along the course of the tendons as they twist, in those two lines.
And if the pain persists in these joints, make points along the course of the tendons around each knot and on the pinched area of the hand.
And if the pain affects other joints or muscles, apply cautery to various parts of the body.
And do not evacuate the malady without proper treatment and reception of medications; for if good regimen is followed and the inflammation is removed with this cautery, God will help.
Chapter .xlv. (This appears to be a chapter heading, indicating the fifty-fourth chapter.)
On cauterization of fractures.
When a fracture occurs in the angles and opens hernias against the intestine at the genitals, treatment begins by returning the intestines to their place, ensuring that the patient follows a diet during his day and uses gentle means so that the wound heals from within his abdomen.
Then continue to support the patient between your hands on his back and instruct him to keep his breath within, so that no hernia or intestine appears.
Then return the patient to his original position and attempt to reduce the fracture over the bone of the thigh, marking the end of the fracture's movement by signaling its resemblance to a circle at the upper gaps of the body.
Then apply the cautery whose shape is as follows:
Within which there is much heat and swelling. And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from protrusion.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And then place the cautery over that sign with your hand holding the cautery straight, and aim it at the bone of the big toe within the joint; repeat this another time if you do not succeed on the first attempt to hit the bone.
And observe carefully the movement of the intestine during the cauterization, so as not to inflame the hernia, preventing it from causing death or other serious complications on the patient.
And you should know that when you use a cautery, do not touch the bone, do not apply your operation.
And take care that the cautery on children should be gentle according to their size and measure.
Then take care of the cautery site for three days, applying fresh bandages until the scar from the fire is healed.
And take care of those with other burns until they are healed.
And the patient should lie on their back for ten days until the site is sealed and the pain disappears.
And take care that the patient's food should be limited according to the duration of their healing, so as not to strain their stomach, and prevent the intestine from protruding due to the effort of healing.
And when it is desired to remove it after approximately ten days, administer the treatment properly and maintain that for another forty days.
And it should also be reduced through work and the intake of food and drink, and avoiding loud voices, because this entire regimen of healing will restore health.
And now I will describe the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, which begins at once and should not stop: cauterize the rupture with a red hot iron according to the amount of fluid that is emerging from it, just as if it were the third part of the intestine; then care for it as we have said, without allowing it to protrude.
And some say that the first rupture should be cauterized with a triangular iron according to this form, because it is noticeable and tries to protrude.
And it is a pause line that holds the skin over the opening, and another line above it; then place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery should be lighter and better.
Chapter XLVI.
On the cauterization of twists.
When pain ends in various members due to injury or impact and persists for a long time without yielding to medical treatment, then apply cauterization with a pointed cautery.
And the cautery should be of the appropriate size and shape for each member, taking into account its strength, flexibility, location, and the nature of the pain it suffers.
Therefore, if the first cautery is successful, good; otherwise, repeat the cautery on it. For usually, those pains are caused by the infection spreading to a member adjacent to that member, so you must be able to apply cauteries to them until the illness is cured.
Chapter .xlvii.
About the cauterization of leprosy.
Leprosy is sometimes treated with cautery due to a severe inflammation and melancholic disposition; specifically the type of leprosy caused by putrefaction of the flesh and melancholy.
And so if you wish to cauterize this, consider whether the leprosy is acute and if it responds to treatment as described in the previous sections without causing further harm, fear that the corruption has spread throughout the body and affects its entire structure; then cauterize it on the head using a hot iron: first at the middle of the forehead, then behind, touching the nape of the neck or at the back.
Lastly, with your hand, apply the cautery slightly before it touches the bone to avoid any sudden shock and displacement of the bones, thereby allowing the release of any accumulated vapors; and cauterize on the surface as required.
And if leprosy has already spread over the body and appears manifestly, then you should cauterize those with those cauterizes that we have mentioned in the beginning; cauterize on the tip of the nose, and two cauterizes on each cheekbone, and two cauterizes on both spinal bones of the neck, and five cauterizes on the spine, and one on the hip bones, and one on the shoulder blade, and two on each ankle, and one on each ankle bone, and two on each toe, and one on each toe. Cauterize all these joints of the upper and lower limbs and on every heel of their feet and on the sole.
And beware of the nerves that are on the sole, do not disturb those.
And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the hip and another on the opening of the stomach, and another on the spleen.
And you should know that the more precise the cautery, the greater its effectiveness and the better it is; and you should know that illness has no pain in cautery, just as it does in other parts, because the body of the patient is already stunned.
And understand that the size of the cautery should be great or small according to the members and joints as previously mentioned about the kinds of instruments.
Then apply the cautery with flour mixed with honey and other remedies, as long as it heals.
Chapter .xlviii.
On the cauterization of stupor.
When a member is stuck or asleep and treated with medicines, oils, and bandages, but it does not heal, then you cauterize that stuck member with cautery according to the size of the member or the severity of its condition.
And let the hot cautery enter slightly into the depth of the wound. And then apply that ointment until it heals.
Sometimes, cautery is also applied to numb certain areas, especially the hands and feet, the spine, and around the eyes where the nerves are visible, and this relieves the pain.
One must not attempt this unless one is knowledgeable in the anatomy of the body's members and the exit of the nerves throughout the body's movements.
Chapter .xlix. (This appears to be a section or chapter heading, indicating the topic to follow.)
On the cauterization of ulcers that are ulcerated.
When the wound is old and does not heal with any of the medical treatments, then you apply a cautery to it using a pre-heated iron according to the quantity of the specific type of cord until the white and color of the wound are restored, and its color is changed.
And then prepare a mixture of flour made from herbs and lentils, infused with rose oil and arnica leaves, and add the dung of a pigeon or dove, each ingredient being in equal parts, and apply it to the wound as a poultice until it is healed.
It appears that the text you provided is incomplete or missing context, making it challenging to determine its meaning or provide an accurate translation. "Capitol .l." could refer to various concepts depending on the surrounding content. Without additional details, I cannot offer a meaningful interpretation.
**De Cauterization (of Cramps)**
When cancer begins to form and you feel that pain, then cauterize it with a circular cautery along the course of its growth as it turns.
And the learned ones say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle of the growth; but to me, it doesn't seem like it should be done this way, as I fear it might ulcerate, and I have already seen this happen a few times.
It is therefore more carefully done that it be cauterized along the course of its growth with a circular cautery as we have said, or with numerous cauterizations.
Chapter.
On cauterization of abscesses.
When an abscess takes a long time to mature, it may be due to excess pus or the patient's poor health condition, as it is old and frail with little strength, or because of time, and you wish to hasten the maturity of the abscess; then cauterize along its course using numerous small punctate cauterizations; and close it up afterwards, as it will slow down in maturing.
If you wish to make the perforation with a cautery, then take the shape of the cautery whose form is as follows: and place it in the middle part of the prepared area until the wire penetrates.
And if the cautery in that place is too far away, so as to relieve the body of the arm; and then take care that it heals properly.
Chapter II.
On cauterization of corrosion.
Corrosion is a wandering corruption in the member, which corrodes it as if fire were consuming dry wood.
So if you encounter that corrosion in a place which is to be treated with fire, then ignite cautery needles thin and thick, according to what is appropriate for the location where the corrosion is.
And then apply the cautery from all sides until you eradicate all corruption and do not leave any cause for it.
And then apply heat to it for three days, placing your hand on the cauterized areas, repeatedly applying a mixture of oil every third day until all scars are completely eradicated and all corruption removed.
And then care for it with a poultice of fresh meat.
It may be three days before the meat grows healthy and free from corruption, which is good; if not, repeat the cauterization on what is broken in the corrupted areas.
And corruption is treated with some sharp medicine, for it takes the place of cauterization. However, cauterization with fire is more suitable for older patients.
And you have already spoken of the treatment for him using sharp medicine in the division, so take that which you will use to treat him accordingly.
It appears that the text you've provided is a part of a medieval medical treatise, and the sentence "Capitol .liii." likely indicates the beginning of Chapter 33 (liii stands for thirty-three in Roman numerals). Without additional context or the full text, it's challenging to provide an accurate translation of this specific sentence. However, given the nature of the document, we can infer that it might introduce a new topic or continue discussing a previous medical condition.
On Cauterization of Wounds and Similar Conditions.
You should pay particular attention to the parts of the foot affected by a malady known as a 'clau' (toe joint), especially when it is swollen and painful; and in such cases, cauterization is performed in two ways: either with fire or with water-drawn cautery.
The fire cautery involves igniting the cautery tool, which is shaped like a bird's claw, made of iron according to the size of the affected toe joint, and having subtle edges.
And then apply the hot instrument to the joint, and turn your hand with the cautery around the joint until the cautery reaches the depth of the joint. And leave that for three days until it begins to heal. And then apply a plaster made of wild mallows dried in salt to that area, and leave the plaster on for one night so that it is eradicated from its roots.
And then treat the area with a poultice of generated animal fat until it heals.
And if it is not curable and repeated incidents occur on the surface of the body, especially in the joints and feet, then you must manage those cauterizations with water, and take a narrow pipe of iron or bronze or a pen, and apply that to the joint; then pour a small amount of hot water into the pipe, hold your hand, and turn it around compressing it thoroughly, and constantly rotate the edge of the pipe along the root of the joint, until the hot water is consumed at the base of the joint. Wait for the patient to bear the bite of the hot water for about an hour, then remove it, because the joint will be freed from its roots.
And thus they do as those before them have done, approaching the other towards all parts of their bodies.
And then take care of those pus that the roots of the wounds have been eradicated with these ointments that the flesh is nourished by.
Capital .iii. (or possibly .liiii, though the numbering system is unclear)
On cauterization (or burning) of tremors.
When you encounter a tremor caused by irritation of the nerves or fever from some irritating cause, or any similar condition, you must cauterize it with four cautery points or two on each side of the spine, between each vertebra with one cautery; also cauterize on the patient's foot and over their stomach with olive cautery.
And the tremor of him rests and hastens the health of the afflicted disease.
Chapter XV.
On the cauterization of accidental burns on the body.
When burns on the body appear, and there are pustules that result from corrupt gross matter, then at the beginning of their appearance, cauterize them over every part of the fistula with a delicate cautery or a piece of birch wood, whose tip is heated by fire; or shave off with a long razor; or apply a lenticular cautery.
And in some cases, cauterization is also applied at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; they are not incurable and dislodge the excess, causing healing from those.
However, be aware that this should be done with care through phlebotomy.
**Capitol VI.**  (Note: Assuming this is referring to a chapter or section title)
On the cauterization of flux of blood from an accidental wound through incision of the artery.
In cases where arteries flow from a wound that has been deeply incised, or from the onset of abscesses or cauterization on a limb, it appears and is difficult to contain.
Therefore, when this happens to anyone, you must use your hand over the wound of the artery, and place it tightly until the flow of blood stops, making sure that no further bleeding occurs.
And then apply the olive cautery to the fire, in both small and large numbers, and blow on them until they are ignited.
And then take one of these, small or large, depending on the location and the wound where the artery is broken, quickly applying pressure to stop the bleeding, and cauterize it until the blood flow is restricted.
And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery as you apply pressure and remove the cautery, take another cautery carefully from those prepared in the fire, and do not stop doing this until the clot is reduced.
And be careful not to irritate the nerves here, which could cause further harm to the patient.
And you should know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to restrict the clot, especially if the artery is large, unless by one of four methods: either using a cautery as we have mentioned, or by extraction, where the ends of it are burned and the clot restricted, or tying it tightly with thread or ligature, or applying medicines whose virtue is to restrict the clot; and they should be tightened gently at the costochondral joints.
He who properly administers restriction and tightens with bandages or by draping or due to burning causes and similar things, does not cease until the clot is thoroughly extracted.
If, in this case, it is not a suitable time for anyone else to intervene and there is no doctor present nor any medicine available, then open the indicated point gently on the site of the vein as we have said, and understand that the great constriction of it occurs when the blood clot is from the original source of the disease, and do not attempt to remove the clot immediately; instead, pour a large amount of very cold water over it until the clot freezes and thickens; then decide if cautery or medicine is required.
Regarding incisions, punctures, blisters, phlebotomies, wounds, and their likes.
We have already discussed in the first chapter all diseases in which fire cauterization is appropriate and medicinal burning useful, along with their occasions and causes, and the instruments necessary for such forms of cauterization; I have arranged the chapters here from head to foot.
And you will proceed in this chapter in this manner, so that relief is provided to him who seeks it, as he has requested.
And before you begin this, know that in this chapter it is for the purpose of fear, as it is in the first chapter of cauterization.
And because you must be in great caution, for in the operation which is in this chapter, you will often see cat's evacuation, which is most dangerous to life; you must pay attention to the vein or incision upon the abscess or observation of discharge or purification of the wound or extraction of an arrow or beginning of a fever and similar things. And among all these, there is fear and trembling; and in most of their cases, death follows.
And you must warn yourself that it does not fall upon you in which there is resistance, for sometimes you may find yourself in the hands of wicked men rather than skilled healers. And from them, some will be carried away by their illness and its sudden nature must be alleviated, otherwise it will lead to death, due to the intensity of their illness, and the duration of their suffering, for the disease itself is a cause of death.
And of those who have granted you the gift of speech and said, "I hope for your health," their illness is destructive.
Therefore, do not consent to anyone who approaches you with this mannerism; let your caution be greater than your knowledge, and your greediness; do not presume any cause regarding it, except through certain scientific knowledge that verifies it is right for you, to which you have been rightly led.
And in the treatment of all your illnesses, use prophecy and indication of the means that bring health, for it is in these that you find help in gaining fame, memory, praise, and glory.
Oh, sons, may God inspire your understanding and grant you guidance and protection, for it is in His hands.
And you have ordered this chapter to be distinguished into sections according to what precedes in the chapter on cautery, from the treatment of the head down to the feet, so that it may be easier for you regarding what you need to know about it and what is required.
First Chapter.
On the treatment of water contained in the head of children.
You know that this illness manifests itself in children, and when the dark blood enters the head of the child, it affects its life.
And sometimes, for hidden causes that are not known.
You may not see this disease in children; and to all those whom I have seen suffer from it, I have witnessed the effectiveness of this treatment on them.
And you have seen that in a child whose head was filled with water, the head was always thus magnified so that he could not lay it down on his pillow because of the size of his head, and more than that, the moisture increased until death by fire.
And this moisture is either added between the spine and bone or added beneath the bones on top of the skull.
For the operation on that case if the moisture is between the spine and bone and the abscess is small, then you must make an opening in the middle part of the head as a fissure at right angles, and the length of this fissure should be enough for the moisture to escape, and this is the shape of the spatula:
And therefore if the moisture is greatly increased and the abscess becomes larger, here are two cracks according to this manner:
And if the moisture enters the bone, it signals that you should open the commissures of the head completely and press hard on the area, squeezing out the water; this is not something to be delayed. Make sure that you cut at the middle of the head in three cracks according to this manner:
and then extract the incision completely to remove all moisture; and tighten the cracks with bandages and plasters; and within three days, drill holes from above into the affected area and pour wine and oil; and clean the wound with ointment and cure the infection with heat, and hold the head in equal position; and feed the patient dry bread with little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
And there is another incision technique that considers the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of water, as sometimes it appears in the back of the head, or at the front, or on the right, or on the left; so pay close attention to the incision where the abscess appears and the accumulation of water, and do it as best you can.
And observe that do not incise the artery, and strive for flows of blood and morbid matter through that flow of blood in the evacuation of humidity.
Second Chapter.
When there is an occurrence of sudden or severe pain in the hands or feet, and it is an old condition that does not respond to medical treatments, then the final remedy is to incise those two arteries.
And thus you cover when you want to incise those that the disease has raised its head, and then rub the place with a rough cloth so that the veins appear, and then tighten the collar of the patient with another cloth; and consider where the pulse of the vein is; and the places of each over the places that are appropriately compressed, and they remain concealed in some people.
Then carefully cut through the tendon with a scalpel, making an incision that enters between the bones and is appropriate for the thickness of the head.
And if you wish, insert the scalpel between the artery and cut it at the incisions on its sides.
And the length of the incision should be such that when any vein is incised, the blood is prevented from escaping through its pulsating exit, which would occur frequently.
If the arrow does not appear at the belt, then measure from the auricle the quantity of space equal to three fingers, and then carefully attempt to insert it into the bone.
And what you get from the wound is a quantity of one wine unce, and it cannot be more or less, and all this is according to the quantity that appears from the severity of the injury and the depth of the arrow in the body.
And consider the infection, and if there remains any cause of the fracture on the bone, then cut it off so that it does not spread gangrene.
Then strengthen the infection with poultices and bandages from linen cloth, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
**Chapter III**
Of extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When ancient or sudden migraines occur due to atmospheric humidity and the quality of the tears in the temples, or sudden weakness resembling these, and are not relieved by medical treatments as usual, we have resorted to the extraction of arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those areas as shown.
And the method of performing the operation and extracting those is to address the disease that originates in the temples; understand the visible artery in the temple where it is indicated by your pulse, and it is hidden from most people due to its urgency and friction.
And if it is hidden from you, then tighten the collar of the disease with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the artery appears visibly to you. And then you take the sponge that has this shape: And then you cut the cord as easily as possible to reach the arrow; and you remove it from inside and extract that from the superior parts while removing that from the cord and uncovering that of the tunics which remains beneath, from every part.
If the artery is thin, then you wrap it at the end of the finger, and then cut a single part according to the amount by which the ends are elongated and contracted, and it will not bleed much, because if they are not incised, the blood from everywhere cannot be stopped.
Then empty the vessel of blood within three beats.
And if the arrow is large, then you tie it in two places with a strong double thread of silk or with cords of length, and do not allow putrefaction to occur before the healing of the wound, and bleed much.
And then incise the surplus which is between two ligaments; do this at that moment or another time.
And if you wish, use a cautery within the bone, using a cutting cautery where the extremities of it have been incised, and hold in place that work done at that point.
And it is better work if the patient has fever or there is a chill present; for cautery is one of those remedies that aid in dispelling humors, and thus it is better applied while young.
And then cover the extraction of the edges that have exposed the area of old scars, and place them neatly over it, and apply a cure with dry medicines that cause healing of the flesh and heat within so that it may be healed.
And if while working another time bleeding from the wound occurs, then immediately restrict that bleeding, either with cautery or by filling the area of the scar, and tighten your hand over it until the bleeding is stopped. And if any cause of those symptoms is not present, then apply your thumb to the area until the swelling subsides, and immerse the location in water with a strong coldness until the sharpness returns, and tighten according as necessary.
And what is more often extracted from the arrow wound is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two blades, after you have felt both locations by trying, and then light some kind of fire, until it reaches the bone and cuts the vein in two places, so that what is between the extremities of it can be elongated, as it is not consolidated from all this cauterization.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And the sharpness of both blades is an example. However, it may be better to have two blades with greater sharpness, as if both are very sharp and close to each other, they do not cut the flesh too quickly.
Therefore, when there is some swelling in those areas, the heat of the fire is retained in them and the flesh is slightly separated.
And this work is best of all works and most light.
And the space between two bones is determined by the quantity of thickness of that.
Capital quarter.
On the treatment of sudden and acidic eye pain.
When there are acute and acidic eye pains, it is the veins of those areas just beneath the skin of the head that are affected, and no medical cause for this condition is recognized. Often, the patient's face becomes discolored and they experience a sensation in their forehead as if ants were walking on it, and their eyes are exhausted, so wet that their eyelashes become uncomfortably sticky, and their eyelids are irritated by the intensity of the tears. The traditional remedies used for this condition are futile.
And it is that you command the patient to shave the hair which is on their forehead, and then inscribe three incisions equally distant according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is two parts: one incision is equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle part of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the tears which are in the tear duct, and the third from the other side.
And be careful with the incision of the arteries which are in two openings, and extend your hand along the continuation of both mandibles. And if the space of each incision is three parts, adjust it accordingly.
And if you have a piece of sponge or dry cloth at hand, moisten it with the blood.
And then insert the knife between the two acute extremities, which is the form of the incision. What is removed from the temples during the second incision. Excise all the cord that is between the two incisions on the thigh bone, and then make a midline incision during the second procedure. And then take hold of this knife and insert it into the first incision, another time using another instrument called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And hold the sharp edge of this instrument against the flesh attached to the bone, and insert it between the bones, and use it to reach the middle fissure, and cut away all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
It may be continued the incision to this appear of the cord, and then make it in the middle crack between the other cracks.
And as the flow of blood decreases, squeeze the locations of the frozen parts of the sanction.
And then place in each crack a small piece of cloth soaked in wine and oil, and it is important that it does not become infected with caution.
On the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large infusion of cold water or tea, and then apply to it ointment made with basilicum and rose oil, and other herbs as the wounds are healed.
The title seems to be incomplete or missing some context from the original text. It appears to be referring to "Capitol" but without additional information, it's challenging to provide a precise translation or interpretation. If this is part of a larger medical treatise, it could refer to a specific chapter or section heading.
On the treatment of bleeding through catharsis and the descent of fluids from openings in the head.
When acute bleeding continues and the patient's wounds from the head injuries are severe, and the care of them has already been weakened, and the eyelids ulcerated along with their hair, and in the region of the head, there is intense pain and subsequent discharge, then be aware that these accidents do not come from nothing but veins opened from inside.
And the best treatment for these is this: command the patient to rake their forehead, and then make a cut at the middle of the forehead, a small one (and begin with the cut from the left temple towards the right temple; and it should be a cut within the bone; and then extend your hand away from the cuts on the temples, which are better avoided after chewing), until the bone is exposed.
Dry all the discharge with a sponge or clean cloth, and then repack between the two edges of the cut with cotton wool or other suitable material. And then apply to them a dust of herbs mixed with wine and oil, so that they do not catch an infection quickly.
And when you open it and see that the infection has already decreased, then you will notice that the pain begins in the bone within it, and then treat it with a drying remedy that makes the flesh fall off, just as if you were to take two parts of flour and four parts of colza and mix them together, making a paste that is applied to these wounds, originating from the native flesh.
Chapter VI.
On the treatment of what cats in the ears.
Any cause that cats in the ears is one of four types: either it is a mineral or causes similar to a stone, such as iron and lead, or it is from a plant like barley or fava beans, or it is a fluid-related cause like water and wine mixed together, or some animal.
And so when a cat's bite occurs in the ear or any other cause resembling those that do not adhere or swell in the ear, hold the ear to the sun, and if the pain persists, it will distill into some cause of oil or cinnamon, then administer the extraction of it, and make the stinging condition appropriate, and position the nose away from the occurrence of sneezing. And then apply some pieces of cloth or wool to the ear canal, and pull the ear away from its attachment, as these motes (or specks) are often forgotten due to such causes.
And if it is not removed, then administer the extraction of it with the instrument called a delicate epichirurgical gear, of which this is the form:
And if it is forgotten with the gear, then it is; otherwise, administer the extraction of it using an incredibly thin tool with minimal folding.
And therefore, if this is not forgotten, make a tube of arax and insert the end of the tube into the canal of the ear and close around the tube with wax and softened oil so that only the tube is opened. And then extract the tongue with strong traction, as it is often seen with these conditions.
If it is not forgotten in this manner, take a warm light or some hot apparatus with which the outer shell of the object is gently heated, and apply that to the end of the ray, then wrap it decently around that part. And then insert that into the ear canal easily, and carefully remove the ear from any moisture.
And therefore, if all the causes we have mentioned are not forgotten, then cut off that which causes the abscess or spasm.
And the method of incision is that you begin by cauterizing the malady in the saphenous vein and extract the blood according to the virtue of it, then make the incision between your fingers, and turn the edge towards the parts from which it came, and make a small fissure at the base of the edge where the grayish part of it is pressed against the area. And if the fissure reaches the pearl (testicle), and when the testicle is affected, you should stop it if you can with appropriate instruments; then quickly make an incision at that time and treat it until it is healed.
And if the cause of the pain in the auricle is one of the inflamed and swollen fats, then administer treatment and extract it; but if you do not follow your instruction, then take some fine spit as follows: and administer the removal of that fat which has fallen into the auricle.
And do not attempt this when you think the part is already moistened by the aura's vapor, place it on heavy weights, and try to extract it gently or with precise incisions as we have said, for this eases its removal.
If water has entered the ear, which is the cause of the disease at its onset, fill the ear with some very fine old wheat or lion's hair according to the length of the affected side, warm them slightly over the fire, and then the patient should insert one of these into the opening of his ear and jump on it with all his strength, striking another stone against the one inside the ear. Therefore, continue with the stone until all the water is removed.
Therefore, continue with the stone until all the water is removed. And once the water is removed in this way, take some paper or wool and place one end of it in the ear and extend the other end towards the fire until all the moisture inside the ear is dried out.
And then insert other needles and do this as many times as necessary until all the water is drained out, and stretch that small tube from the stone extractor.
If a stone is small, the extraction can be performed in the same way as we have described; however, if it is a large one that causes an apparent blockage, then the extraction should be done with gestures and incisions, and the cause of it should be treated more lightly than all other causes that affect the ear.
In the extraction of worms born in the ear, when you treat that as we have said in the division and in the treatment of distills, and do not agree with your treatment, then you should observe the ear facing the sun.
And so if any cause of the worms appears, then extract them with subtle gestures or incisions; however, if no cause appears, take a tube that is narrow at one end and wide at the other, whose shape is as follows: And then insert the fine end of the instrument into the ear according to the amount of pain suffered by the patient; then suck with a strong suction, making movements as you do this, until all the worms are expelled.
If you do not adhere to the above instructions, then seal and close the end of the cannula with wax as we have said; administer distilled liquids that have already been prepared in the treatment of worm infections, which you will find described in the section on distillation treatments.
And let your flow be the one that empties the medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, which is shaped as follows: And make it of silver or iron, keeping it straight, with a small opening on top and a flat surface.
And thus it is used, as it fits into the cavity of the containing cannula here; this will be necessary. And if you wish, take the thread and neatly wrap it around the end, then pour oil into the concave part of the ear, or juice from some herb, or any remedy you prefer, onto the thread, and insert it into the ear while pressing your hand over it until the oil is expelled into the concave part of the ear and the patient feels relief.
And what is inserted into the ear should be scarified with a small piece of fire. And be careful that the cause you are treating in the ear is not too severe, as ear remedies do not tolerate too much force.
Chapter VII.
On the Cure for Ear Inflammation.
Some times children have abdominal pain without any perforation, and this happens in some men due to inflammation of the auricle's meat from an infection or from nothing; and this inflammation sometimes occurs on the edge of the wound of the auricle, which is not felt, and sometimes it is outside the folds.
And that which happens in the edge of it, which is not felt, is in the most difficult situations for healing.
And in that case where you can feel it, make sure you turn the patient's auricle towards the light and examine it. And if you see any swelling, open it with a thin knife from which this is the shape of it:
If the end of it where the tightness is, from which one part is sharp and the other not; and the knife has two edges wide enough so as not to cut into the auricle.
And thus, if the operation is for a bone grown in the ear or in the flesh, then use delicate scissors and cut with velocity until all the flesh is removed.
And if the operation is on the edge of the ear, then take a fine blade and heat it slightly with fire, and then insert that into the flesh of the ear.
And thus, if you have sensed that the patient finds relief from this condition due to its ease of removal, then apply pressure to alleviate it; and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear.
And then, place a bandage on the ear according to the amount of space occupied by the treatment you have applied with Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are certain of the healing of the wound; or, if it is more beneficial, immerse it in water and sprinkle over it every third day, using it; and if the ear has already formed a crust, be careful not to ruin the treatment and replace it with another made from wax that is smooth, so long as the infection does not worsen; and attend to it until it is healed.
If a flux of blood occurs, then immerse the exposed or wounded area in warm water, place a bandage upon it, and use another treatment that restricts the flow of blood, which is called in the distillation treatise.
It appears that your text is missing some content or has an incomplete structure. The phrase "Capitol .viii." does not provide enough context for me to determine the intended meaning or translation. If you could supply more details or a complete sentence, I would be happy to assist further.
Regarding the treatment of inflammation affecting the eyelids.
The inflammation affecting the eyelids of the eyes sometimes becomes moist, at other times it is dry.
Therefore, if you have those sticky or crusty particles, remove them from the affected areas and place a bandage over the treated spots.
If severe pain flows from a venous source, then you cauterize them with fine antique cautery.
And the best cautery is to make incisions and carefully observe their return when there is no cause for their reappearance; and when cauterized with fire, those incisions are burned away and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Treatment for a severe condition that occurs on the eyelids of the eyes.
Visibly swollen folds on the eyelids due to some cause that resembles a significant accumulation of strength and hardness are therefore called 'grandeyssa'.
And there is an excessive addition of moisture on the lower and upper eyelids.
Therefore, the operation on them consists of considering, when the size is proceeding in it from where the eyelid appears and is reduced throughout; and the cause of it is light.
So now turn your attention to that open fracture according to its extent, and then carefully extract it from all sides so as to evacuate it; and then suspend that one and cut and separate it.
And if the wound is large, then adjust it with stitches; and take care of that until it is healed.
And if it is small, you will not encounter much trouble, for the healing of its wound restores and incarnates it.
And if the swelling is decreasing within the eyelid, you must attend to the surface beneath, lift the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a bandage, except as you deem necessary from the beginning, press on it from all sides, and if the eyelid itself is elongated for some reason, pay no attention to it.
Then make the initial incision, rinse the wound with salted water; and treat the area with ointment until it is healed.
Chapter X.
On the treatment of an acute condition on the eyelid above the wound.
Acute inflammation is caused by the conditions of the eyelid tissues above, and it particularly affects children, aggravating their eyes and leading to their discharge; and they cannot see clearly due to the tears that gather in them.
And so you must keep those actions over their faces for a long time, and over their faces they sleep; and on the eyelids of their eyes you leave the eyebrows moist, which have already been covered by inflammation, and the imminence of its arrival is apparent in the eye; and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel acuteness within those.
And in some ways of operation, the patient positions their head on the thigh, and then wraps them with cloth and makes them cool; they form a circle according to the amount that contains the seed from every part, and then place it over one another, pressing with your fingers throughout so that acuteness is added to the middle of the circle, and then close the middle of the other part with humidity incident on the fissure in accordance with its extent, but the fissure must not be larger than the one made in flaubotomy.
Place in the preon a cover that you puncture the entire cord until you reach acuteness, for in the most advantageous positions, acuteness is achieved through fissure according to the form of white grayness.
Therefore, remove those sheets which you have wrapped around the affected parts outside and twist them with your left and right hand until they are completely dispersed.
And be careful not to tighten it in the fissure so that the spatula does not penetrate too deep and dislodge it.
If it does not appear to your assistant at the beginning of the fissure, then you should adjust the fissure a little more easily until the process begins; and then remove the sheets as we have said, and immerse them in water, add vinegar, and place them over the area, and apply these as powders.
And then some sprinkle salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure so that what remains of that moistness is removed.
And then take care of it until it is healed.
If an infection occurs in the pustular area, then treat it with emplasters until it heals.
**Chapter XI**
**On the Methods of Touching (the Wound)**
When, in the eyes, there are growths of abnormal hair, which are old and cause pain to the eye, these lead to various maladies, such as constant tears, soft eyelids, and inflammation, until they cause the destruction of the eye, known as "tactinir del huel" (eye irritation), and it is treated in four ways: with a hot cautery; with acute medicine, as mentioned previously in the chapter on cauterization; through incision and suture; or with canes, as explained later.
And so you should position the patient's head in a suitable manner; then, with your left hand, turn the eyelid of the affected eye towards you, and if it is turned, that indicates the problem; otherwise, insert an needle into the area where there is a lump beneath the eyelid, and make the needle pierce through the lump to the other side of the eyelid, close to the edge where the hairs are, and pull the thread gently from beneath the eyelid towards the lump.
And then gently open the gap between the eyelids, adjusting the hairs with a delicate brush; then extract the tear and place the eyelid by covering it with small cotton or cloth particles, and press down on the eyelid as if to shape a myrtle leaf.
However, it is necessary to consider that the shape should be adapted according to the degree of swelling of the eyelid, as this varies among individuals; those who suffer from significant swelling require a greater incision in the eyelid to allow for proper drainage.
Then open with the spatula along both lines that you have marked, beginning from the lacrimal nerve ending at the smaller lacrimal duct. And if your incision is near the natural hairs, it should also be as thick as the diameter of a king's finger.
And then apply the onion to one of the two angles of the wound, clean it entirely, and fit the binding with two lips made of wool or fine thread, wipe away the discharge, and make adhere what is superfluous from the dregs on both eyebrows for certain causes entwined, if you wish to do so; otherwise, do not treat it.
And then change the binding of the stitches every three or four days, and take care of it.
And if you wish, leave the wound open without stitches, and treat it with what dries and constricts, because the eyelid is lifted due to the seal of the wound and the influx of fluid; but tighter stitches are better. Thus, I tell you the ancient practices of the taxanir.
However, always seek help from a knowledgeable doctor about the illness, and it is a good sign, and not something to fear.
And there is another method of treatment, which is as follows: place the thumb over the eyelid like a mirror, and then raise the eyelid with three fingers, lifting it up and down according to this form.
If it is not possible to do this, having the fingers ready, and this is not similar to cutting, then take a needle with a thread and insert one in the middle of the figure, and another close to the larger lacrimal (tear duct), and the second closer to the smaller lacrimal, and adjust these threads equal to each other, and then with your other hand elevate it at the same level as the first, lifting all the eyelid as we have recomposed.
And then adjust the two edges of the wound with stitches, and heal that which is healthy.
If after your incision or your fissure, an abscess occurs, then treat that abscess with cera and apply heat to it.
And in some cases, when the eyelid's hair is turned inward, then use what we have mentioned about incision; more stitching is more artificial.
To prepare canes (possibly referring to medicinal herbs or ingredients) is as follows: and it is that you turn the eyelid and divide the figure within as I have mentioned; then make two or three thin canes (or strips) whose length corresponds to the length of the eyelid, and their width is adjusted to the width of the space. And you have already made incisions at the ends of each piece, where the strings (or fibers) are located.
Next, add each thin piece beneath what exceeds from the eyelid of the patient, and tightly wrap the canes of each cut with firm tension, leaving it for a few days, as the tightness by the tension will eventually kill the nerve and prevent any further movement, and it will fall off on its own.
If it is delayed, then break open the abscesses, and return care to the wound until it heals.
When it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the skin does not hurt.
And this is the method for making two canals according to this form: and it should have the exact amount of length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter XII
Regarding the elevation of painful hairs on the body using an agule when the hair is hard.
When there are unnatural, hard, and painful hairs in the body, the operation on them requires that you take a subtle needle and insert it into that specific delicate area, and then adjust the ends of it very carefully, not making any sudden movements. And the length of the threads should be about the size of a palm.
Then, immediately, insert another fine thread inside him briefly, and tighten the ends of that if you wish.
Then hold the patient's head in the small of their back, near the sun, so that your work is clear, for this is a delicate and precise operation.
Then insert the needle into the root of the closely woven hair, using skill, and push it in deeply until you extract that from its natural place on the eyelid.
Then pull the hair out from its roots, and insert the instrument into the gap, taking care that there is only one or two or three hairs left.
And then gently pull your hand to that space where the skin is detached from the eyelid or the natural hair.
If the detached skin is not pulled out and remains attached to the wound, you will pull the skin back to its original position along with the thread that was placed there.
Then examine the wound for its appearance, when you remove the thread and stitches, clean any debris from the wound, and leave the scar open for two or three days, so that the skin attaches to its place and a new, healthy tissue grows over it.
And if the hair is too short, you will take a longer natural hair and lift it up to that space where it should be extended close to the skin, and then gently pull it up.
**Chapter XIII**
On the treatment of an injury seen on the upper eyelid.
When you see an injury on the eyelid, it is characterized by contraction of the eyelid when it's drawn to one side or the other, due to poor healing from a wound, section, or cautery, and it's called 'leporina' (like a rabbit's eye). This type of injury can be either natural or accidental, caused by the healing process of wounds or sections or cauterization, or similar conditions.
The method of operation on it is that you open up that consolidation and separate the eyelids, placing a piece of cloth between them as a drain, and then tie them together so they heal properly.
And be aware that you must not use treatment methods that dry out the eye, as if you do, it will only cause further inflammation and harm that never fully goes away.
Use one of the causes that mollifies it as fenugreek, and embrocate it in water in which fennel seeds are steeped or diluted with vinegar, which is liquefied with some of the oils, and immerse the affected area in it, and treat it.
And the treasure of your healing is that you perforate with whatever tool is not solidified according to the form that you see at the beginning.
And this operation that we have mentioned is nothing but a correction of deviation that does not return the form of the place according to what you see before.
Chapter XIII.
On the treatment of hernia that is done on the eyelid below.
This inflammation which is found on the eyelid, called truly 'alkalization'; it is either of natural origin or accidental.
An accidental alkalization can be caused by infections, cuts, cauterization, or other similar things.
And the method of operation is that you take a needle with double thread and insert one end into the flesh, then pass the other from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, so that the thread goes through both ends of the flesh.
Then stretch the flesh apart from its attachments with the needle and cut with a wide spatula. And so return the eyelid to its natural position if it is suitable; otherwise, take a thread and secure that in the slit, then turn the eyelid over and make both slits on the inner edge of the eyelid.
And the extreme points of the two slits at the two angles of the incision, which you have made where they meet, form an angle that, when they come together, creates a figure of their own.
And this figure is Greek letters: lambda.
Then pull the flesh away from that area, to the extent that it exposes the eyelid.
Then adjust the separated parts and sew them with wool thread; and apply remedies consisting of soft medicines and hot compresses as needed to promote healing.
And if you need to increase the incision or suture or apply a cautery, then make sure that your incision is flat across the hairs of the eyelid as mentioned before. And then separate the water between the two lips as we have said.
In the complete discourse on the treatment of ulcers when they are raised or left open, allowing them to heal according to how the ulcer is prepared, it varies in form and type.
And the skilled artisans always prepare various schemes to make it possible for him to return the figure to its natural form or close to it, and treat that disease according to what suits him in terms of operation and instruments in the best dispositions.
Chapter XV.
On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this adhesion occurs in many people, it makes the eyelid firmly attached to the white part of the eye, preventing its easy movement and natural functions, so you must insert your finger between the eyelid and the iris, and raise or extend it away from the corner of the eye.
And then carefully incise the adhesion with a thin spatula, not sharp from the cuts, making it obtuse slightly so that the malady is not disturbed during the operation, and remove the spatula when it does not damage the wound with its sharpness.
And your incision should remove that adhesion easily, so that the eyelid can return to its natural shape and all the adhesion is healed.
Then apply to the wound salt water with which you wash; or distill in it sun-heated water dissolved in the water.
Then separate the eyelid from the wound with lukewarm water, place over the wound wool infused in egg albumen, and on the third day use consolidating remedies until it heals.
Chapter XVI
On the incision of a lump and the prominence of tissue in the lacrimal area.
You know that a lump can be of two types: either it is nervous, resembling a subtle hard chip, or it is non-nervous, resembling white frozen humidity, which when pricked with a needle, is easily detached and the needle does not get stuck in it.
And both these conditions do not begin until the major lacrimal gland, gradually covering the eye, prohibits light and movement.
The method of working in the incision is that the patient holds their head in their hands, opens the eyes wide, raises the upper eyelid with one hand, and with the other, gently extracts the lump in two or three parts. Then take a needle and, with a slight pressure, insert it into the lump, choosing a sharp object such as horsehair or goose feathers or strong wool, doubling the end of the needle gradually and placing it in the middle of the lump. Penetrate the lump with the needle and tie the lump to the thread, then extend it little by little and extract the entire mass from the eye, removing the lateral part of the lump that blocks the pupil. And thus you cut open that part of the skin at the anus of the patient.
Then, with a thin spatula or small scissors, you incise the membrane at the root of the tear duct, removing the flesh of the natural tear duct so that, by making this incision, continuous tears do not flow.
And some times, the stone is in the bladder completely extended or embedded, as we have said, and with a thin, sharp spatula, it should be extracted in such a way that this is its form.
And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal tunic and cause its rupture, and that the pupil is pierced.
After the incision, put a little salt or finely ground soot on it and leave it for another day; and then take care of it until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it embedded in that place, then look for other remedies for this type of nail, which is cured with medicines and healed thusly as you find and remove it from the division.
And if you want to open that, then open the space of the patient and take a small piece of gauze with sharp accuracy according to this form: with subtlety. And if it turns out that that one is hardened and bent and stuck in that place, then distill from your time into the wound with a sharp tool of tin or iron or salt mixed, and wrap the wound within the next day.
Then repeat the operation on that one until everything that is foreign is removed, otherwise, a foul wound will form in the wound, for when you leave it, the infection will heal from the beginning as it is cured.
And then you continue your operation on that part until it is healed.
The urgency of the tear duct carnation, if it is noticed with great pain, should be suspended immediately; and incise that one part from the other, without closing the incision so as not to block the flow of tears.
Then distill the tear fluid from the main duct carefully until it heals.
Chapter XVII.
On the incision of hernia and that which has arisen from attached flesh in the nose.
In some cases, in the eyes of certain individuals, there is a growth of sickly flesh, which presses upon or draws close to the pupil, or becomes enlarged and pulls the eyelids outward, forcing them to adhere to the bones around the eye and resembling a small shield.
The surgical procedure is such that the patient holds their head in place on the table; then open the incisions on that part and collect all the tissue with scissors as appropriate, and to this add a forceps or basket; and then cut the flesh from the beginning until everything is finished with the scalpel, and be careful of the wound so you do not spoil your operation.
And your incision should be such that you incise those or scrape off the tissue that we have removed in the incision of the nail, or use small scissors carefully according to the shape that comes next in this chapter.
So when your incision is complete and all that tissue is removed, then fill the wound with fine salt or sprinkle on it a powder made from herbs similar to those of corrosive medicines, and place over the wound a clean cloth or linen until it is assuredly free from infection.
And if you see any cause for further difficulty or severe pain, and fear an infection, then leave the wound and treat that infection with what is suitable for it, and repeat the operation on that until it is healed, and do something similar to the surrounding flesh which has suffered from this particular wound.
However, you should be aware that any cure for a severe wound by natural or accidental means, such as cutting, and do not place your hand on any of these operations until you see that the member is able to withstand that operation.
**Chapter XVIII**
**On the Collection of Sabers in Wounds**
Saber (swords) often become entangled in wounds, which makes them difficult to remove and prevents the wound from healing, and it takes a long time for the wound to heal.
Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning to consider if the wound in which the saber is stuck is strong and does not have any other severe damage besides the saber, then you should collect that saber.
And command the patient to hold their breath and then suspend those veins with an occlusor or two, according to your discretion; and let that occluder have a subtle, double fold in this manner:
They make incisions gradually on a body according to this form:
And then they gently compress those veins with subtle force, abstaining from pressing too hard, until the blood stops flowing and those veins appear to be filled with humor and are turned red.
And be careful not to touch the humor at the edges of the incision; if your operation is in the morning facing the sun, and you are firm in your operation, only incise those veins.
And when you have finished, pour distilled vinegar or wine over the humor to corrode what is filled with sap.
If it is not possible to collect all of that humor at once, then apply a plaster to it to alleviate the patient's pain, and leave it for several days until the pain subsides and there is no risk of infection.
And then repeat over them according to the manner of the disease until it is cured.
And this is the way of the scissors:
Chapter XIX
On the reduction of inflammation in the nose.
When you treat inflammation with a cautery or acute medicine, as is preceded by the narration of the patient's condition and it is not cured, then do not apply any bandages to them, but rather make incisions over the affected area after the maturity of the inflammation, and extract all the moisture that is in it until the bone is exposed.
And therefore, when the bone is exposed and there is corruption or blackening in it, you should cut it with an instrument that has this form:
And it is called an acute cap, and it is made of iron, and the head is rounded so that it can be pierced with a point by the liming or alkali puncturing gently (thus as in the following form).
And place that over the corrupted place of the bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your small hand little by little until you know that the corruption is gone.
This should be done at times, and then the place is restored using drying and stopping agents.
Therefore, if the place is consolidated and there is good flesh in it and the body is separated from the healthy and sound for 40 days, and it is not renewed or infected and no accident occurs to it, then you know that it is healed.
And if that is not the case, then it is not to reduce the fissure to its natural state but rather to mold it in the shape of the nose. This is done according to the bones, either by cutting them with a sharp tool or by using acute medicine. Once the bone is exposed, you take hold of it according to this form:
Let the end of the instrument be triangular, and the stick of it be first extended within the extremity thus as often as necessary.
Then place your hand over it, and that is the lacrimal; extend your hand a little towards the hollow, and then rotate your hand on the groove until it penetrates all the bone, and you feel the pain as it passes through and comes out here when you remove your hand.
Therefore, you will restore the area with stipulant, drying medicines as it has been shown to you.
Therefore, when the flesh and the place are hardened, the matter that exuded from the openings outside returns to the nose, thus this is less concerning about the illness.
Chapter XX.
For the reduction of the hernia's protrusion.
When the hernia is prominent and does not yield to gentle pressure or decrease in size, it is necessary to relax the patient, and then continue with the following steps: make incisions in the neck of the hernia for better drainage; apply suction if beneficial; then apply a liniment made of aloe, fennel, henbane, and horse-tail, and finally secure a compress over the hernia using motes (small particles or powder).
And the method of the particles is to take sheets of lion's fur, each sheet cut into four pieces, and make them into a powder.
And then place these layers one on top of the other according to the quantity of hernia present. And then tightly secure these with a strong cloth; repeat the suction from the incisions; and keep the hernia tight with the bandages during the day and night.
If the ligament becomes softened during this time, then make sure it is very tight.
And then hold the ligament, both day and night, as we have said.
And if the hernia has already been reduced, that is well, otherwise, repeat the application of poultices, compression, and sucking cups until it heals.
Chapter .XXI. (Note: The number is written in Roman numerals, indicating the chapter number.)
Regarding the incision of the tunic's eminence (uvea).
When a disruption occurs in the tunic (uvea), and it is swollen and you need to operate, first remove the eyelids with a gentle pull, shaping them as naturally as possible, and if you want to make an incision, perform the operation as we have recommended: insert the needle at the root of the uvea, starting from below, and then pass another needle through it, doubling the thread from the lacrimal side; thus penetrate and leave the first needle according to its position. Then incise the place where the double thread is, and lift the part of the uvea attached to the needle in a circular motion, and tighten that part strongly.
And then extract the needle and place it over the humid wool soaked in hot oil, and wait until the thread falls off on its own.
And then apply the humid wool to it, to comfort him until the plague is healed.
And sometimes, from all over, the wool collects in a circle around the most prominent part, and then it is perforated with a fine spatula that reaches to the bottom of the wool, allowing the albumin humidity to escape, and the wool descends and enters.
And then tighten it until it is healed.
**Chapter XXII.**
**On the Healing of Alconati.**
This illness called alcemies is nothing but a healthy condition that resembles a flowing water and it is not the latter.
The method of operation in this case is to stop the illness from spreading to the affected part and right away, take hold of the patient's head with both hands from two different sides, and try to prevent the healthy fluid from flowing into the parts below; and thus it remains, without descending, and the light (or life) is preserved, and the illness understands its causes in this way as it observes.
And if it does not descend below, you know that it is water.
If the descent of the healthy fluid is not prepared as we have said, then stop the illness from spreading between your fingers and take a fine needle, pierce it into that part covering the panniculus beneath the continuation of the conjunctiva with the tunica cornea in the crown (at the desired location), until the healthy fluid is drained.
Therefore, when it is drained, you will distill the warm water mixed with honey or water in which fennel and honey have been boiled.
And then it should be treated for other causes as well, as long as it is healed.
**Chapter XXII**
On the treatment of water retention in the legs.
We have discussed the types of water retention and which ones require puncturing, as appropriate, according to their condition.
You should now understand how to stop the patient's pain between their thighs on a couch and bind their feet tightly.
And then place your hand near the patient's eyelid, if the lid with water is the left one, use your left hand; or if it is the right one, use your right hand.
And then take your right hand if the pain is on the left side; or use your left hand if the pain is on the right side.
And then hold the end of the thumb near the edge of the eyelid for the thickness of the film on the inner side of the lower eyelid, and gently pull the thumb towards you while turning your hand.
And then penetrate the eyelid film, and feel that the thumb has already reached the inner part due to the pressure.
And observe that the measurement of the path of the thumb to the point it reaches corresponds to the measurement of the space from the pupil to the edge of the black circle, which is the corona of the eyelid; for you will see the pupil clearly through the clarity of the transparent cornea.
And then place the cup inside the area where the water is, and draw it down towards you one time, then another, and so the water descends, and soon after, the illness over which it holds its gaze, will be drawn into the cup and within it.
And then rest for a moment; so if the water has descended, you should pause again before removing the cup until it is completely drained.
And when it is completely drained and does not descend, then carefully remove the cup, turning your hand a little at a time, and dissolve into the water a small amount of clear salt from a gem, and wash the inside of the wound; and then apply outside the wounded area, or stop it, or wrap it in rose-colored oil and white wool, and bind it with the water of the wound.
But for us, and those of our time, it is better to treat these things with white wool and rose-colored oil.
And if you do not adhere to your knowledge in the use of the knife through its hardness - for it is one of the tools with which many men are unfamiliar -, then take up the sponge, which is called a blade, and this is its form:
And therefore pierce that joint, and do not stop your hand in the track, and do not stop until you have made a subtle opening in your knowledge.
Then insert your knowledge as we have said.
And you must complete your work, prepared for the patient's peaceful sleep, done decently in which they sleep on their back at home in a dark room, and all movements are prohibited.
And pay attention to the nature of this, so that it may be peaceful in its nature, and do not disturb their head towards the right or left at all.
And arrange the ligature according to its position within three days.
Then, with a keen eye in that dark matter, examine and discern some causes, and return the ligature within seven days.
And be aware of what you do at the hour of treatment or, perhaps, soon after infusion. You will notice that this is done for such reason that the water can be slightly heated and gently applied with care.
If there is a risk of infection after cauterization, be aware that you should open the wound and clean it with water on the seventh day, and correct any deviation in the bandage.
Then, examine him closely and focus on the face where he is being treated, leaving it as it is for several days, existing in that dark matter.
And gradually immerse yourself in that nature, gently discussing its causes.
And you know that in alchemy, the student is not excused from seeing certain things, and now you must be daring with regard to the operation.
And we have already come to know some of those who are in the art, and someone said that fire should be made in the magnesium air, through which water is sucked out.
However, you should not think that this is perfectly known in our land or is written in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the spices of magnesium, so that it may be about those who ignore them.
And they are made of iron or bronze properly, and their ends have this triangular subtlety, the acute end thus with that shape.
**Chapter XXIV**
On the treatment of nasal flesh injuries.
When in the nose there are diverse attached carnes (tissues) of which some cause is connected to a growth of flesh resembling a scorpion's tail or a polyps growing from the sides; this malady is called polyps because it resembles those feet represented. And it is cancerous flesh, blue-black in color; and from this arises the flesh of a lion not of a dark color.
Therefore, in that which is in these lion flesh, not fraudulent nor cancerous, you must perform the malady's removal between your fingers and place it in the sun, and dry the nose of it, and pick at the tiny particles in those meats. And then carefully extract it from the parts outside, and divide what you have understood from them with a delicate scalpel between the parts, knowing that all the flesh is still intact; if any cause arises from it for which laceration is possible, then quickly use one of the delicate instruments to facilitate this without any difficulty. If it is a mild or acute apoplexy, then apply it to what it covers; but if it is of malignant abscesses, then cut and cauterize that part until the san is separated and all cavities are intact.
Then carefully get near the nose, make an incision with the instrument, and use either salt water or vinegar. If the nose is blocked and you feel moisture in the palate, then know that it is already healed.
If the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that inside him there is flesh filled with pus between the bones of the nose to which no incision has been made.
Therefore, you should insert a thin instrument into him where there is any abnormality, and move it within him gently, and between each joint apply the amount of pressure as appropriate, and manipulate the patient's pain by inserting one end of the instrument into the nose either by cutting or for other possible causes.
And when this is done, it releases its smell within so that it reaches the nasal canals, and it should be held over the patient's face, for it is a common occurrence that several times children in school have been affected by this action, and it is a minor cause for those who want to perform it.
Then hold both ends of the instrument: one end protruding from the nose and the other entering the nose, and apply pressure to the flesh around the instrument, and do this until you know that the flesh has attached itself to the instruments within the nostril.
And then extract the gallbladder, place it in a container with some salt water, and do this for three to five days until the solution corrodes all that is soft in the flesh.
And finally, at the end of the treatment, place a lead tube in the nose for several days until it is healed.
If the treatment ends and there is no improvement, use other remedies.
And this is the design of an enema tool, which distills oils and medicines into the nose:
And make it of silver or brass, which is similar to a small open lamp with a small cavity, and attach it in such a way.
And if you wish, make a closed tube as well, with a handle at the end of the enema tool, which should be flat and open; to this, attach the nozzle from which you will pour oil or water that you want into the body's humors.
It appears that you have provided a reference or a title, but no text for translation. To assist you effectively, I would need the actual content of the "Capitol .xxv." for translation. Please provide the text, and I'll be happy to help.
They grow on the ends of the nose.
Various veiled growths are found on the ends of the nose, which initially seem magnificent and swollen, but after some days, a mot is formed that attracts attention due to its appearance.
And for this reason, you should pay attention at the onset of its appearance, and eliminate it entirely. And then apply over the area a cautery or medicine that burns, which is located in that place.
If the operation takes too long, and it is necessary to cut, consider if it is inflamed, hard, of dark color, and with little feeling; then do not touch that part with a sharp tool, for it is a sign of gangrene; in fact, such symptoms indicate great evil in the patient.
And if the abscess is of good appearance and not dark colored, and it is possible to operate on it anywhere, then evacuate the infection and cut it without fear, and treat the place with a drying and constricting agent until healing occurs.
**Chapter XXVI.**
On the suture of the nose, lips, and auricle when continuity is broken due to disease or something similar.
You should know that when a rupture of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, it seldom provides much aid to the operation except in certain cases.
Therefore, when you encounter any cause among these, and it appears to be a fresh wound or infection, you should then adjust the two edges of the wound with sutures, and take care of the inner part so that it heals properly.
And if the edges of the rupture are already separated and each part is healthy, you should then extract each piece from its neighboring tissue carefully to ensure it does not become infected. Then, adjust the two edges with sutures and strengthen them, and sprinkle dragon's blood and triple-stressed herbs on those sutures, and place a thin piece of fine plaster or some other consolidative dressing over it, leaving it for two or three days. Then remove that plaster and replace it with new one, and take care with ointment so that the wounds heal properly.
The method of suturing is that you add the solution for continuity with needles as we have recommended in the suture of the abdomen, or add the solution for continuity with thread as it has been taught to you and done.
Chapter XXVII.
On the removal of those causes that come in both lips in the partitions within.
You often notice in many people within the partitions of their lips various hard spots resembling tough flesh, some are larger and others smaller.
Therefore, you should remove the lips and partitions of each of those hard spots from all parts, and then fill the place with a clean bandage as soon as the bleeding stops, and also wash it with vinegar and treat the place with water that has been heated, until it is healed.
Chapter .XXVIII.
On the incision of tissue adhering to the gums.
Treat the adherent tissue around the gums that ancient practitioners called 'albus', then either suspend it or hold it with forceps and cut it away, allowing the healthy blood to flow.
And then apply pressure over the treated area with sage or other stoppers or astringents.
If the tissue returns, cut it again secondly, and cauterize it, for the cautery will not return.
Chapter .XXIX.
Because of the tooth's root.
When on the surface of the teeth within the jaws and between the gums, there are coarse cuts, scars, and some blackened areas, this indicates inflammation in the gums and the teeth become loose.
So therefore, you should remove the patient's pain between their thighs, stop the head of it in its place, and pull out the teeth where those cuts and similar marks appear, without causing any further damage, and this brings about the darkness, whiteness, and other conditions as they are purified.
Therefore, if this remains as it is in the beginning of the reason, well and good; otherwise, you should repeat the reason over those other parts each day, second, and third, until you come to the final statement in what you wish.
And you should know that teeth require various types of cutting tools and shapes according to how they are prepared for your operation. And for this reason, the tools with which a tooth is extracted from within are different from the tools used to cut between teeth according to other shapes, and these forms of cutting tools must be prepared as you will see shortly:
Chapter XXX.
Eradication of teeth.
Understand that you cure the tooth of its pain with all possible care and take your time in its complete extraction, for there is no reason to delay the moment of its removal when it is extracted, as it is a sublime substance whose excuse lies in the extraction of itself.
When the disease is forced to extract a tooth that causes pain, you must be certain which tooth is painful, as the pain can sometimes deceive and lead one to believe it comes from a healthy tooth; therefore, extract that one, and the pain will not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is extracted, for we have seen this through operations by barbers.
Therefore, when you must be certain which tooth is painful, and you know, you will cut into the gum around the tooth using a scalpel in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth's root completely, and then slowly apply pressure with your fingers or use fine pliers at the beginning little by little until that pain ceases.
And then use a strong tool for good speech or a powerful forceps, and place the patient's head between your hands that hold them gently to prevent any harm, and carefully extract the tooth in a way that you do not break it, nor cause greater pain to the patient.
And therefore, if it is not forgotten, take one of those instruments and insert it into the patient from all sides with ease and make an effort to remove it as it was done at the beginning.
If the tooth is broken or rotten, then know that you must wrap a piece of cloth around that wound and stretch it with the tip of a fine wire so that it does not tear in the hour of your tightening grip on that area.
And be sure to perform the scarification carefully on the entire gum line and take care not to break or tear that fragile part, and return to the patient with caution for the evil that is greater than the first pain of it.
And beware that you do not perform what some ignorant barbers do in their haste and audacity regarding the removal of teeth, for they do not administer what we have recommended; often times, they cause great pain to men that is very difficult to bear, and the roots of the teeth are torn out completely, or some of them, or even entire bones from the jaw, as we have witnessed on many occasions.
And then wash out the eradication of it with wine or vinegar mixed with salt.
If there is a continuous flow of pus, and the swelling increases, trim some amount of it with a scalpel and rinse over the wound, and if that pus does not cease, cauterize it.
The shape of the forceps should be fine and slender, with their distant end suitable for holding a tooth from the beginning, short in length and thick, so that they do not bend when used in such delicate operations.
And they should be thus with wide ends, thick in the middle and narrow at their distant tips, so that when you first take hold of them, they are not bent.
And they are made of Indian iron with straight ends, and at the tips of these forceps there are teeth that interlock with each other, entering by strong compression, and sometimes the tips of these forceps have the form of a bird's beak, which is curved and very firm.
Chapter .xxxi.
On the eradication of teeth and the removal of broken bones from the jaw.
When you need to eradicate a tooth that is lodged for some reason, first place your hand over the area with a border for one or two days until the location is softened; then insert pliers or tongs whose ends are assembled in the shape of a crowbar called a ciconia or guanta.
The ends of them should be filed away inside with a chisel or file.
And if you do not obey these instructions regarding the use of pliers or tongs, then you must dig into the root and remove all the flesh and insert the instrument called a small lever, whose shape is as follows:
And take a thin but sharp knife, small in size, and do not cover it so that it can cut.
If the incision for this is forgotten, then do so; otherwise, help me with these other instruments whose shapes are as follows: the shape of the first instrument is triangular with a thick end in which there is some depth.
The shape of the second instrument is triangular with an even thinner end.
And now assist with this instrument, having two inclines; the appropriate shape is as follows: and other instruments which are used for dental extraction; since it is skillfully done with this instrument resembling a large claw, and the shape is:
From the rounded or pointed end of the triangle, which may be of any thickness, but not covered so as not to be squeezed.
And you should know that the tools with moving teeth are similar to other instruments.
The skilled and subtle artisans, through their knowledge of the art, understand the meaning of various operations and ailments, for they are experts in dealing with diverse afflictions; these are the ailments to which the ancients did not give name or pause, due to their varied forms.
If the jawbone or any other bone in the mouth is squeezed, then place the weight carefully on that area as is appropriate for that part of the body, using the tools and forceps we mentioned for removing teeth, and assist with the handling which this shape requires.
And within it, any swelling should be reduced little by little, and it should be tightly bound or held in the mouth so that nothing evades or escapes until the bone of all parts is completely healed; and then restore the area with suitable medicine for it.
If there is a small fracture in the bone, quickly remove that of that fracture and its darkness, and treat it until it is healed.
**Chapter .XXXII.**
**On the Care of Teeth Among Others.**
When teeth are prominent in violation of their natural form, especially among women, and most particularly in the case of very young girls; then consider this: if it is not possible to replace or extract that tooth, but you wish to separate it from another tooth, then cut it off with a suitable instrument having a sharp, pointed end, similar to the tooth of a pig.
And make your incision, which you will incise on it in too many days because of the hardness of the tooth, and that it be not cut away from any of the teeth.
And if the tooth is eminently exposed to decay, then sharpen that with a sharp iron lime from India whose form is as follows:
And all of the iron from India, the margin precisely; and it should have very small points as with a lime, which are used to make needles, and through this the tooth is slowly sharpened in many days with ease, so that no other teeth are cut away or damaged. Then bind those at the end, and shave those with other razors.
And if it is a tooth from which one piece is broken and affects the tongue, then cover that you sharpen the space between which the roughness of that fraction is blocked and entangled, and apply pressure so that the tongue does not hurt nor does the speech corrupt.
Chapter .xxxiii.
For the restoration of lost teeth, use gold or silver wire.
When teeth are affected by concussion and removal due to impact or extraction, and the patient cannot chew effectively, having tried strict dieting with medicinal astringents without success, then consider using gold wire instead of silver for binding, as silver corrodes and becomes useless after some time, but gold remains unchanged forever.
And the wire should be of such subtlety and thickness as to fit between the teeth, and the method of binding is that you take the wire and wrap it around two healthy teeth twice, and then twist it into a spiral between two damaged teeth, or around one or both remaining parts of a broken tooth, ensuring the wire reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. And then continue the tissue repair within the opening from which you began, and tighten your hand with facility and wisdom so that it is not damaged.
And the tightening of your hand, which you tighten around the thread, must be such that it does not tear the teeth.
Then cut the ends of the thread with forceps or scissors, and insert them at appropriate places and gestures, and convert them into the spaces between the healthy teeth and the damaged ones, so that they do not harm the tongue. And then bind it tightly with a bandage as narrow as a Roman strip.
But if it becomes loose or broken, tighten it or those with another thread in such a way that it does not come undone at any time.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, thus when you perform these ligatures:
And when it is done so that a tooth or two returns to its proper place in their locations, and they grow back as we have recommended, and remain intact.
And only skilled craftsmen and wise men do this.
And sometimes it is appropriate to use a cause from the bones of a cow, and it is made from them in the form of a tooth, and placed in the place where the tooth is missing, and held as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter .XXXIV.
Regarding the incision of the ligament seen on the tongue, it prohibits speech.
This ligament, which is seen on the tongue, sometimes prevents speech or is natural to it, or accidental and occurs due to a plague that has already become solidified.
And the operation on it is to open the mouth of the malformation, removing its existence in the throat; and lift up their tongue, and then incise that nerve ligament according to its width so that the tongue is freed from its attachment.
If there is any hardness or resistance, and this is due to the consolidation of a plague, then you apply oil and cut it according to its width so that you incise the ligament and the knot is dissolved.
And be careful not to cause a fissure in the flesh and cut here behind, allowing pus to flow out.
And then clean the wound with warm water or vinegar or friction water; and take away the tongue; it is necessary that the patient keep their tongue in some position each night to prevent another relapse.
If a flux of blood occurs, apply a hot compress to the place; if the pain is from wind, cauterize the place with a poisonous cautery suitable for it. And then apply that treatment for the other causes until it is cured.
Chapter .xxxv. (Note: "xxxv" likely represents the Roman numeral for 35)
On extraction of the ranula, keep the tongue away.
Sometimes, the tongue becomes infected and resembles a small wound, preventing it from moving naturally; and its strong inflammation increases until it fills the mouth.
And the operation on them is to open the mouth of the hernia, feeling it before the light, and considering the aperture.
If it appears of a dark, hard color, where the hernia has no sensation, then do not touch that part which is cracking.
And if it turns to white, in which there is humidity, then place your finger in it, and insert a thin spatula, and divide it completely; and if you have strong wind during the time of your operation, then hold from above with three gestures, using vinegar, as long as it restricts the wind.
Then return to your work until you have tried it completely, as much as it has been washed with wine and salt; and take care of the other treatment for this until it is healed.
Chapter .XXXVI.
Extraction of abscesses from two ears and those that occur in the throat, as well as other abscesses.
When swelling occurs in the throat, there are glands that are gathered together and swollen, which protrude outside and are called "two ears," and when you treat them with what has been said in the previous section and they do not heal, consider if the abscess is hard, of a dark color, with little sensation, then do not touch it with a knife.
And if it is of a reddish color and the root is thick, do not touch it with a knife due to the flow of pus; instead, leave it as it matures, and either it will be drained on its own or it will break open by itself.
And if it is of a white color, soft, and the root is thin, then that one needs to be incised.
And the operation on it is that you consider, in front of your operation, if the abscess has rested sufficiently through rest or if it has decreased at all; and then stop the malady in front of the sun, and let the head of it be in the low position, open its mouth, and the servant takes between his fingers the tongue of it gently with a delicate instrument of which this is the shape.
And it should be made of silver or brass, and be subtle with a sharp blade.
So when you press on the tongue and show the abscess to your patient, observe the place where it hurts deeply, then take an onion and place it on the affected area, and pull it out towards the sides as much as possible. Another thing that you pull out is the cause of the tunic, and then cut into it with an instrument of which this is the shape.
Another thing that you pull out is the cause of the tunic, and then cut into it with an instrument of which this is the shape. And it is similar to forceps, however, its extremities are curved, so the opening of each of those is at the end of the other, very sharp, which is made of iron then covered with cloth.
If this instrument is not at hand, then cut with a spatula of which this is the form: sharp on one side, blunt on the other side.
And having cut one slit, cut the other according to this same manner of incision, and then close the incision with clean water.
But if there is a flow of blood, wash with decoction of mugwort or juniper leaves and similar to that of the strict causes while the flow of blood is restrained, and then take care so that it heals.
And in some cases, you may see other appendices or those two auricles, and incise them as you have seen and mentioned in the incision of two wounds equally.
You have already treated a woman with an abscess that was born in the groin of her, an abscess that tended to a dark color, with little sensation, which had already closed the groin of her, and the woman breathed with great difficulty, and she had forbidden herself from eating and drinking water, and she was on the brink of death if more time had passed, even one or two days.
And the abscess had already torn so much that it had created two openings through which pus could escape.
So, you should listen to me carefully and follow these steps: incise them surgically and remove the abscess; drain a large portion of it, then identify the site from which you understand the other wound is originating; press the mouth of the patient and grasp their tongue, then place the abscess in that opening.
And then you cut out a large part of it, and there would be little or no bleeding from it. Thus, the treatment for that woman is absolutely necessary, and she should begin to drink water immediately, and then consume food. Therefore, you should not hesitate to make incisions in those motas (swollen areas) for a long time, but rather succeed with one incision after another in the same location, which will help prolong the healing process.
Therefore, you should use herbs and cauterize the ulcer of the patient, thus adding to it; and then walk around and do not wash what God has given you from that wound.
Chapter XXXVII.
On incision of the huvela (a term likely referring to a specific body part, perhaps a growth or lump) when it becomes apopthetic.
When catarrh occurs in the larynx, and it is elevated and lengthy, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the lower part thick and round, then it is called a bubo.
When treatment is as we have said in the previous section, and you do not agree with the treatment, and indeed, it has been observed that when the inflammation is already present and subtle, one must incise the rounded addition; and if it is of considerable length, and it is bleeding, either a dark or black color, and does not yield to touch, then be aware that you must fear the incision, for there is great danger in this.
And when you observe it according to the manner I have said regarding its whiteness and length, you must then remove the malady, and with an instrument that shapes it, press on the tongue, and close the gap with a new one, and pull it down and incise it with either of two instruments called in the incision of two lines.
And be careful not to incise anything other than what is appropriate according to the natural term of its addition, for if you incise more of it, you will harm its function.
After the incision, use what we have recommended for the incision of two wounds, and care for it until it heals.
If the patient was afraid of the incision, use cunning in the cauterization of it to dispel their fear, and the manner of the cautery on it is nothing but sharp stone, and it is that you place the head of the patient on the table, and then press the tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, and take water as we said in the chapter on cauterization, and apply it to the living cause, and do not make it too thick or too thin, and fill the concavity of the instrument whose form this is:
Let the extremities of it be concave in which the medicine is placed, just like a spoon's concave part, and place the instrument with the medicine on the skin, and let the patient lie on their side so that saliva or mucus from the mouth of that one does not escape from that proper cause to the throat of them, and binds that.
And now apply your hand to the medicine, and extract it from the throat by making a space with the point of your tongue until you feel it become weakened and numbed by the bite of the medicine.
And if you wish, take care and wrap that around the end of the finger, submerge the wrap in the medicine, insert the finger into the wrap through a small opening until the wrap sticks to the finger, and do this several times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the ulcer, then let it dry so that it falls off after three or four days.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it, then using a cautery soaked in the medicine, wipe along the circuit of the ulcer, cleanse that area with water and soap, and bandage it up, using guards as needed until it heals.
And this type of treatment is much safer than incision and is free from much fear.
Some times the uvula is cured by something subtler than cautery and incision, for it is healed by sublimation in this manner: take calament, hyssop, origan, rue, scabs of Arabic camomile, and similar herbs, and combine all those causes, or some of them, into a single mixture, and immerse them in wine; let the mixture bubble and boil; place a trough in the middle of the mixture, upon which rests an instrument shaped like a hook made of silver or bronze according to this manner.
And then insert the tip into the patient's mouth over the uvula, until the vapor obscures the uvula completely.
Then repeat this process on any remaining moist spots, but be careful not to perform this treatment immediately after meals, as it could lead to the development of abscesses; do not press too hard on the abscess, or you risk complications. You should only attempt such a procedure if there is clear evidence of an abscess, and in that case, you must first consult with a physician.
If you do not have this instrument at hand, take a cane and make a loop at the end of it with wire, so that the mouth of the hernia is closed, for the wire's loop prevents the gas from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the removal of thorns and other objects stuck in the skin, and from other causes.
You may observe objects stuck in the skin, such as thorns or pins, or any other cause.
Then you should extract what is visible among these, examining it closely, for you press the tongue against the tool in front of the light, so that you may clearly see what is in your mouth.
And for what is hidden from your sight in the gullet, be sure to make the patient vomit before the food has been digested in the stomach, for the strong cause attached to the gullet will be forgotten through vomiting; or make the patient swallow a piece of napkin or shredded lettuce, or a piece of dry bread; or take a piece of dry seaweed lion's beard, tie it tightly with thread, and make the patient swallow it, for when it reaches the place where there are spines and is extracted, it will be forgotten. And you can take an eel and tie it with thread, lay it on the table, and carefully extract it; or take a pig's intestines and carefully open them and extract them.
If these causes are not forgotten, then use an instrument of lead in the following way:
And it should be thick but sharp, and at the end of it make a concave shape that you insert into the patient's mouth with ease.
And he raises his head up, and be careful of the touch of his throat bone, so that he can identify what causes him pain, whether it is a bone or a spine, or what the doctor puts his hand on.
However, if the patient's illness is more severe, with greater knowledge of the location of the cause attached and penetrating below, he applies his hand to the instrument to it according to the amount prepared for him, until it is forgotten.
Chapter .xxxix. (Note: "xxxix" is likely a typo, as it should be "XXXIX" for the correct chapter number)
On the extraction of blood clots attached to the throat.
When treating blood clots as described above, using medicines rather than surgical removal, consider the patient's throat under the sun, since you will have touched their tongue with the instrument we recommended.
Therefore, if you examine the pulse, extract that small or subtle sensation appropriately.
If it is not possible to extract that, take a concave needle and insert it into the hollow of the hernia, then place a heated iron in the concavity of the needle and do this several times (as long as the pulse is halted and the hernia is separated from the hollow) and then bandage the hernia with water for the entire day.
Then take a cloth filled with water, apply it to the opening of the hernia, and wash the area; do not suck on it or drink any water from it, as the pulse will soon feel the cold water.
But if what we have recommended is forgotten, then fumigate the hernia with herbs or spices using the instruments we have mentioned for the suffocation of the uvula.
Do this, so it falls down.
And this is another method of operation through suffocation of that part: you take a cloth in which are ignited coals and the cloth is covered with a covering in the middle of which there is an opening, and on that opening is placed the end of the instrument; then apply it from above the suffocation; and the patient places his mouth over the end of the tube, and closes his mouth so that the suffocation is not expelled until you know that the suffocation has reached the blood flow, because the blood flow will fall.
And if you do not eat, then repeat the suffocation with motion several times, keep the patient from drinking, and eating salty and bitter foods, and do not drink water, and thus it is necessary that at this regimen be forgotten.
And this is the form of the instrument used to extract blood from the veins when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps as well, except that it has some curvature. Which is placed in the throat, and its end resembles a crocodile's beak, which is smooth from lime, for this reason, when we encounter any cause, it does not leave.
Chapter XL.
In which is the summary of the discourse regarding the prevention and treatment of wounds.
The wounds are special spots, of various kinds, according to the recollection of their origin, each described in detail in this book.
And they vary in puncturing and cutting them in two ways: one is for the specific type of wounds themselves; and another for understanding the moisture associated with them.
And the second way is for places where bodily accidents occur, where a wound in the head is different from a wound in the foot; and a wound in fleshy parts is different from a joint wound; and each of these has its specific surgical treatment.
And some apoplexies cover those that do not pierce but are rather a maturation of the health in those or completion of their course.
Other apoplexies that cover those that are to be pierced when they cross, and are not matured according to their course, also include apoplexies that affect the joints, where an apoplexy occurs near a joint, its nature is prolonged as long as you can do something about it, which is why it causes contraction of that member; or if it's close to a major member, and if you delay piercing it while it's matured, it will affect the primary member; or it's near the buttocks, so pierce one that hasn't matured, not one that's dry, otherwise the pressure of the air will prevent the preen from escaping and cause it to be elongated within the parts of the anus, forming a fistula, or something done in the term of the apoplexy that isn't healed. But it's important to know the time for piercing the apoplexy, and that's when it's matured.
And you will know that it is cured when the pain ceases and the fever abates, and there is a reduction in the heat and pulse, and the redness of the affected area improves, and other signs.
And furthermore, know how to recognize the incision needed in the pus-filled area beneath the abscess and from the healing of the prominence.
The incision should always be made through the skin or flesh, if the abscesses are in the thighs or feet, and in places of the tendons, nerves, or arteries; and, lastly, in all other areas that do not reflect light; for in those that do reflect, one must use the incision according to that particular member.
But if the abscess is in a fleshy area, then it is better to delay the incision until the digestion of the pus is confirmed as described earlier; for if you make the incision too soon before that, the body's defense against the infection will be weakened and the abscess walls will be stiffened, increasing its depth.
Some wounds may be made completely through the flesh or body parts as needed, or according to what the member requires.
And be aware that you should make small incisions, and in large wounds make a deep and wide incision or create sections according to the diversity of the size of the wounds.
And other types of wounds where the cavity is concave and must be incised, when made in such a way that the pain and swelling are already present, it is as if it has happened in cases of double or bubonic plague.
And of those that are incised in sections with three angles; and of those where it is incised like a figure of a myrtle leaf, as with the wounds of the knees.
And of their kind where a round section and a lunar section is administered, resembling those mentioned above.
If that one whom no such things befall, when you make incisions into the skin's surface, take care to pierce only at a shallow depth or else it may become infected.
And if the abscess is large and has already collected a lot of pus, do not pierce it and try to extract all the poison at once; instead, after extracting some, compress the abscess and repeat the process over several days, gradually increasing the size of the openings according to their healing.
And especially if the patient is very weak, or a woman in labor, or a small child, or an old person, because the animal spirit moves more readily at the exit of the pus, and they often die from the disease, and you must operate on them.
Take great care with this chapter: when you make incisions to drain these abscesses, be careful to avoid infection, and consider whether the abscess is small or a flat cut; then administer lukewarm water or some other anti-fever medicine. If the abscess is large and the cuts from the incision are deep, you must apply pressure in each wound until they heal together.
And if a portion of the tendon or a concavity in the contour is excised, then cover it with a piece of thick cloth or thread from linen, as when you treat cuts or shaves; moisten it daily for three days and then apply a poultice and cure the wound until it heals.
If bleeding occurs during your operation, administer warm water mixed with vinegar and apply a cloth of linen over the site of bleeding, and press it until the flow stops several times.
If the bleeding persists, you must administer regimens and remedies, and apply powders recommended at various points of this book and according to division.
If it is winter, and the site of the abscess is a place of many nerves, then you must apply poultices in hot oil and vinegar, and place them over the sites.
And if it is summer and the parts are fleshy, then you should apply powdered ointments mixed with water and oil or wine and oil, and all of this should be rubbed until the third day, as we have said, and you must open up the abscess and cleanse it and administer what is appropriate for its cure until it heals.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but more according to the way of distinction that I have already said about each type of abscess, in what manner it is a path to its cure, chapter by chapter.
Chapter .xl.
On the section of abscesses that occur on the head.
On the head, small abscesses occur, which are of various types with shells that are formed; and their species have different names.
And from their glands, and those contain a moisture similar to lime. And those that contain a moisture similar to pus, and resemble it; and those that are stone-like, hard.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, as the removal of those does not cause violent pain.
And the operation in the extraction of those is that you expect those with instruments in the shape of which they enter, called entomes, as long as you know it contains them.
For if what contains is moisture, then you cut those as section according to their length by cutting the surface according to this form:
And it begins in the section of the line B within the line G. Thus, when moisture is evacuated, you scrape that part where the moisture was, and do not leave any cause for that, for troops seen returning indicate some cause from that.
Then immerse the affected area in hot Egyptian (or warm) water, if present, or otherwise in water and salt; fill it with that remedy and leave it for another day, as it corrodes all that is broken off from that skin.
Then you repeat the application of that remedy in hot Egyptian water according to need, as long as you are confident that there is no other cause for that skin condition; when the moisture has healed, cure the wound with that moisture.
And if there is an abscess with fatty knots, then you pierce them according to this form: I have a section without a clear shape, and you cut between the two lips of this section and remove it entirely, then use your virtue to extract the tunic which contains that.
If your bow (or perhaps metaphorically, your ability) feels resistance, do what I have first told you.
And similarly, do in the abscess of the section (or wound) as I have told you; and cut over the abscess that is filled with liquid, for it is less severe, containing little blood and little moisture.
Sometimes these abscesses are so hard in the head or on the bodies of certain men that they contain no liquid; which causes them to be incised over an abscess on the head of an old woman, and left with a hard, dry, white stone, which cannot be extracted, and if anyone strikes it, they will be infected.
In other instances of accidental spots on the head, except for these mentioned in this chapter, such as the spots that appear on the heads of children and require trimming of the auricles, the treatment for all of these should be a superficial one.
And stop the perforation of those in the lower part of their origin so that the matter of the illness is removed from the deeper parts to the shallower ones.
Then take care of those as is appropriate for the treatment of that one.
Chapter .xlii.
On the section of scrofula that occurs on the collarbone.
Various incidents cause these spots on the collarbone, armpits, and angles, and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And thus those that occur in the colon, and so motifs that are generated between them, and all scrofula of those proceeds from its own tunic, and thus as with the nodes and aphthae of the head, so have we treated.
And the types of these scrofulas are motifs; some are stone-like, others contain humidity, and some are malicious which do not obey treatment.
Therefore, in that which you perceive a good disposition by touch, whose color is specific to the color of the boil, and it's swollen throughout, not attached to the colon's nerves, veins, or fascia, and not filled with pus, you should incise it along its dry, superficial surface from the part closest to the body to where it deviates from the skin, as we have said about the aphthae on the head, and remove it little by little.
And it is more careful that the vein or nerve is not incised.
And if the knife is not sharp enough to allow you to make precise incisions, or if it causes discomfort for the patient, and you make incisions where they are not needed; if you were to cut a vein or nerve, this would prevent your operation, leading to an infection from the vitriol or other powders that stop the flow of pus, inflame the wound, and leave a scar as the ulcer heals and becomes softened. When the pus is drained.
Therefore, return to your operation until it is complete.
And then carefully inspect the said indicated small ulcers; if any appear to be caused by a different condition, make incisions and clean them.
And if it is in the region of a large scrofula vein, you must be careful not to puncture that scrofula from its region. First, carefully extract the twisted and broken thread, taking care not to pull it further into the wound.
Then fill the wound with fresh, new bandages that you have soaked in Egyptian ointment, and tend to it.
If you puncture the entire scrofula, be careful to close both edges of the wound and soon, any excess pus will stop leaking.
If you find that there is continuous discharge due to the size of the scrofula, be sure to understand where it originates, puncture its region, drain it, and then apply stitches and the mentioned treatment.
And for those of scrofula that contain humidity, make a deep perforation at the place where it appears on your body, and stop the perforation from which pus flows in the lower parts of the body, as we have said.
Then administer the perforation, use suitable substances found and similar to these, so that it corrodes what is broken down by corruption. And when you see the wound has already been cleansed, then apply a treatment with a substance generated from flesh to promote healing.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the section of the pilot (or membrane) of the abscess, make an incision during the acute phase of the illness.
The ancients used to make this incision on the pilus (or hair) of the abscess, and we have not seen anyone in our land who does this.
And this is the inscription of the speech of these ones.
In men, there is a tendency to form stones, and it is important to avoid the extraction of the gallbladder, as by doing so, all the veins and the main ones related to the disease are here.
In those who have abscesses in the mouth or throat or both ears, when the illness is not in the gallbladder, be careful to avoid the section of the epiglottis to prevent the loss caused by perforation.
Therefore, when we want to do this, cut the epiglottis with three incisions from the circles of the epiglottis, or four with a small section through the latitude in the one between two circles for quantity, and make the incision in the cartilage, not in the muscle, and this location is suitable for cutting because it is devoid of flesh and the blood vessels of the organ are open.
And if the doctor is cautious, you must ensure that he extends the cord of the laryngoscope slowly, and then cuts the cord until it reaches the channel, but avoid damaging the vessels with force, especially for any reason.
Then make incisions in the patient as we have recommended; it is meant regarding the section of the channel for the flux that comes from there, which is due to something broken within, and through the removal of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Therefore, when the time comes that the incision is to be closed, add two layers of the cord from the wound, and with that one alone, close it in such a way as to preserve the cartilage.
And then administer medications that promote healing of the flesh until it is cured.
And Albucasis says that the whole of this discourse which we have compiled is nothing but to show that some of these spots have already buried the patient's gullet, and the patient has been brought to the brink of death, and his breath is cut off, and others are going to incise the epiglot so that the patient may breathe over the site of the illness through some respiration, and thus be saved from death.
And for this, he will keep the wound open until the evil of the illness is consumed; and the evil lasts for three days; so now you will command the wound to be thus treated, and cure it until it is healed.
And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant cut open his throat with a knife and incised it in the neck, and I was called to cure him, and I noticed the mucous thus as if it were the cry of the dying, and I uncovered the wound, and discovered the hole from which the pus had come.
Therefore, you should admit that neither a vein nor an artery was injured, and the pain comes from the disease, and treat it until the fire of sickness is cured.
And do not be hasty in the treatment if it does not require speech, and after some days return to the improvement of their dispositions.
And now it is said that in the section of the epiglot there is no fear.
Chapter .XXIV.
Of the section concerning the apsema which occurs in the gullet outside, and is called a hernia of the gullet.
This apsema, called a hernia of the gullet, is a great apsema according to the color of the body, and it occurs more often in women.
And it has two manners, either it is natural or accidental.
And in the natural, there is no means of cure.
And the accidental has two manners: one is similar to gouty nodules, and the other manner is apoplexy, which is caused by the sudden interruption of an artery, and that is fearful. And one should not make a presumptive diagnosis except for those who ask for help. And you should investigate what it is and say to them, if it resembles gouty nodules, and is not obstructed by any of the veins, then you pierce it like a node, and extract that which contains the pus from the skin and abscess; otherwise, you should examine his whole body, and pay close attention to the area that needs treatment until he is healed.
Capital .45.
On the section of the removal of nodules.
These nodules have different species, and I have already described all their species in the previous division.
And it is important to distinguish between the node and the hernia with caution.
Therefore, you say that a hernia is characterized by heat, fever, and intense pain, while the patient feels relief when the excess fluid subsides, and putrefaction completes the process, stopping the fever, pain, and heat.
A nodule, on the other hand, shows no signs of heat, fever, or pain, and it is a cold, silent mass that requires surgical removal.
And according to the color of the body, its beginning is like a cease and is made thus with void, either greater or lesser, and they are according to two kinds, some are fat and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are spots, as I have said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a hernia, you must expel that and inquire about the beginning of the stirment which is called an intrus, according to how its form comes in the chapter which is appropriate to this.
And this is the manner of inquiry for abscesses and all hernias, and it is that you take this stirment and intrude that one into the place which is most humid that you find in the abscess, and you will turn your fingers around at that spot little by little until you know that this stirment has already penetrated the membrane.
And then, with your hand, you finish according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and you extract the intrus and consider what has remained in the track of it.
And if the current humidity is forgotten, of whatever color it may be, you insert it into the superficial section as I have said in the other posts.
And if there is no humidity left from the intrusion, then you know it's dry.
And dry, having no shape of a cross according to this form: As it is taught, raise it up, and with a cut, remove the cord from all parts easily, and take care of the skin or bag over it, if possible, above that and extract the sanie (sanity/life force) from the node.
If it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract the sanity, so try again here, and if you can't extract it safely, leave it within them until there is no further risk.
If from any cause, whether little or much, the pain returns, it should be treated according to custom.
And if you find that the pain from any cause affects a small part, complete the plague with some sharp corrosive powders and tighten the plague, and place a hot cautery on the one that is infected, and treat the other with another cure until it heals.
And if it is not large, then cut both lips of the hernia and treat it with this method.
If a vein is pulsating against it, or not pulsating, then cut and use the place of a zigzag seal that is made of vitriol and leave that tight for two days or three until the plague subsides and the inflammation of the sanc ceases; and then return to incise what is broken off from the node.
Chapter .xlvi.
On the forms of tools necessary for incision and perforation.
Of these are the forms of the instruments, and they are of three kinds, one of which is larger, and another is middle-sized, and the other is small.
The form of the large instrument is this:
The form of the small instrument is this:
They are made of iron, of aluminum, and of suitable size, so that the instrument fits well into the incision.
And these are the methods of the experienced ones, and they are called alchemists, and one of them is known as the alchemist.
And it is of three parts: one is great, another is middle, and the third is little.
The form of the experienced one, great:
The form of the experienced one, middle:
The form of the experienced one, little:
So, it is indicated for those with apisms, excrescences, fistulas, and hernias, so that those within are of bones or other causes.
And thus, they are made round, thick, like lions, with large needles sewn onto them, and are done with hot iron, or with bronze, or with silver, and the best are when they are done with hot iron.
And they prepare the experienced ones with black plume, who remember that through these are opened the fistulas in the cavity of which reflections are made, which are reflected to their lightness on those reflections.
And they are of three kinds: some are long, others medium-length, and others short, according to the size of the fistula and the tightness of it.
Form of the experienced one with black plume:
Form of the experienced one with medium-length plume:
Form of the experienced one with short plume:
The shapes of the wounds are diverse, some being simple cuts with a slight curvature, and they are classified into three types: large, few, and medium-sized.
And from their bodies' humors, there are three types.
And of these, there are two types of curves, which are of three kinds.
They have three types of curves, which are also of three kinds.
All of these are necessary in their place.
Shape of a single curve very little, shape of it:
The shape of a large horn has two curves: The shape of a smaller horn has two curves: The shape of a very small horn has two curves:
The shape of a large horn has three curves:
The shape of a smaller horn has three curves:
And these are the forms of scalpels which are used to cut and incise nodules and abscesses, and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small.
Form of the large scalpel:
Form of the medium scalpel:
Form of the small scalpel:
The ends of these have sharp blades, and the other ends are not sharp, but instead designed to make a precise cut during the removal of nodules without damaging veins or nerves, and for these reasons, it ensures a quick recovery from surgery and provides comfort, thanks to the adjustment required for excision of the abscess.
And these are the forms of weapons, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you can see.
They are made of iron and look like a flame on which alcohol is burned.
And at the end of the handle is a pointed spike hidden, which goes into the body and comes out again, as you wish.
The shapes of the instruments, which are hidden between these parts during the piercing of the apertures and do not injure the patient, are of three kinds: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of wounds through which the flow of blood is obstructed are of three kinds; great, medium, and small; the forms of them:
They are made of citric erys, either round or of some length, and they are subtle.
And know that these kinds of wounds, great, medium, and small, must be used so that by them the flow of blood is obstructed at the right speed in need, and they are useful when first applied, not as medicine.
I do not recommend using them to obstruct blood in every part of the body, but only in fleshy parts, as with the scales of the legs and thighs, and the scales of the arms, and the nipples and abdomen and the groin, similar to their appearance in moist fleshy parts.
And some times these instruments are made of small blades similar to scissors according to this form; for the incision is made when the vein or artery is cut through phlebotomy, or a wound is incised in a vein or an artery.
And some incisions are made in a round fashion according to this form:
Chapter XLVII.
On the care of the mammary glands of men, which are assembled from women.
Some incisions are inflated in the mammary glands of certain men when they begin to be covered with hair during sleep; then the mammary glands are inflated, and the mammary glands of the women are assembled, and they become enlarged, distant.
And for those who wish to treat this, be sure to cut out that section of the moon in the shape from B to G, then remove all the roughness, and fill the wound with incarnate medicine, and close both lips of the wound with stitching, and cure it until it is healed.
If the breast decreases in size and softens due to its magnitude for women, then cut it into two pieces, each with a slit resembling a moon, of which each contains the other, so that the longer line contains the shorter one according to this form from B to G. Then remove the cord connecting both edges of the wound, stop the discharge, and apply what has been said about stitching and powders necessary for treatment until it is healed.
And if you do not carry out the incision as required due to restlessness of the patient or flow of pus, then fill the wound with a hot cauterizing ointment and leave it so that it corrodes the pus, which is broken by the heat, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter .xlviii.
About the perforation of abscesses that come from beneath the skin.
These abscesses that come from beneath the skin are caused by scalpels, hard and sore, which contain a pus that needs to be drained.
And of those, some contain humidity; and those that contain humidity should be incised during the moon's half-circle, according to this figure: from the line marked G to the line marked B. And once all that is in the abscess has been drained, then secure it with a bandage and inspect it the next day.
And keep the bandage in place and care for it with a suitable ointment until it heals.
And if the abscess of lymphatic glands and scrofula appears, then you divide it as we have said in the section about scrofula in general.
If the plague spreads so that it causes putrefaction, then apply cautery to it as we have said before.
Chapter XLIX.
On the section about abscesses that occur from arrow wounds or veins.
When an arrow breaks through and the wound is stabilized, which is on that part, then you observe signs of abscess and the marks by which inflammation and abscess are known to be from an artery or a vein: for when abscess is from an arrow, it's a deep penetration in the body; and when you probe the abscess with your hand, you feel a hissing noise.
And that which is through veins returns to the manifest of the body.
And cutting into this ulcer is often erroneous, especially when it affects the joints, angles, and back, and many parts of the body; as it is very great, therefore care must be taken to avoid its treatment, and that which is in the extremities, or head, must be avoided.
Regarding those affected by the inflammation of the orifices of the bowels, incise in the long bone at the hip joint; then cut open the section with a saw and remove the bowels, freeing them from the surrounding tissues until they are exposed.
And place a needle on it and make it penetrate between the other layers, and tighten the bowels with a double thread at two points — which causes the patient to urinate by drawing out both bowels located in the temples.
And then apply pressure to the area between the two ligaments, spreading them apart until the wound is completely open and the abscess is dissolved.
Then apply treatment to the area where pus has formed until the ligaments fall; and cure it with suitable foment until it heals.
And if it is an abscess caused by vein section, then you must have your hand over the abscess as much as possible, and insert the needle into the area that you have secured with your hand, and pull out the pus from the other side; and then tie off the abscess with a suitable ligament according to what I have told you about the ligament of grapes on both sides of the thread.
If you are afraid of pulling out the thread, then insert the thin needle into the abscess after making a small incision with the first needle, and tighten your threads in four places.
Close the wound in the middle part of it until it heals, and then you will cut away the surplus of the stitches, leaving what is attached to it.
And then place your hand on the puddle which you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and administer the treatment which is necessary and apply poultices until it heals.
On the final stage of the wound which occurs due to nerve damage.
Thus, wounds of this type occur in the rear and in veins, and they appear to be caused by nerve damage when they occur due to excessive pressure or similar causes.
And the treatment is applied in the areas where the joints are affected or in the foot, or indeed anywhere that the joints are inflamed.
And it is a great ulcer, resembling the color of another body, and it is located in its largest parts, characterized by their disposition, and when it is tightened with violence, pain in it causes a sensation of stupor.
And it is not an ulcer that is added to the front of the body, and for this reason, the opening is left, and it is painful throughout its entire extent and does not spread towards the sides or behind.
Therefore, regarding those who have it in the joints, it is not appropriate to use iron, as they will experience intense contraction.
One may make the opening for those on the head or forehead with a knife. If the ulcer is small, one may use scissors to cut and separate that from the skin.
And if it is great, hold it with ungents and extract the foreign body, then close it up with bandages, and treat the wound until it heals.
It appears that the text you've provided is incomplete or missing some context, as "Capitol .li." doesn't offer enough content for an accurate translation or interpretation without additional information about the document's structure or topic. If this is a section title or part of a heading, it could refer to a specific chapter or topic within a larger work. For a more precise response, please provide the complete sentence or paragraph surrounding this segment.
On the section regarding the treatment of an abscess that occurs near the belly button.
Even some people are moved by certain maladies in the bellies of those and in other parts of their bodies, which are called fungal-like due to their similarity to fungi, whose roots are subtle and the heads of which are large; and already their lips are covered, and it is from these that a magnified one is sought.
And you have already seen one, and in its belly there were two parts that served as functions similar to each other, and there was no difference between those whites, of small size.
And the lips of those [parts] were inverted and cracked, and moisture flowed from them constantly.
Therefore, you should cut them and tighten the first one on the foot's big toe, which is about 18 units long, and the other one on a smaller toe, approximately 6 units long.
And the procedure for cutting them involves considering whether the patient's illness is moist, and the color of the abscess is white, moist, and of fine size; then you cut them with a broad knife, and apply hot cautery over them in the presence of your eyes, as you must drive out the pus, and if blood comes out, cauterize that area.
And if the patient is afraid and trembling, beware of sudden movement with a sharp object; then take a fresh piece of lead, tighten it in that tool whose method we have described, and leave it there for two days.
Then adjust the tightness of the lead string; therefore, do not cease to tighten the large lead after it has been divided and comes out by itself through its work.
If that part is of thick consistency, then in the incision there is no cause for fear or anxiety, especially when it is in the abdomen.
It is possible that you open the hernia, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then take care so that it is healed as the disease goes away.
And be careful not to presume to incise that which is of a dark color, with little sensation, and firmly attached, for that is absolute cancer.
And now let us recall certain things regarding this illness.
Chapter II.
On the treatment of hernia (or "eminence" of the navel).
The hernia (eminence) of the navel is caused by various reasons: either through fissures in the abdominal wall, from which protrudes the intestine or hernia, as is the case with other ruptures; or by a vein or artery that flows into it (sanct), as described above; or by flatulence (ventositat) that is constrained within.
If it is due to an abdominal wall fissure and the protrusion of the intestine (hernia), then the color of the hernia may resemble that of the body; and it is accompanied by considerable pain, appearing in various positions. And if it is for the removal of the hernia, you observe the position of that part which we have mentioned, with greater diversity, and when you press on that lump, it is concealed, then return; it is strongly attached to its place, and the introduction of water and vigorous work is magnified.
If it is due to moisture, you will feel a lump and it will not be concealed when you press with your hand, nor constricted nor ripped.
And if it is due to infection, then these signs will appear: the hernia will turn black and decline in size.
If it is not due to flesh, then the hernia will be very hard, thick and solid, and it will remain in a certain quantity.
If it is due to windiness, then the touch of that part will be painful.
And the operation on it considers whether the prominence of the navel is due to arrowhead, or vein, or flatulence; then you must refrain from treating it, for there is fear and dread in that, as is taught in the chapter where I spoke of hernias due to arrowheads and veins.
If the prominence of the navel is due to an intestine or hernia, then you must instruct the patient to lie on his side, and carefully explore all around the navel, and command him to remain still between your hands on his back, and then encircle a broad spatula around the navel in the place where you felt the attempt; and extend the extent of the hernia above it with great care; and bind around the circumference with a strong thread or catgut in a proper manner.
Then open the middle of the hernia extended over the ligament and insert your finger into that indicated place to explore the intestine; and if you have tightened or guarded it with the ligament, then extract it carefully and push the intestine back inside the abdomen.
And if you have located the fabric, then take that sticky substance; and cut away its excess.
If it is against your skill or vein, then circle that area and return to your operation; take two needles and insert into those two strong threads and pass two needles through the circuit you made around the abscess in a crosswise manner, which will cause penetration; and then tighten the abscess in four directions over the needles.
And if you prefer, leave the needles and allow the area to heal until the flesh is extended and falls out on its own; or cut away that part when it becomes subtile and can be removed, and then treat that wound with something that covers and heals the burns until it is completely cured.
And if the protrusion from the navel is due to flesh or moisture, cover the abscess as we have said and remove the pus or moisture that you find in it, and then treat it with something that covers and strengthens the area.
Chapter .liii.
On the treatment of cracks.
We have discussed, in the previous section, the types of cracks and how treatment should be approached using medicine, and that it is dangerous to use sharp objects on them so as not to cause ulceration. We have also spoken about the causes of cracks and precautions for their treatment.
And the ancients said that sometimes cracks can be in places where it is possible to completely eliminate them, such as crack in the nipples or in the genital area and similar parts of other members, especially when they are just beginning to form.
But when it is old and deep, it may not respond to treatment, for I have never seen it heal nor has anyone else, nor has it been known to improve.
And the operation on him is as we have said, you should precede and remove the illness and purge some times with black choleric blood, then drain it if a manifest refill is observed.
And then prepare the hernia for the operation with a preparation in which it is located, and make incisions around it; and carefully explore all parts with the knife to avoid any cause of rupture from the patient's internal pressures. Then let the blood flow, do not stop it abruptly, press on the areas, and wash away the thick blood with your hand or an instrument suitable from among your available tools.
If it causes you difficulty to make an incision of thick blood from a vein or artery, cauterize it until the flow of blood stops, and then tend to the other wound with the proper cure until it heals.
Chapter .liv.
On the cure of hydrops.
We have already discussed, in the previous section, the distinction between the types of hydrops and their characteristic symptoms, regarding their cure by medicine.
And that which is cured with iron is only the species of inflammation alone, and it should not be approached with iron to the species of tympanitis or the species of hypostasis, for that is mortal.
And when you have already medicated this species of hydrops tympanitis with medicines and do not confirm your treatment, consider this, for if the illness has already been weakened in the patient, or it is another malady other than hydrops, just as it is in those with coughs or abdominal pains similar to those, then beware that you do not treat them with iron, for there is fear about that.
If you find the disease with exuberant growth and it is not another malady but gout only, without swelling or inflammation, then the manner of treating it is that you lift up the malady between your hands, apply pressure to it with your hand, express the belly of the patient by pressing it, drain the water from the affected part below the penis, and take out the sputum in this way:
both parts should be cut with a sharp, long knife, from the acutely pointed end, also taking out some sputum; however, in performing the operation on that, do not let it enter the cavity, and take care to remove it.
And consider whether the generation of gout is from the cavities, for you will find that by cutting into the side of the abdomen below the navel, in the right place over the penis, you remove about three parts.
If the generation of gout is due to disease of the bowels, then your section should be on the left side of the navel, about three parts deep.
And if the formation of it is due to heat, then your section should be on the right side.
And ensure that your section is on the side where the pain resides so that excess fluid does not flow to that area.
Then thoroughly punch with the instrument through the cord, enter that section, place your hand between the cord and sinew, and extract it; if it is of the size of a finger or smaller.
And then puncture the sinew until the space is reached that you wish to reach, and it is located in the area of water. Then remove that one and insert an instrument of this form: and it resembles a fine silver cannula; made of silver, brass, or iron, from which, at the beginning where it is inserted, there is a small hole, and on its sides are three openings: two on one side and one on the other; and the tip is cut according to the manner of a pen, thus:
And at the end of it, a crown-like ring is placed, for when the instrument reaches the water, it will immediately withdraw over the instrument, thus evacuating a significant quantity of water at once; for if you evacuate less than necessary in one go, the patient may die from the resolution of their animal spirit or be subject to a sudden stroke that brings death.
Evacuation should be done according to the patient's condition, based on the disposition of their illness, the strength of their vital spirit, and the goodness of their pulse.
And after removing the instrument, retain the water that is caused because it is often held back by the cord that catches the tract over which you have made incisions; I recommend that you make those according to this manner.
And repeat the process with the instrument on other days if the illness tolerates it, evacuate a little water from it, and do this for several days in fear; be careful not to break the water seal except slightly.
If you are concerned about the illness, and abstain from a great amount of water, then treat it with burial in dry sand, and sweating in a bath, and expose it to the sun for a long time; and treat it with drying medicines until it is healed.
And apply a cautery to the stomach, and press on it to extract water, as I have recounted in what has been said above.
Chapter XV.
On the treatment of children who have not yet developed the ability to control their bladder functions.
Sometimes some of the children pass stool from their mother's womb, and the opening of their mix (or it is too narrow or not in the correct place).
Therefore, make an incision in the hernia as soon as it appears through the thin, moving spatum in this manner:
And then, close the wound with a thin lead pin and tie it, and do this for three days or four.
And when they have urinated, let them strain and collect the urine; then return it to the patient.
And if you do not hold the lead still, it is possible that the urine which flows onto the area will not adhere to this closure.
But the one through which the wound is narrow should be treated with a lead pin, as we have said, for too many days until it is enlarged.
But those in whom the wound is not in its place, they should be treated thus, which causes them, because of the nature of the injury, the pain is at the root of the penis so that it cannot urinate inside, unless it raises the penis with the hand above them; and it is not a hereditary condition, therefore, because of this, the sperm does not reach the mother according to its rectitude, and it becomes a very weak malady.
And the technique for performing the operation is that the patient should be laid on their back, and then extend the head of the stone with your left hand using strong traction, and cut the tip of the stone at the opening of the urethra with a sharp knife, as if making an incision with a feather, so that the middle part of the stone appears like the head of the stone and falls into the correct place.
And be careful in your operation of draining the pus, for what causes it to happen; place yourself over it so that you cut the pus and heal the wound while it is still fresh.
Chapter LVI.
Of the albater (or gum) that occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis, and of its corruption, blackness, and adhesions to the foreskin at the head of the penis.
Moistures observed cause this albater (white substance) on the scrotum and its flesh prominence.
And some are malignant, while others are not.
Not malignant, it requires a delicate suspension and removal of the affected part; then place your hand over the submerged area with an Egyptian ointment; and apply that, cure it with finely prepared ointment until it is healed.
If the albater (white substance) is malignant, it turns black; then you must administer cautery near its incision and ration it accordingly.
If the albater (white substance) is on the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis, and one part of the albater is within the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you must treat the albater that is inside at the beginning until it is healed; and when you cure the outer part, remember that if you do not circumcise, the foreskin may become tight again.
And they examine the genitals and the dark, inflamed prepuce, so that you understand all that is already discolored, corrupt or decomposing; then apply to that place a poultice made of flour from crushed millet, wheat and barley seeds, mixed with herbs.
And apply treatment to that, as with any other healing process, until it is completely healthy.
If there is an end of pain, then administer cautery monthly according to this form:
This cautery is useful for two purposes: to relieve pain and to treat infections when they are corrupt.
And if the head of the foreskin is corroded and completely destroyed, then you must insert a metal tube into the meat of the prepuce so that the discharge from the infection passes through it.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in those whose foreskin is its own, and no circumcision is required on it; when adhesion occurs due to a wound or an abscess), carefully excise the thick spatum with an obtuse scalpel until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely freed.
And if it is difficult to distinguish them precisely, then you must excise with a scalpel for some cause from the head of the penis and the foreskin, and this is because the foreskin, when it is thin, easily perforates itself slightly due to its thinness.
Then carefully separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a thin knife, which has already been soaked in water to prevent further adhesion.
And then it should be carefully cleaned with a hemostatic agent until it is consolidated.
Chapter .lvii.
On the purification of newborn children and the treatment of what happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a cure for impurity, nor is it compared to other plagues: however, when it concerns our action and our own will, and it is performed specifically on children, it is necessary that we assign to this better operation and way a lighter approach for the sake of health.
Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not practice circumcision in any of their free lands, as they do not include it in their laws, and only because we have acquired knowledge through experience, which is why I have attributed the major part of this practice to skilled craftsmen and barbers, who use a sharp knife and cautery; they also use lint and a fingernail for incision.
And you have already tried all these methods and do not find better relief than with scissors, lint, or thread that in circumcision, as the cut of the foreskin has two layers, and the inner layer is left, and it is often necessary to make another incision and a safe, sure cut. And circumcision, which is performed by cutting, using the digit (finger), a method used by barbers, is not secure for making an incision at the tip of the male member, as it quickly enters the wound.
However, with the use of scissors or other instruments, it quickly becomes messy and corrupts your operation. And the foreskin of a child is naturally short, and in many cases, it does not require circumcision, and I have seen this myself.
On the operation that is performed using scissors and thread, I have discovered through experience its great usefulness, because the scissors are of a suitable size for incision, thus preserving the sharpness that is present at one end, and with your hand positioned in proportion to both ends, you make incisions according to a calculation in time; and so there is compression of the thread forming a loop containing all the strands of pain, from which no error arises.
And the first step in the operation is that you ensure the child remains awake if it is one of those who can understand a little, doing nothing but tying the thread to their pain and allowing it to enter into the other on the following day.
And then do all you can in that way to bring joy to someone who understands this, according to their ability. And ensure that person is well-rested and prepared, without being weary; keep the scissors hidden in your hand or place your foot so that the child does not see those or any other surgical tools.
And then insert your hand into the patient's anus and blow into the rectum, pull it until the tip of the instrument reaches the end, and clean that which has been added to it by filth.
The shape of the instruments for cleansing, this is the form:
The extremities should not be of unequal length; the others should be such that the radius of the bone is not left out, and the length of both acute angles is equal to the length of two handbreadths.
Do not make the mistake of removing the intrinsic tension entirely, or deviating from it during the incision.
Therefore, it is necessary that you stretch the one from your hand to your finger in front of the aperture of the place and make an incision according to equality.
If you cannot hold it with your finger, extract it with a hook and make an incision on that.
If it has passed three days and they say that it is swollen under the infected scar, then you should leave it until the scar becomes soft, and pull it out gently, make an incision on it, according to what you are prepared for.
And observe the head of the hernia, so as not to damage it.
So therefore treat that part which the plague has hardened due to the powders we have discussed in the treatment of powders.
And if it is cut from the cord within measure, and follows the rules regarding them, it will not affect it.
And apply treatment to that part which we have said should be healed.
Chapter LVIII.
On the treatment of urine retention in the bladder.
Urine retention in the bladder is caused by swelling due to stone or infection, or obstruction or inflammation, and resembles those we have discussed regarding treatment in the sections (i.e., chapters).
And if what we have said does not dissolve it, then be aware that you must extract it from the disease using an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the form: Both silver and thin as a lion's jaw, with a tube of fine hair like a long needle in similarity to a palm and a half, to which is attached a thin cane at the tip.
And the method of urination is as follows: take the folded bladder and tie it at the end with a thread or string for good closure; insert the ends of the bladder into the urethra, cut them with scissors if any cause requires cutting off the string, but more carefully insert it into the catheter with force, and then place the urethra near the edge and fill it with honey and alum.
And apply compresses to the pain on the skin, drain the vesica and varices with oils mixed with honey, olive oil, and water.
And then insert the urethra with ease until it reaches the root of the varice; and bend the varic over the opening of the catheter; and push the urethra from inside; and push it until it reaches the bladder, and ensure that the pain is relieved from its cause; and do not force it in a hasty manner, but rather carefully insert it into the part where it is bent.
And then slowly extend the urethra using the forceps, as the urine dries the linen.
Then extract that one for the treatment of urine, using forceps, without ceasing to do so, and use a syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient's condition improves.
**Chapter LIX.**
On the quality of bladder clisting using a clepsydra and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose.
When a bladder ulceration, fistula, or infected swelling occurs there, and you wish to drain waters and medications from it, use an instrument known as a clepsydra, and this is its form:
But if its opening in the extreme part is blocked, it is closed. And there are three parts to it: two of one kind, thus as often.
In the beginning, it is hot, which is what is being pushed, and according to its quantity, it accumulates or piles up; if any cause pulls it away from its humors, they are thrown out, and when they are expelled, they are thrown towards it, and when they come out long, according to what causes them to solidify, like naphtha in sea battles.
Therefore, if you want to prevent humors in the bladder, insert the end of the clamp into the humor and throw it away from the parts above, for the humor is thrown into the cavity of the clamp.
And then insert the end of the clamp into the urethra as we have mentioned in the operation; and push the humor towards what you are pushing, for that humor goes to the bladder soon enough, and the evil comes from it.
The shape of the delicate crystal which the bladder is crystalized on, and that shape is:
And whether it is made of silver or lead, which the head resembles a small feather, and leave it with a sticky substance inside.
Then take the bladder with motion, and place it in the humidity that you want to crystalize in the bladder, and then close it between two strong ligatures with double twine, and heat that humidity over fire.
And then insert the end of the crystalizer into the urine.
And then place your hand over the bladder with pressure until the patient feels that that humidity has already penetrated into the bladder.
If you do not have a bladder at hand, take a piece of cloth and make a circle from it; then pierce that through its entirety; and insert the twine strongly into those passages, turning them around; and add the circle to the container thus enriched with also urine and water, as you wish.
And then you insert that into the instrument and make it so as you have made the bladder, and express with your hand within so that the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter LXX (60)
On the extraction of stones.
We have already discussed the division of stone types and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, as well as the signs of each.
And we have discussed the stone that requires surgical intervention with the hand, and incision.
And the stone formed in the bladder specifically is the one that is lodged in the bladder.
And they recount that this manifest exposure and concise explanation.
Therefore, it is said that the disease born in the bladder most often affects children; and among its signs, the urine expelled from the bladder is similar to water in its clarity, appearing in that sand; and the illness rubs its sting, causing frequent pain, and then is dressed; and this is why they call it "the wound" because of those.
And the healing of children from that condition is easier for those who have reached 13 years old; and it is difficult to cure in the elderly. Among the young, it is more common due to what exists between those.
And of him whose stone is larger and healing is more difficult; and if it is small, it is the opposite of that one.
Therefore, in order to achieve the cure for that condition, we must begin by cleansing the disease with Christ, who extracts all the gap that is within their intestines; for that gap sometimes blocks the flow of urine before its inspection.
And then, with the disease in their feet, they should position and support it well so that urine descends to the bladder's opening, or sometimes it may jump from its place.
And then use that tool between your hands, prepared, and let the patient's legs rest with their things in place, so that the bladder is completely emptied towards the parts below.
And then take hold of that and completely remove all those discharges.
Therefore, if you feel the urine in the space, then immediately place a sword over it.
And if you do not catch hold of everything, cover it with oil the little indicated by the thumb of your left hand, whether the hernia is a child or its little piece if it is fully grown, and insert that into its place. And once the stone is extracted, leave the little indicated place as it is. And convert that small opening little by little into the hole of the bladder.
Then apply pressure on that small place indicated, and expel it outside through the opening where you removed it.
And command the assistant to press the bladder with their hand; and command another assistant to extend their legs with their right hand above, and with their other hand to hold the skin around the opening where the operation is performed, drawing it away from the wound.
And then insert a sharp instrument into the opening from which this mass protrudes. It divides into what is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle of the opening, first on the left side; and the incision should be above that bone and it is said to be in the anus, and a transverse cut is made so that the external cutout is wide and inwardly narrow according to the quantity that can be extracted from the anus without causing too much difficulty, for the saying goes that the anus must be divided, and this should not be forgotten.
And know that there is some part of the anus that has angles and margins, making its extraction difficult because of this.
And from that part, there is something resembling a seed, and it is round, and it is made of the lighter extraction.
Therefore, if it is that which has angles and edges, adjust it in the fissure.
And if it is not thus easily removed, cover your hands over it, or tighten it with a suitable gesture, the tip of which is as sharp as lime, that you tighten over the stone, and do not dislodge it; or insert from the sides a subtle instrument with a curved tip.
If you cannot do that, then amplify the opening a little, and if you see a flow of pus, cut and tighten it with vitriol three times.
But if the stone is more than one, at the beginning, push your hand into the mouth of the bladder and cut it; then gently push a little water in; and seemingly make them both move more than two.
And if the pain is very intense, ignorance consists in perforating that great section, which causes two things to happen to the patient: either death or an increase in the discharge of urine, due to continuous urination, which weakens the area and makes it not entirely consolidated.
If it is necessary to expel something from the bowels that is stuck inside, or if there is a fracture with scissors that extract those in the pelvis, use forceps to carefully remove them.
After completing your operation, fill the wound with aloe and dragon's blood, and tighten it. And place over that cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rose oil and water, to prevent the wound from closing too quickly.
Then return the patient to their bed and do not remove the bandage for three days.
And when that is loosened, apply the area with water and oil, then treat it with a delicate ointment and a potent ointment until it is healed.
If, in the case of an infection, there is gangrene and corrosion, and it appears as if the cold has seized the bladder, and due to this the urination is hindered (and this is known as the discharge of urine), then insert a small tube into the plague and extract that pus, for if it does not drain, it can cause corruption and putrefaction in the bladder.
Then wash the plague with wine, water, and salt, and oppose it to all kinds of things that are suitable for its healing until it is cured.
And during all the stages of healing, make sure that you both cover and adjust the medicines that are applied to the area.
And if the stone is small and lodged in the urethra, causing urination to be obstructed, treat it with what you have previously described, as the stones passed through this treatment are often blamed for urethral obstruction; take a metal probe of suitable size, which has this form.
with a triangular tip, sharp, lodged in the wood.
Then take hold of the thread, and tie it around the urethra below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the metal into the urethra, piercing it until the probe reaches the stone. And turn the probe with your hand on the stone, slowly and carefully, continuing to pierce until you make an opening from the other side; then urine will flow out.
And then apply your hand to what is broken off from the stone in the kidney, outside the bladder, as it is squeezed and voided with urine, and the illness is healed.
If this treatment is not suitable for any reason, then insert a thread into the kidney and another thread on top of it. And then close the kidney within that bladder between two bindings. And then extract that one. And then loosen the binding and clean the frozen blood, which is made in the plague.
And it is not necessary to insert a thread into the kidney, but only to prevent it from returning to the bladder; and the other binding on top, because when the thread is removed, the kidney returns to its place, and the pain comes back again.
And for this purpose, when you tie the bandage around them, you must raise their legs to the level of their heart, or return them to their normal position, and secure the bandage as we have said.
Chapter LXI.
On the extraction of kidney stones from women.
Kidney stones in women are rarely formed.
If you see a stone in either of those areas (kidneys), its treatment is difficult and is prohibited by various methods.
One of their weaknesses is that women who are strong in other respects can become pregnant.
And the second weakness is that you will not find a woman more knowledgeable than herself to discover if she should consult a doctor when she is pregnant, or whether she belongs to those women who have husbands.
The surface is what you do not search well, as women often do not know this art, especially the operation with fire.
And the fourth is that the place of incision on the stone in women is far from the place of the stone, so it requires a deep incision, and there is fear in that.
If it is necessary to do so, you must seek help from a skilled female surgeon, and they are not easily found.
If you are lacking in that, seek out a skilled surgeon with a keen and subtle hand, or present a well-respected female midwife who has extensive experience in the care of women.
So do as follows: present this person and command them to carry out everything you instruct, from examining the stone to its removal. The reason for this is that they must determine if the woman is a virgin, so they should insert their finger into her anus and carefully extract the stone.
Therefore, if you find it, cut it off and then order him to incise on that.
If it is not possible, then order the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's urethra and feel around on the bladder, as she places her left hand on the vesica, and feel it carefully.
Therefore, if you find it, cut away gradually, from the opening of the bladder to the edges, with great care and using all your strength, so that it reaches inside the thigh.
And then make an incision over that position of the bladder, starting from the opening of the thigh, and direct it towards the part where the urethra is stopped, and ensure his finger does not go back inside the urethra.
And the incision should be small at first; then insert your finger over that section, and if you feel the urethra, adjust the incision according to the amount, knowing how much urine will flow from it.
And you should know that the spices of the pear are varied: for some are small and hard, others are large and soft, some are pointed and sharp, and others are round and smooth.
Therefore, you should know how many species there are of it according to what you have mentioned about what you want.
And if you wish to treat a wound, apply arsenic trioxide to the affected area and let it sit for an hour until the wound is drained, then return to your operation to remove the pear.
And prepare for yourself the instruments mentioned in the removal of pear in men, so that you are aided by them in your operation.
And if you wish to treat a wound and know that the expulsion of pus is from the deep incision, then place powder on the area and gently apply pulvils (herbal compresses) and stricture descent, and do not repeat this; leave the pear and do not extract it, for the strong nature of the disease will die. And then treat the wound.
So when the sharpness of the pain subsides after a few days, and the place can be touched, then you return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
Chapter LXII.
On the section about hernia removal.
A hernia of the inguinal region is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white skin where the muscles containing the bowels are left open, and it is called the cavity.
And sometimes it is in the natural pouch which prepares itself for the bowels, as if it were another bowel; and it is the opening of the muscle between the white skin that we have mentioned, and it is not a true hernia.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which occurs in the bones, so that this material is discharged to those, and sometimes it occurs due to a blow made on the bones.
And this humidity does not have moving colors, for the color of it either declines to citron or sanguine, or is red, or is black and viscous, or is white and watery, and it is that which is most common.
And the signs by which it is known that this addition of water occurs are as follows: for if it is in the white bone that we have mentioned, then the swelling becomes round, declining slightly in length, with a figure like an egg, and the bone appears, because the humidity contains that of all parts.
And if the humidity is in the own panicle, then the swelling becomes round and parted from the bone, and therefore one estimates that it is another bone.
And if moisture is between the joints of the fingers and the white bone, then cut away the sensation.
And to determine the colour of the moisture, you should observe the colour of the moisture in the cavity as it emerges from a cut made in the affected part; and according to what you see in the trace of the emergence, judge what lies within.
Therefore, when we come to the treatment of it with iron, you should know that you command the patient to be fleered (or "flaccid") if possible, and empty his bowels.
Then lay him down on his back for some time, for any reason, and place a warm blanket over him.
Then place yourself on the patient's left side, and instruct the attendant to follow his right side, extending his finger from two fingers' breadth below the joints of the fingers to the bone at the base of the thumb, as well as to the opening of the abdomen.
And then take a wide spatula and cut through the tight band of tissue at the middle of the thigh along its entire length near the penis.
And make the second cut according to the same measurement from the line where you have separated the skin of the genitals, until you reach the white bone completely encompassing it.
And remove it, and observe, and pay attention so that you do not insert anything; your incision should be clear and distinct, and carefully examine the wound according to its quantity as much as possible.
Then, pierce the full bone with a wide puncture and extract all the water.
Then, separate the two lips of the incision with scissors and extend the bone to its parts; do not touch the band of tissue surrounding the genitals, and incise the bone in that manner as best as you can. And incise the affected area completely or into the flesh, and especially its thin layer, for if you do not carefully examine the incision of it, there is a risk that the water does not drain out.
If, during the process of removing the hernia outside of the abdominal wall in the course of your operation, you have completed the section of the circumference of the hernial sac, then return inside it and properly adjust both edges of the hernia from the genital area with sutures, and take care of it just as you do with other wounds, so long as it heals.
And if you find that the hernia is corrupted by another illness, then tie the vessels that are above the suspender, extract the hernia, and treat it as we have said.
If water is added in two parts, then you know that both are hernias; therefore, make an incision on that part according to what you have done with the other in a different manner; and if it appears to be a suitable operation for you, then perform it.
And then, you wash the wound, and enter the sections with wool submerged in oil or rose-oil; place another piece of wool that you've soaked in wine and oil outside, expanding it over both legs and the wonder of the belly; and rest it on folded cloths and pillows, and wrap those around with a bandage according to this form:
Then, take two pieces of cloth and wrap them with woolen tape according to this pattern; secure the extremities with lint or wet wool, add structure in the crotch area of the pants, taking one extremity from the buttocks towards the two, and the second extremity from the opening of the legging, and place two other extremities on each side, leaving two others over the thighs, and all the tightness should be adjusted in the crotch area of the pants.
In some cases, this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of incision; so you take a thin cut-edge cautery and make an incision at that joint of the bones, and it should be ignited according to what we have recommended until the white skin containing the water becomes uncovered, and then take cautery as follows: It resembles Greek writing.
And then perforate that seal, and ignite it until all moisture is expelled.
Then extend the seal with scissors, cut it with scissors, and burn it gently with a finely lit cautery; incise it as best you can until you eradicate all of it; and be careful that the fire does not touch you.
And know that this operation is much safer and farther from the flow of infection, and better than an operation with a section.
If it causes you difficulty to apply a cautery during the section or at the time of burning, or if there is a flow of infection, then address that which opposes you through treatment for that, as suitable care according to what is said.
If the illness is severe and there is no hope for a second operation due to its horrendous nature, then perform an incision as recommended; and it is at this point, as we have said regarding signs, that you must determine if that hernia is watery.
Now you understand that you must sever the illness on a raised spot, then perform an incision at the lowest point of the pus collection using a sharp knife, and stop the incision according to the length of the body.
And it should be a wide opening so that all the water can flow out.
Then place your hand over the area, pressing gently to ensure the flow of water stops. And then attend to it until the affliction is healed.
If there is any contradiction to the draining of water at that time, you perforate it: this should only be done because the white panniculus in the orifice of the abscess causes resistance and prevents the discharge of water; then make sure to insert into the abscess a needle or instrument for extracting water, the shape of which precedes; or apply a small amount of pressure on the abscess.
And you know that water returns and accumulates again after a few months or even years; and when it is added, it should be perforated in the same manner as mentioned above, because the illness will thus pass its days.
Chapter LXIII.
On hernias and their treatment.
You know that in performing surgery on this hernia, there is great danger of losing the patient; for it is my opinion that its discharge and rescue by some better means should be sought.
And they are reminded of the operation on those and the spices of the abscesses.
Therefore, it says that the abscesses are born in the bodies of those whose genera are composed of them, and this is done for various reasons: either by a sudden acute inflammation, which is poured into the genera, or by percussion.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it does not cause pain in it, and it is a severe abscess.
And very few are the lapified abscesses, of which the color is dark, and they do not cause pain in them.
And sometimes it is made by the compression of the arteries, and by the inflammation of those thus already perceived in memory, or by the inflammation of veins.
It is known that what is due to the inflammation of arteries is called the dispersion of gangrene when you feel it in your legs, and it should not be touched.
What is caused by the inflammation of veins should not be dispersed due to any cause; compression on them is necessary.
And it is possible that on this particular case, incisions are made and on other meats; you insert the instrument of the skilled surgeon, then open the hernia from its parts, extract the white lump, cut through the suspenders of the vessels, tie them, and insert the suspender from which you have cut, making sure to do so with all parts of the hernia.
So if the hernia is already consolidated among those meats, then you should extract it and make an incision on it.
And if there is an adhesion due to any cause within the body or between structures, you should remove all that adhesion and cut it with a circular incision.
If the adhesion is a natural growth of flesh in the location of the adhesion, behind it, then you should cut all that belongs to it and extract it as we have said.
So when your operation is complete, you should fill the wound with wool saturated in rose oil and wine; and then care for it with other remedies until it heals.
Chapter LXIV.
On the treatment of hernias that affect the viscera.
It is an aperture (hernia) enveloped by some similar growth, softening the testicles, and makes movement, exercise, and walking over the affected area difficult.
And in the treatment of this illness, caution is required regarding what precedes it.
However, I note that they mention operation in that second step which I described as "treatment.
And it says that you should cease the illness over a raised pillow; then, gently pull the suspender of the testicles towards the body; and take hold of the chains of the genitals with your hands placed on the testicles, which have been proven effective against the pain; and have other assistants as well, and extend them to their full extent with force.
Then, cut with a sharp knife across the path of the vessels, as long as the vessels remain uncovered.
And extract from every part as we have said in the removal of arrows, which are in the temples.
And then insert a needle with two threads, attach it to the first point where the pain occurs, and do the same again at the last part of their. Then make incisions in the middle part of the body at a slight angle according to its length, and extract what is added from the putrid and corrupt humors.
Then treat the infection with a cure for other infections in which you wish to prevent the formation of vessels that block one or both openings, as it is not harmful for this purpose.
If it happens that all the vessels are affected, then remove either the testicles or constrict them through the vessels, so that they are deprived of all nourishment due to the incision of the vessels and become atrophied, or tie them off so that they are no longer useful to those parts.
Chapter .lxv.
On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a tear in the wall of the abdomen, extending from the blood vessels of the abdominal cavity, allowing the intestines to protrude through the opening.
And this rupture can be either of the wall or an protrusion of the intestine, and these two types occur due to various causes: a blow, sudden movements, shouting, lifting a heavy object, or similar.
The sign of this, when it is due to an extension of the wall, occurs gradually over a long period, and not suddenly, and it presents as a swelling that pushes inward into the cavity because the abdomen contains the intestine.
And the sign of it is when there is a cutting in the flesh, for at the beginning it causes violent pain suddenly; and it is an apparent abscess appearing behind the knee, which is due to protrusion of the intestine, and the matter from it comes out of the body through the opening in the flesh.
And in some cases, the intestine's membrane is forgotten and this is called intestinal hernia.
And sometimes it is caused by flatulence, and sometimes it runs in the hernia gap, and here it gets stuck, which is a great hindrance to the patient, and sometimes it causes severe and intense pain, especially when pressed.
In the treatment of this illness with herbs, one must be careful, so as to avoid the mistake in that.
The manner of the operation for that is to command the patient to return the intestine to its cavity with their hand inside the hernia, and then press it between your fingers, and raise the legs of the patient.
And then tighten the ligature which is the ligature of the testicles at their attachment, and cut the ligature of the testicles entirely through; and fix in two folds of the section incised as you need to open the section with these.
And if the section is according to the amount that it is possible for you to make, then from that the hole will be forgotten.
And then scrape away those bodies which are left by the ligature of the testicles, until the white hard body of each part is discovered.
Now insert your finger into what is the testicle, where the white body is between, which is left by the ligature, and between the second body, and loosen that adhesion which is behind the testicle.
Then take hold of the ligature of the testicles at its attachment, and thus extend the white body on it with your left hand, and raise the testicle to the part of the section; and command the assistant to spread the testicle wide open, and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with a complete solution.
And seek out the threads that indicate there is no cause for the hernia enclosed in the hard white ciphas. If you find no cause for it within the patient, then search for it in the lower abdomen.
Then make a cut in the scrotum just below the tendon of the testicles, from which blood and pus will flow as we have mentioned above.
Then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound; leave it there; and use the poultice we have recommended (and sometimes white cautery, as we said, is used after incision, for it has been observed that these cause bleeding) and change the poultice until it falls off on its own.
If the case is severe, then apply cold water compresses and leave them on until it falls off, as we have said.
And then treat the plague with other remedies for internal ailments until it is healed.
**Capitol LXVI.**
Of herniated wind.
In this hernia, nothing has been seen that indicates it has been treated with fire.
And the first ones said that it is done thus as we have recomposed in the hernia which is by sight; which is that you lie the vessels close to the section over that part of him with ease; and then dry around the middle place with something that works, so that the vessels fall.
And cure the plague as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LXVII.
On the dislocation that is done in the joints.
Sometimes, tears occur in the angles as we have said, and they expose the area.
And do not mention any cause of hernias to the patient; and if they do, it is rare; and return to it at all times.
If the time is prolonged, a suitable opening should be made in the wall within before the hernia descends into the wall; this happens due to the enlargement of the wall, which we have mentioned, causing it to become stretched, and then hardened, and the area becomes inflamed.
And the treatment for it is with cautery, as we have previously described.
And sometimes, it is cured by cutting, so that the patient lies on their back between two cushions, and then the area of the rupture is dried with a section according to the extent, in three parts.
And then tighten the white strap that is below the spine until it is completely exposed.
Then take the needle and place it over the most prominent part of the spine, and press it against the abdomen.
Then locate the two prominent points on the end of the spine needle, and adjust the suture from one to the other.
Then extract the end of the needle, without inserting it into the spine or extending the wound, or any other cause as you should be aware in the treatment of intestinal hernias.
Then apply the treatment for the plague, and when you cut away the pus, clean it and restore the plague until it is consolidated; for the spine is contracted and the prominent point of rupture is not adjusted.
And cauterization is better in this place, for it is closer to health.
**Capitol .lxviii.**
On the softening of the cord of the testes.
In some men, the cord of the testes becomes softened due to the softening of the tissues surrounding it, and this is a matter that requires careful attention.
Therefore, it is necessary for the one in charge of the treatment of this condition to position the patient according to their side, and uncover all the softened cord, extending it beyond its natural position; and then form two lips over the suture.
And if desired, at the beginning, you can remove the excess of the softened cord with three or four stitches and a secure suture.
Then cut between the sutures; and carefully care for other ailments within, ensuring their healing and the falling out of the filth.
Chapter .lxix.
About castration.
You know that castration is forbidden in our law, but for the sake of remembrance, I will discuss it in this book; and the remembrance of it is necessary only through two means: one, so that when a doctor is asked about it, he knows the treatment for those who suffer from it; and the other way is that we ourselves may sometimes have need to castrate other animals for our young, as with horses, dogs, pigs, and similar beasts.
And therefore it is said that castration is performed in two ways: either by constriction or by making an incision to cut through.
In the case where it is performed by constriction, the method of surgery consists in cutting off the animal while it is still alive, so that the genitals remain soft and flexible, and they hang down. And then apply those bandages with your hand so that they are secure and do not appear loose.
In castration, the incision is made through a split and sectioning, ensuring that you hold the animal firmly and use your left hand to press on the cord of the testicles.
Then attach the suspensory, and incise on either side of each hoop with a sectioning cut until two hoops have processed.
And then incise those pus that you have extracted from each excoriated area. And do not leave any of those from the neck any cause, but rather the subtle phlegm that is over the vessels.
And this method of castration is better than the one performed by cutting, as the strong binding leaves no cause for the testicles of the animal to swell and desire copulation.
And then apply the cure until it is healed.
**Chapter LXX**
**On the Cure for Hermaphroditism**
Hermaphroditism in men exists in two manners: one where there is an abnormality or appearance of tissue in the scrotal region that resembles female genitalia, featuring ovaries and uteruses; and another where there are characteristics of both male and female sexual organs coexisting within a single individual.
And in some cases, this condition causes urination issues located in the scrotal area where the testes are situated.
In women, there is a specific condition: the female clitoris resembles two male testes, although slightly smaller, located just inside the vagina, similarly to a man's penis with two testes.
And the cure is of three kinds: from two men and from one kind of women. For it is necessary that you understand those tight meats within which the discharge of that impurity escapes, and then cure them with the treatment of other plagues.
And in the second species of men from whom urine is discharged in the scrotum, there is neither cure nor operation for them.
Chapter .XXI.
Of the springtime and flesh prominent due to causes of women.
The prominent vein is tightly adjusted due to natural causes, as it is stressed, and it should be examined carefully; sometimes it becomes enlarged in some women just as it does in men, and even during intercourse.
Then take a quantity of lard in your hand or with a knife and insert it.
And do not finish with incisions, especially at the joints, so as to prevent bleeding.
Then take care of that as part of the cure for the plague until it is healed.
May be a new growth is the flesh that does not have the horror of the mother, filling it from within, and strongly leans towards the exterior according to appearance like a feather (and for this some call it "tailed ill health"); therefore, it is necessary to insert into it as we insert lard, and care for it until it is healed.
Chapter LXXII
On the cure for arthritis.
It is important that the woman's vulva be neither perforated nor overly stretched. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental refers to illness that precedes it, and it is caused either by improper diet or subtle and deep-seated impurities.
It is manifested in the lower back, or in the sides, or above the anus, and it prohibits movement and procreation and childbirth, and strongly suppresses menstruation.
The recognition of this condition is achieved through careful examination of the patient, if the swelling is apparent, then it is treated; however, if it is not apparent, you should seek its presence in the patient's urine or breath.
If the oppression is due to a subtle infection, especially affecting both lips, then cut and rupture it.
And it is that it presses on both soft lips, and then you should press your fingers on both the most sensitive points.
And the woman should be on her back, her legs extended, and then stretch both lips with force until that subtle infection is ruptured and the oppression is opened.
Then take wool and wrap it in oil and place it on the area, and keep applying heat to that place every day so that the incision does not harden.
If the infection is thick and dense, then cover that with a broad spatula or a leaf of mint.
If the operation is for flesh, then suspend it from a hook and cut it.
And these are the medicines that stop the flow of blood from wounds, as well as pain and dragon's blood, and bandages, adjusted to the patient's skin.
And then administer a wide lead needle so that the infection does not solidify prematurely.
Hold it for several days and administer water from the spring.
And it is healed with the other cure of consolidation until it is completely cured.
Sometimes accidents occur in the natural birth of other flesh, and then you must cut according to this manner. If it is so for a cramp in the leg, the cramp in the leg which is in the greatest severity should not be caused by any manner of strain.
**Capitol .lxxiii.**
On the treatment of hemorrhoids, tail, and red boils that occur in the vagina of women.
Hemorrhoids are appreciated as the dilatation of veins within, rather than those that burst and cause a continuous flowing of blood; when hemorrhoids are old and hardened, they become painful.
And you have already mentioned in the classification the species of those [diseases], and the signs of those, and to say thus which receive treatment and which do not receive treatment.
Therefore, it is said that hemorrhoids and boils when they are in the prostrate state of the sick and do not appear in sensation, then in those there is no use of iron [or possibly a type of medicine] for treatment.
Those which are within the anus, over which sensation exists, are those which are cured.
And be careful that you place the woman on a soft bed and then stretch her out with your hands, or use a rough cloth, and cut those at the roots.
Then sprinkle over those parts the flow of sacred medicine from one of the powdered substances, thus as with oak and similar ones.
Then massage their feet for an hour and then immerse them in hot water.
And if the flow of the medicine persists, then make a decoction from adding and mixing many grains and similar things.
Then take flour of wheat and mix it with honey and wine, and make a paste from this over the patient's back.
And if the stone is detached, it is good; otherwise, adhere two suction cups and make incision on the nipples.
Then take wool and immerse it in a solution of colander juice or nettle juice or guaravier juice with vinegar, and adhere it to the area; then care for the place with ointment until it is healed.
And care for it until it is healed.
Chapter LXXIV.
On the perforation of the eye socket by accident in the head.
Various types of abscesses occur in the body, such as cracks, abscesses, ulcers, blisters, eruptions, fistulas, bleeding hemorrhoids, and swellings, among others. And you have already described these ailments, their types, and the signs of those, and the treatments for them in detail.
And you mentioned in this medical treatise about the cautery for abscesses that occur in the body, which is a common practice when dealing with such infections, and if you wish to know the manner in which this operation is performed.
Then consider that in the early stages of an abscess, the pain is sharp due to inflammation and fever, and sometimes there is swelling. If you observe this sensation without perforation, do not puncture it, but treat it with something that aids its maturation until the sharpness of the symptoms diminishes.
And then place the woman on her side on a couch that has two cushions; she should recline on her back, aligning her feet at the opening below the abdomen, and spread her thighs apart, placing her arms by her sides, and securing her with some bandage accordingly.
Then the midwife should stand at the head of the woman and administer the instrument that opens the wound of the mother, the shape of which will be appropriate for those conditions that require it.
And be mindful when administering this instrument that you hold the edge of the mother's wound of the woman, and whatever part of the instrument enters into the mother should not be more than the edge of the mother's wound and harm the illness. If the instrument is larger than the edge of the mother's wound, be mindful that you should apply poultices over the texture of the mother's wound so that no part of the instrument enters into the mother's wound.
And be careful that you hold the direction of the flow that runs in the instrument of the suture most uppermost, and that the minister holds the instrument and turns the flow until the opening of the main wound is opened.
And when the excitement appears and it is touched with the hand and becomes hot and moist, be careful that you immediately clean the head of it with a large spatula.
And after the discharge is evacuated, be careful that you place in the wound a sponge soaked in warm oil or oil with some astringent, and apply pressure in the section in the vicinity of the main wound.
Then remove the dressing from the wound and place on it a clean cloth soaked in lukewarm water containing calamine.
And it is cured in two days with the application of what suits it until it is healed.
And sometimes the mother and plague are washed with water and honey, and then added to water in which the root of iris or a long tongue of aristology is boiled, and finally the mixture is returned.
If the plague is deeply embedded in the affected area, you will need to be prohibited from treating it with fire, instead following the method we have discussed above.
Chapter LXXV.
To teach midwives how to care for stillbirths, so that the embryos' lives may be saved according to a non-natural figure.
A necessary cause is that the midwife knows the beginning of the natural childbirth through signs of it, and this is when you see the woman pushing at the contractions and desires to smell the air, and she is lifted up because of what is happening above her, and the quickening of the embryo occurs. At this point, you will know that this delivery is according to a natural figure, and it is the coming out of the child on its head, or suspended or hanging from the umbilical cord.
Therefore, when you observe those signs, you will know that the mother's abdomen is contracted so that the embryo can be delivered slightly, and it seeks the second stage, and it is cleansed of those superfluities with a good cleansing.
He who deviates from this practice is not natural or commendable, for when the embryo is situated on its feet and the body of the mother is positioned with her head below her feet and her hands either at her sides or on her chest, or her head and hands above her feet, or her belly pressed against her spine, and she bends sharply over her pelvis, resembling figures that are not to be believed.
For legitimate reasons, the midwife must be wise and subtle in all these matters, and she should guard against errors and disappointments.
And having thus shown all the signs, and since there is an art involved in these things, it signifies that this has been done for a reason and has been based on it.
When the condition is situated on the head by natural excess, and it is intense in women and affects them in a difficult way, and its virtue is already weakened, then do that sear, or what women have, and evaporate the heat of it with fennel seed and humid oils.
Then insert the meter between their dilated orifices, and apply pressure to it with that second instrument, or rather, use your finger within it to drain what is present in it of humidity. And press the woman's belly as the fetus descends.
If it does not descend, then cover the woman with a mixture of bird feather down and fenugreek meal.
Then command them, control the contraction, which should be reversed and make them sneeze in this condition; also close their mouth and nose for an hour, so that the fetus is expelled soon.
And if both sides of the wound are forgotten at the beginning, then you must reduce them with ease, little by little. If you do not follow the procedure, then place the woman on a mattress and lift her legs up, then carefully lay the mattress on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall due to the impact.
And if the wounds are not thoroughly healed and the fetus dies, then cut those open and remove the debris from the fetus or bind the body to the bed with drapes and remove it equitably, as that will be forgotten.
When the fetus moves to its feet, then you must gently push them up, and gradually turn the fetus, and then draw one of them closer, and take a foot of it and stretch those little by little.
When they are situated within the thighs, then command them to expel, and make him vomit in this condition, for it will be forgotten if God wills it.
And if it is not forgotten about what we have recommended, then return the small thing little by little until it reaches that second natural position, for that will be forgotten through the lighter mentioning.
And if it is prohibited to do everything we have recommended, then take a mixture of alum and dissolved gum, and pound it all in the mortar with good percussion, and apply it directly to the hernia of the woman, at the base of her abdomen. And apply that compress in boiled water, as long as it reaches the hips.
And when the discharges from him have stopped being putrefied, then make him inhale mist and submerge him in it. And after the fumigation for an hour, you should stop it on a cushion, then make the patient sneeze and expel the air from their mouth, take away the cushion, and press the lower part of their belly with a light compression, as the effect will soon be forgotten.
The fetus is located longitudinally hanging from one of my hands. Use ingenuity in reducing the woman's hand, but if you cannot do that, then elevate the woman and try to achieve it that way.
And if it is impossible to achieve that, then make the woman lie down, and with forceful contractions, manipulate her body parts until labor begins, and then administer medications that you have at hand and which are effective in relieving pain.
And when childbirth has occurred, then make the woman lie down on her side, and carefully study the reduction of the hand, and guide the fetus back into its natural position, and have the woman sneeze, and command her to press herself until the fetus is expelled.
The expansion of the body's muscles and fascia at two times its normal size indicates the condition. The midwife should have her hand on the fetus and gradually turn it, ensuring this movement is easy.
And when it is fully extended and its tip is in the position we have recommended using oil and mucus, then pause there.
Then you should command the patient to move their legs little by little, and when you have done this, make them lie on their side and command them to bend over slightly, then ask them to change position; and have them sneeze in this condition. Prepare for the exit of the fetus on its side.
When you encounter a hemorrhage from the mother according to this manner, consider it and then insert the second knife with your finger until it is evacuated of humidity.
And if the matter is suspended over the face and neck, then cut into that of the embalic so that it is not retained and suffocates.
Then push the matter to the sides until it stops according to its nature, and order the woman to buy herself some lighter items, and then it will be removed by vomiting, if God wills.
The outcome of twins or many fetuses. You know that twins are born together, and sometimes three or four, which is strange and difficult; but it can also be due to nature, not life.
And among those, when they are multiplied, a second one appears, separated by calculation, distinguishing those that enter the ligament in each person's navel and some cases are forgotten as if it were an act of natural leaning, and sometimes they are located by an unperceptible cause as we have recalled.
And if they are difficult to understand due to their birth and it comes to what we have said about non-natural figures, then treat them as we have recalled.
And if the midwife is subtle and does it in such a way that it becomes easier and more timely, and she is ingenious according to each figure as they have prepared her with the appropriate means for healing.
Remember that it is formed in the womb from embryos and some are aborted.
Sometimes miscarriages occur in one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even more, and it is often necessary to determine if a woman has aborted or if she is completely formed, which is determined by the measurement of the wise sages.
And all this should be in the knowledge of the midwife, how strong she should be towards that young one resembling this, and thus should pay close attention to it.
Chapter LXXVI
On the removal of the fetus that is dead.
When you care for the dead fetus as we have discussed in the section on treatment and it is not expelled externally, and you are compelled to use manual operation, then consider whether the woman is of healthy constitution and not subject to any conditions that could lead to her loss.
Now place the woman on her side with her left side uppermost, and tilt her head downwards while raising her legs.
The midwife should hold both parts or grasp them on the side to prevent the body's matter from spreading during delivery.
Then moisten the mother's mouth with oils and mucus from fennel and fenugreek seeds.
Then the midwife rubs her hand with these oils and mucus, smoothens the mother's skin, and searches for the spot where the baby's claws are embedded.
And the right place is found: then consider if the baby is ready to come out on its head, and keep hold of its claws in the feet, or neck, or mouth, or palate, or leave it with its beard, or in the fork of its bones, or in places near the ribs, or below the hipbones.
If the onset is in the feet of the patient, then it occurs in the toes or in the middle of the spine.
And you should have the index finger of your right hand cover it, and pause the curvature of the body at that place between the fingers of your left hand, and insert your other hand easily and position the index finger in one of those places we mentioned, so as to reach the cause of the pain.
Then you should pause and stay in the position of him with another finger, or the third if necessary, so that it is equally attractive, and not extended according to its rectitude only.
And it is beneficial at every step, so that the presence of him is also removed as it is done in dental procedures for the eradication of him.
And pay attention to what is between them where the extension is softened; and if any part of him is retained, then you should have the midwife apply her words with oil and insert those skillfully and turn around what is retained.
Therefore, if the expulsion of the fetus is delayed, the incisions should be changed to another location where the pus has formed; and do this until the entire fetus is expelled.
If the hand is obstructed and cannot be reduced due to its position, then a cloth should be wrapped around it; and extract it until everything is expelled, cutting it either at the wrist or the elbow.
And the same should be done for the other hand and both feet.
If the head of the fetus is large, or there is compression in its presentation, or it is in a position where water cannot flow out, then insert between the sharp edges and cut off the head, or use an instrument called an "alundat," which resembles the shape of other instruments described in the relevant chapter.
And seemingly, the making of this is of great difficulty by nature: and now you will see that it cuts into that limb bound with a splint, or takes up that swelling as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
If the head is fixed and constricted, then the saw must be cut through the moisture that is in the foot.
If it is not complicated and does not contradict the sight, then you should cut off the head as soon as possible.
And if the hernia from the abdomen is inflamed or contains water, then you must pierce through that space where the moisture in it flows.
If the problem is on their feet, then the attraction of it should be light and the direction towards the opening of the hernia should also be gentle.
If the abdomen and foot are squeezed, you must extract that thick cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and open the abdomen and foot until everything inside is removed.
If the other limbs are held still and the head is turned, then the left hand should be inserted; if the mother's womb is closed, then insert the hand into the opening of the vagina, seek for the baby's head, and pull it towards you, then insert one finger, or two, and deliver the child.
And if the mother's mouth is closed due to an apoplexy that occurs in the womb, then be careful not to cause further harm; instead, administer effusion of greasy humid causes. And apply bandages; also, keep the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
And if the problem is on their side, try to use a knife: and administer what we have said regarding the living body.
And if that is not possible, then make an incision in the leg and extract it.
And be sure not to leave any cause within the second incision.
And when you have completed all your operations, administer what we have said about the treatment of the wounds that may occur from the procedure.
And if bleeding occurs, stop it with strict waters and administer the other treatment.
And you have already seen a woman whose womb was filled with dead children, and then another time, over that fire, she became pregnant again, and the other child was born dead. It has happened that after a long time an abscess forms in their wound; then it opens as if fire breaks out, and they begin to shiver with cold.
And you have been called upon to treat it, and medicated for a long time, but the disease is not cured.
Then consider the causes from various perspectives, applying strong treatments, and reduce it to a bone; after some days, another bone forms, and then another; and you will be greatly amazed when there is no bone in the belly.
And then you will realize that they were bones from the dead fetus.
Therefore, you should follow the disease, extract many bones from it, and remove the female parts in their proper positions; for a long time now, it has been treated in this manner with a slight improvement.
And do not be afraid that it is strange, for in this there is knowledge and aid to what the doctor with their hand applies for healing.
On the forms of instruments necessary to extract the hernia.
Form of the instrument used to open the hernia:
This is the form of the strangulator in which the limbs are entangled, with two spikes at the two ends of each foot. However, this spike should be made quite subtle compared to the strangulator, and it is made of bone or ebony or hardwood.
And the thickness of each wood should be such that two digits can fit between them, and the margin of both woods should be a single digit, and the length of each should be one palm and a half; in the middle position of the two woods, there are two notches already formed, of which the length is half a palm, and the width of each is two digits, or slightly less.
And these two additions are inserted into the opening of the mother so that it be open to those whom you turn the two prescribed virtues.
Another form, similar to that subtle and light pus:
It is made of wood or bone, according to the appearance of forceps. However, on the extremity of it, there are also two additions, each with a length of about a palm and a width of approximately two digits.
And when you wish to open the mother, you place the woman on her side with her feet hanging, opening what is between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument resembling shears, according to the quantity you wish, from the opening of the mother until the meter indicates what you desire.
The way of vertigo that the ancients spoke of:
The method of pushing that which is pushed:
The method of healing as it contains the great cure:
And it is made like tongs with teeth at the end, also when you use them, and sometimes they are long, according to this form, also when you use them, which have teeth similar to a saw with which it cuts and contains. The method of healing little by little:
The method of digging without a spike:
The method of digging with two spikes:
A tool with two ends, where the head is separated:
A form of two spatulas wide:
All those instruments, when more diverse are the species of them and better prepared the artisans, are easier to use and more effective for their purpose among people due to their quantity.
And do not neglect those instruments that are already available to you, for the need for others is not an excuse.
From the extraction of the second (object or part):
When the second stage of labor is underway, you must command the patient to hold their breath and make them sneeze in that position, then place your hand over their mouth and nose, if they exhale, so be it.
And if that happens, take a hot compress and make a hole in the cover, then place it over the mouth of the mother, thus using warm and harsh herbs such as calament, rue, anet, and camomille, as well as aromatic ones like scicados (possibly *Syzigium aromaticum*), cassia lignosa, and stachys. All these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the hot compress, and then that one should be placed over the fire.
Then place a canvas tube in the mother's mouth, and keep it there until the steam enters the mother's cavity.
And then perform that sneezing as we have said, and the second one is expelled quickly.
If this treatment does not work and is not efficacious, then you command the matron to immerse her left hand in warm oil or an infusion of althae, and then insert that into the vagina and gently massage it, seeking the second one. Once found, grab it and slowly extract it, according to what we have recommended, so that the mother does not experience too much attraction. Now, it should be changed on the right and left sides with ease.
And if the mother's mouth is constricted, we have already recommended treatment with sneezing and medication with various herbs.
If all the causes we have mentioned are not forgotten, be careful not to perform any operation on that part of the body in a state of abstraction, but note that what comes out from him into the mother's mouth lies in the woman's matter, and then anoint it with a mixture of herbs and tetracyclone; for this will rot it within a few days and dissolve it and drive it away.
When you notice, it is a high fever that affects the head and stomach, and this causes the illness; therefore, consider administering fumes and remedies suitable for this.
Some of the ancients already used fumes from natritor (a type of herb) and dried figs.
The form of the instrument used to fumigate women for the retention of menstruation and afterbirth:
It is necessary to make a cut or an incision.
And the fine end of the instrument should be in the cavity and the wide end over the fire, and the smoking should be controlled over the branches of the fire.
And hold that over which the smoke should be consumed, and repeat another.
On the treatment of the unperforated anus of a child.
Many children have this problem, and their anuses are not perforated, but rather small and swollen. Then instruct the midwife to make a small incision as she has said, and if not, perforate it with a sharp instrument, taking care not to touch the laceration.
And then apply pressure to that cloth soaked in vinegar and oil; and carefully treat that affected area until it is healed.
If there is a risk of obstruction, insert a catheter into the tract for several days, and stop it when the child's healing process is complete.
And it also happens that there is an obstruction in the rectum due to a fistula or abscess; then, once that consolidation is incised, apply the cure as we have said regarding healing and lead.
Regarding the cure for fistulas that have been left behind.
Fistulas that have formed in the area around the anus, which discharge pus and are swollen, either protruding outside or within the space of the opening.
And it is a fistula or an abscess.
And when that swelling is old and filled with moist white pus or subtle corruption, sometimes these fistulas penetrate from it.
And those that penetrate are guided by the liquid that is expressed from them for exit and expulsion; and sometimes the patient suffers from the difficulty of exit, and very strongly, the liquid is expressed from those verm.
And from those fistulas, some are found in the space that penetrates into the bladder, and into the flesh of the penis; and some penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the notch of the knee.
And for the case where the fistula penetrates into the anus and does not exit, you should insert a finger tightly into the anus, and attempt with subtle effort to erase or pierce the fistula when it is not in a state of tightness.
If there is stiffness in that place, insert a delicate probe of lead or horsehair until you feel the tension or hair in its proper location.
And if you do not feel any tension at all and do not detect any cause for evacuation, such as a worm or flatulence, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and you should proceed with caution in treatment.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then the meaning of it is the emission of urine from that place and the prohibition of its return until that location is healed by medicine.
If it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the surrounding area, then its sign is that tension has entered here if there is no stiffness within the bone, and pain in the circulation; and it will always cause aching; and it does not respond to any treatment, nor is it healed by ointments.
And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is no complete cure, and the cure for those is the work and diligence of skilled doctors over which they persevere.
But for those that are neither penetrating nor chronic, healing with iron is hoped for as per what I have told you, and what you have already tried.
And indeed, the disease moves between your legs over its sides and raises the patient's legs within, the parts lean towards the patient's belly, and then it attempts to penetrate with lead, or iron if it is in a twisted fistula, into the place where you know the attempt succeeds.
And if that feels like the disease is around the heart, then you must insert the pointed knife directly into the heart.
And if you feel in the pointed place the attempt already made, so that it has discovered how to penetrate, or if you feel something between the pointed place and that tissue or flesh, then you certainly know that it is penetrating; and therefore do not work on that, for there is no healing in that, as we have said.
Yet some say that it heals certain men's tartar.
And regarding the treatment by which one hopes for healing in these cases, you apply subtle cauterization according to the size of the fistula, as previously mentioned, and insert that burning instrument into the fistula until it reaches around the core; then repeat this process two or three times until you know that all the flesh surrounding the fistula, which is adjusted and resembles a quill of downy feathers, has healed.
And then, for those with wrapped up wounds, you should tend to them until all the flesh that is adjusted and compacted heals, and apply medicine that stimulates and strengthens the healing of the flesh; if it heals well, it is good; but if not, in no time will it heal through any other treatment.
And if the attempt enters and does not penetrate into the deep tissue—the quality of which is either flesh or bone—and between that and the attempt, there is a space like a wound on the surface of the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you should dry the attempt as well; then, when the drying of the fistula reaches the place where the end of the attempt penetrates, the attempt is removed and healed.
And then clean those fistulated meats that are assembled like a quill canal of use and not ruptured by any cause.
If a flow of pus appears between you and your operation when you inspect those meats, then the best course of action is to use a sharp instrument heated by fire or acute medicine; cauterization with fire adjusts the two habits well: it adapts those adherent meats and removes the pus by drying the humidity.
And then attend to those wrapped in bandages or tied up within that location, and take care of the infection with hot wax applied to hard, infected flesh, generating and solidifying a cure.
And such medicines which include binding and cutting; when you have restored it, it is healed and you need not fear recurrence.
But if the fistula has already reached the anus and is extended from the surface of the body, then insert a finger into the anus and inquire about that.
And therefore, if you feel a sudden attempt and there is a significant difference between you and it, or it is inclined towards penetration, then at that moment, it is not an operation on it but rather a matter of trust and hope.
The treatment for this condition can be administered in three ways: either by cauterization as we have mentioned; or by drying out the affected area so that you can access it and offer the appropriate cure; and do not use excessive cutting, since it may damage the membrane containing the pus, and it is important to respect the patient's will; and take care of this as we have said, because it will be a strong treatment; or by elongating the membrane and draining the pus that has formed in the affected area, as we have mentioned before, either by probing or another instrument of extreme sharpness, and then clean those fistulated meats that are created during the section, where you can use cauterization; and make every effort to restore the whole wound through sectioning, and if the orifice filled with pus does not heal, open up the fistula in the anus and let it drain more easily for the patient. And some times the fistula is closed in this manner: when you insert the thread into the fistula, it is done on the side of the anus around the surface of the body with a string and at the margin of the anus, take the pointed end to perforate, which is thus prepared as a needle according to this form:
and insert into that wound wrapped in cloth or around those; and then insert the thread into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
If it penetrates near the margin of the anus very deeply, then you extract the thread from that trap by inserting the tip into the anus; and extract the end of the thread and align both ends, and tighten each one, and leave it for a day or two, and when you insert the thread into the flesh again, insert it until those meats are inserted between the two ends of the thread and they fit.
And then apply treatment until the wound is healed and consolidated.
If the opening of the fistula is not deep, then make it penetrate in some way as you are prepared, either with force or gently, because it is not for you to cause injury; and then treat it until it is healed.
The shape of the spatula with which the fistula is incised: its curvature is sharp on one side and blunt on the other, so as not to cause unnecessary injury when you cut.
On the stitching of hemorrhoids where pus runs from the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids occur in two ways: either they are between the anus and resemble stones, or those are swollen with the pus of maggots. And they are small and large, and the heat flows from them at that time in one way, and they cause many problems, and they appear on the outside, and at the ends of the body.
However, those that are outwardly on the buttocks are usually due to a lack of moisture in the past few days, from which citrus water or a small amount of sweet heat flows continuously, and they are according to the color of the body.
And the treatment for that which is inside the buttocks is that you command the patient to lie down and press until the heat goes away and the bruises appear to your satisfaction. Then you hold yourself steady with pins or whatever you have at hand, and cut open those parts according to their depth.
If the cuts are not held in those parts by their moisture and softening, then take a rough cloth or a strip of linen, pull out those with your fingers, and incise them, and sprinkle some powder over them after the incision, so that they adhere to those places instead of cauterization; or cauterize them as mentioned previously in the chapter on cauterization. And then attend to those and other remedies until they are healed.
If the hernia does not yield to expulsion, then you should treat the disease with a small incision, wash it with water that is in the abdominal cavity and which hinders the expulsion of the hernia more lightly when the hernia is squeezed.
However, if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, their cause is lighter, and it is because you take those with your finger, or those with a balm, and cut them, and then attend to them as we have said until they are healed.
For those who perform the incision, note how to apply stitches to them according to this method: take a thread wrapped around [a certain object], pierce it through with a needle, and extract the hemorrhoids from their attachment above, and make the needle penetrate into the root of the other part; then wrap both ends of the thread on the side away from the needle, and stretch the hemorrhoid tightly with a strong pull, and tie off the thread, and remove the needle.
And do this continuously, leaving them untouched, so that the excess of blood flows from that part.
Then place a warm compress on the affected area, coated in olive oil or wax; and press it upon the wound, commanding the patient to rest. Then remove that compress and, when the wound is healed, treat it with ointment or other remedies until it is completely cured.
And when they are old and no longer respond to those medicines, you will need to scrape away the dried matter using a point of sponge or your finger, ensuring that the wet discharge from them is removed, which prevents the formation of crusts; and then treat them until they are consolidated.
Now hold those at a distance with a sharp reason, as the first enters that which causes pain and becomes inflamed; then take care of those inside so they heal.
You know that hernia is crucial, and it appears as a bulge in the body resembling a bone knob, present throughout the body but mostly in the joints of the legs and feet, and due to these pains, you should address it.
And then, you should incise what is in the area around the hernia, using scissors or a hook, and remove it from its place, and then tend to it.
And if you wish, cauterize it as mentioned previously in your chapter.
A wart is a small, rough, round ulcer raised above the surface of the skin, and spots are often seen on children's bodies.
And the treatment for it is that you extend and incise it, or open it with a sharp object inside that cavity. And if you wish, cauterize it with fire or sharp medical instruments.
A mosquito is a small, round, or grooved eminence on the skin's surface that itches like a bite from a mosquito and occurs anywhere on the body.
And the treatment for it is to take a sharp needle from an eagle's feather or a viper's tail, make it strong, and prick it onto the mosquito within its circle, holding it with the pressure of the needle; then turn your hand over the needle as you incise what is in the path of the mosquito, and press it into the flesh where the mosquito originated, eradicating the mosquito from its root.
And if you wish, make this as a tube of iron or bronze in this form:
The beginning of the tube should be delicate, soft (not perforated), wrapped around itself so that the appearance of it is smooth and its revolution is controlled.
And if you wish to cauterize the wound as mentioned above in the cauterization of a vein in the chapter on cautery.
In the form of instruments that are administered to give heat.
Sometimes heat is applied using silver or iron or bronze that has been melted or shaped; and sometimes it is done with small or large instruments depending on those to which it is administered, for the heat used in treating small children should be small, and for those whose bodies are stiff or painful, the heat should be gentle.
The form of a great and rare crystal.
The top of the tube of the hernia, in which the sac is attached, should be wide according to this manner; and it is distinguished where the sac is attached as well with several times.
And the end of it is placed below, which is inserted into the anus, should be smooth (not covered) with leathery substance; and on one side of its length there are two openings, and on the other side one opening, and the size of the opening should be according to the thickness of the rays and more broad a little.
And the sac in which the medicinal substances from the bladder of an animal or sheep's wool are placed, its size should be a palm.
And it should be pierced through many openings as it is twisted; and the space between the openings should be as thick as said.
And then insert a strong, sharp instrument into those channels made of hard bone, or around them; adjust the bag to it; when the bag is paused on it, tighten it firmly between two distinct points at great cost, and cauterize each channel: The quality of cauterizing those is that you fill the bag with medicine, heated according to the amount of the patient's tolerance, and be careful not to make it too strong or too thin.
Then place the patient on their stomach, elevating their legs and placing a pad beneath them, upon which already lie men or a lance; apply the tip of the cautery to oil or egg albumen or a paste of fenugreek or similar; insert it into the anus with ease, and have the assistant take the bag and squeeze it twice as forcefully as possible so that everything in the rectum is evacuated; then remove the cautery and the patient raises their legs to the wall.
And if the medicine forces it to be emptied, give as much as you can; and if you sleep with that for the entire night, it is more beneficial for healing.
If you excise the growths in the solutions of the belly and the protrusion, then you apply the cautery until it heals.
And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus that burn and hurt, then use a subtle and gentle cautery, of which the childrens' doctors are experts.
**On the Cure for Plagues**
You have already mentioned in the discussion of curing plagues what suits a healthy body, and you gave the cure for those with great pain and according to the availability of medicines.
Therefore, it is said that plagues are diverse according to what causes them and according to the place where the plague strikes.
And the causes for which you become ill are due to plagues in this way with the weight of stone, or incision of space or of metal, or percussion with lance, or with club, or with arrow, or similar to those causes that bring about sudden illness.
The plagues that are in the parts of the body may also be like a plague that attacks the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the stomach, or the chest, and similar to those members.
And it is often recommended for the treatment of certain plagues that it halts that reasoning and regulates the others.
And one should begin with the simple plagues of the head, since the recollection of the composite ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, it says that when a simple plague occurs in the head and it is not a fracture, consider: if it is due to the weight of stone or something similar, and you have already bitten off part of the teeth and it is a great plague, and you fear the patient will die from apoplexy, then immediately perform a craniotomy and extract the substance of the brain according to the quantity of the strength of it if there is no other cause preventing craniotomy, especially if the brain that has been affected by the plague is small.
And this is the first sentence translated: It is the flap operation contrary to the affected part; and attention must be paid to the patient's diet, and to avoid heavy foods.
If there is any cause for concern about smallness (of the body or a part), then reduce intake of food and do not consume meat nor wine.
And regarding the infection, if it becomes gangrene, apply cauterization with hot oil or wine in which it is steeped.
If it is certain that the cauterization is for gangrene, then focus on the infection; if it is recent, apply a poultice and ensure the air remains unchanged, keeping the recommended powder nearby.
And if the air has already changed that (unspecified condition), then focus on other remedies until it is healed.
If the plague is severe or due to lack of space and similarity, and the lips of the wound are not properly aligned for healing, adjust them with stitches as I have previously described in the suture of their wounds.
If the plague has already exposed bone and pen, and it is not an enclosed ulcer but a small suspended one, then incise it and promptly treat the ulcer with medicines and restore the flesh appropriately in the area of the wound, and order the patient to abstain from food that is coarse: caps, forms, and similar items, until it heals.
And if you find putrefaction in the ulcer that does not adhere to the bone, then incise and remove all of it, and properly treat it.
If in these plagues it is an artery or vein from which pus flows and it is not severed by medicine, then you should inquire about the artery, and if you find one that is not incised, you should incise it with a knife, or tie it off; and if it becomes necessary to do anything contrary to what has been said above, then you should cauterize it until the pus is drained.
And if these plagues are simple and small, their cause is slight; so that you sprinkle over them this powder, for it hardens in front of the air changing.
The method of the powder is as follows: take equal parts of olive oil and dragon's blood, and three parts of an untanned animal cauldron; mix all together finely and grind it, and fill the plague with it, and confine it tightly so that it adheres well to the affected area, and coagulate it with the blood.
Then tightly bind it with poultices and leave it, and do not unbind it while it is in this condition so that the medicine does not escape until it is healed.
Sometimes it is made only with this (powder) without the presence of olive oil and dragon's blood.
And now performs this surgical procedure on large abscesses when it is necessary to drain them and tighten their openings, and the abscesses are recent with clear pus, which the air has not altered.
If the air has altered them, especially during summer, one cannot understand the position of this powder, so follow the treatment we have mentioned: place your hands over the affected areas with a paste made from chickpea flour and honey until they heal.
If the abscess ruptures in a bone, and it is small, then extract it with your fingers.
And also describe the treatment for fractures of the skull, which are dangerous.
Of the abdominal abscesses.
If the plague occurs in the colon, there is no difference in treatment, nor between the plague of the head when it is simple.
If the nerves of the colon are cut or an artery is affected, then it is not a matter of skill but rather preventing treatment from causing intense spasms, so as to avoid substances like vitriol and similar ones that irritate the nerves and contract them. And do not consider any cause of all this tension, for the substance of the nerves is tense and its continuity is towards the brain, which is the source of all the body's members.
And if it is treated with lighter medicines, as when it is washed with warm water, sometimes with oil or without, and then dried with a cloth, and other means are applied afterward according to this method, and moisture is added.
If the wound is deep, then apply a stitch, or close the edges with bandages, and treat it with powders until it heals.
If the wound is deep or develops pus, making it prone to infection, then perforate it in the most sensitive area.
If the wound has already perforated an artery and blood flow results, then either separate, dry, tie, or cauterize it if that is what is required to stop the bleeding.
If the spine of the neck or all of it has been severed, but the veins in the neck are saved, then you should close the edges of the wound with stitches above the jawline and do not touch that area; first equalize the wound and return it to its natural shape, then tighten it with moderate pressure, leave it for several days, and care for it with ointments where there is stiffness and inflammation until it heals.
If the disease has already taken hold within the bone, then pierce it, and if there are pieces of bone within it, extract as many as you can; leave what is not suitable for treatment inside until the infection clears and the swelling subsides.
And if the disease is recent, then sprinkle over it the powder which has been recommended to you. If the disease has caused a fistula, then treat it with water from the source of which the memory will return appropriately in its chapter.
If it is a stab or cut wound and the depth of it can be seen, then consider more carefully if the disease has caused any swelling when the injury was inflicted; know that the disease may be fatal.
And if there is no depth in it and the illness is recent, then you should apply powder to it from the first hour, but do not squeeze it so that the pain is not retained in its depth and does not return to the body and aggravate the disease, but rather apply a healing ointment and rub it twice a day.
And if you do not have a suitable ointment, then apply clean, dry cloth to the affected area to draw out what it takes from moisture; and make the patient rest on the affected part so that whatever is in it flows properly.
If after three days the pain has subsided and the patient does not experience spasms or tremors of the heart, or constriction of the vessels, and other good signs appear, then you know that the illness is on the road to recovery; and then treat it with heat and cold as necessary until it is completely healed.
If the healing of the hernia is prolonged, and it remains open for a long time, then you will know that a fistula has formed; treat it accordingly.
And if the infection is due to a wound or cut, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it as mentioned above: with surgery if it is large, or with poultice if it is small.
If the infection has already taken hold in the bone, and you have already incised the skin, then press the infection and extract the foreign bodies if they are separated. If they are not separated, then leave them inside as the infection may spread, and their extraction is hindered.
And for other infections that occur in the other members, the initial treatment is the same as what we have mentioned.
Of the plagues of the belly.
The disposition that occurs in the belly is either great, or slight, or intermediate.
And minor disruption is challenging to resolve in another way, and it should be noted that the reduction of them is more difficult if one does not quickly intervene by inserting them back into their place, as they open up and become swollen, making it difficult to maneuver them.
Therefore, the intermediate disruption is best, as it involves neither great difficulty in reducing the hernia, nor is it challenging in both types mentioned above.
And you should know that the suture of the abdomen is done in four ways, but two sutures are common and suitable for the sutures of other diseases of the body.
And the other two sutures, though they communicate with other diseases, are more appropriate for the suture of the abdomen.
And I recommend to each of you exposition and declaration.
Therefore, it says that when the disease is small and there is no cause in the intestine for it, and it is difficult to return it, then this is in one of two ways: either because of the narrowness of the rupture as we have said, or when the intestine has become inflated due to the coldness of the air.
And therefore, when it is thus, you must wrap it as if you were immersing a sponge or cloth in warm water, or take water with vinegar, and spices, and pack it around the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
And in some cases, it has been observed that vinegar is more effective than water alone in resolving inflammation.
And once you have resolved the inflammation, you should moisten the hernia with water in which alder and marshmallow roots are steeped, for this helps to relieve its pressure due to a slight cause.
However, if the hernia's protrusion is severe, then using this treatment alone may not be sufficient. In such cases, you should cut open the rupture with a small instrument used to incise hemorrhoids.
And the initial treatment is better when it does not involve cutting, and there should be no concern about drying it out excessively or depriving it of nutrition.
Regarding the instrument, pay attention to its shape:
In one part of the acute pain, and in another part not acute, and the fine extremity, and let not the fineness of the sputum be overlooked, at first it is somewhat obtuse.
And therefore, when the hernia is enlarged and it has protruded, you must cover that its reduction is according to its natural form in its proper place, if possible, as it is better.
If the rupture is extensive, and it occurs in the lower part of the belly, then you must make the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; but if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you must elevate the head and feet higher than the affected parts.
And similarly, if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the belly, then you must always direct your intention and consideration towards making the affected part higher than the other.
And thus you must administer this in both great diseases and lesser ailments.
And in smaller ailments, apply what you have prepared, and then make the medicine flow between your fingers, holding it with your hand and adjusting its lips, and gradually uncover from one point to another, seeking any cause for the rupture, other than the suture.
And this is the common suture method: take the needle, or count one needle according to the amount of the wound's amplitude; then lay it on the edge of the rupture at the little finger, and tighten the needle once; avoid putting any pressure on both ends of the thread, only on the two ends of the knot that remain inside, as long as you make the needle penetrate from the other side of the knot; and once you have added both ends of the thread and both ends of the knot, you have made four orders.
And then tightly twist the thread double around the needle, sometimes from two sides at once, and add both lips and the wound for a proper addition; and leave the thickness of the thread and attach another needle to it, as if it were the first one; and do not stop doing this with the needles until you've filled all the contraction of the wound.
And the needles should be of varying thicknesses between coarse and fine, for the fine needles slice through the flesh more gently; and the thick ones are difficult to insert into the skin, therefore it is necessary that they be both middle in size and delicate.
And it should be noted that the needle should be placed in both ends of the hernia gently, so that the flesh is not cut too deeply and the hernia opens up before its healing is complete.
And the sutures should not be too long, so that the hernia is not blocked from healing.
And then carefully insert the ends of the needles so that they do not puncture the patient during their sleep; place pulvils on the sutures, spread out from all sides, which have the ends of the needles; and leave them there until you know that the illness is healed.
And these types of suture have needles in a way that is most convenient for small wounds, where one needle or two or around those are sufficient in the suture.
However, the second suture is initial: and it is that you administer a suture to all four extremities, from the tailbone and two extremities of the thigh, at once, with an needle in which both thread is tightly wrapped, in fineness and thickness.
And then, when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, return the needle to its original path from which you began, so that the thread retracts and pulls the wound closed, making the suture like a second drape with which the drapes are tightly drawn together.
And between each stitch, hold the amount of the thicker end of the thread.
And this stitch prevents men from bleeding.
And with this stitch, I have closed the wound that had occurred in a man's abdomen, which was caused by a knife, and it was a rupture of a major infection about the size of a palm, and it was located around the intestines near the middle of the abdominal opening, and it was a rupture in the middle of the leg; and then I reduced the swelling that had been around the wound for 24 hours.
And the wound healed in about 15 days or so, and he was cured, and I visited him for many years, and it was discussed in his condition.
And other doctors had judged that he would not be cured; but by a miracle, for you did not cure him with ointment, for it was in a place where ointment and any medicine could not reach, yet you applied the treatment to the wound twice a day and repeatedly washed it with honey water until it healed.
There are two kinds of suture according to the account of the word.
And so you begin to suture from the back, and insert the needle from outside towards inside.
And so, when the needle penetrates the skin and reaches the underlying tissues according to the rule and length of the body, leave the tip of the instrument in which you have inserted the needle; and make the other end of the needle penetrate from inside to outside at the other end of the wound.
And when you have made the first penetration, make another penetration from that same side of the wound towards the inside; leave the tip of the instrument in this place, and make the needle penetrate from the other end of the wound towards the outside.
And make it penetrate with that penetration by which you cause penetration into the body at the end of the eye, which is in the opening of the body so that all of that penetrates.
Then commence with these treatments on the side and with that extremity which is of the body in the other direction, remove the needle from the thread by which it penetrates, and return it to that thread and to the extremity of the body which is on this side of that extreme of the eye; and remove from the thread that is part of it.
Do this once and then another time, and do it again close to the first time that you have done it according to this example.
The sum of this manner of stitching is that you stitch with a skin suture by which you sew the flesh, in such a way that you stitch the body once from the part of the extremity of the needle, and then you repeat it again until the wound is complete.
But the second species of suture, which is especially called Guilda, and this is of speech concerning it and by it recommended, is that you sew according to the second half-way through which some doctors sew it, thus adding all parts to its natural part appropriate to it; and apply one end of it to another end of it, and the other end of the gaze to the other extreme of it, and this is done as you have learned.
Take the needle in the end of the gaze towards your own part outside, and make it penetrate into the part inside at that sole, and leave both ends of the cloth; then turn back the needle and make it penetrate from inside to out through both ends of the cloth.
Then turn back those threads, and make some of the parts inside penetrate into the outside part in two ends of the gaze other than those on the opposite side.
And in this manner of stitching, it is better than common light stitching, it is the kind of stitching of which one has previously had recollection.
This is the speech of Gaul.
And some might say that the stitching of the belly is done with two needles, so you must insert a thread into each, and begin to introduce the needle from this one, penetrating it into the other side according to the stitching of those which join the flesh together.
And you should know that when there is disruption in the middle part of the belly, the stitching of it is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
The play of medical treatment for plague is judged according to other plagues.
The cause of which is when you realize the recent pain in front of its sore spot that the air has altered it, and reduce the hernia and sew it up and prepare it properly, then place your hand over that fleshly powder.
And if the air has already altered the pain, then place your hand on that alcus (flesh) in front of you so that it causes hard pressure and extracts the filths, and becomes solidified and healed; and treat it thus as with other pains until it is cured.
If you do not have any medicines at hand, then apply pressure on it immediately, as it begins to feel hot, and bind it with a cloth, changing the dressing twice a day, just as your teacher has shown, until it is healed, for you should not need other types of medicine due to your careful disposition when dealing with simple ailments.
But if you are afraid that the pain might spread to other main parts of the body, then cover it with a piece of cloth dipped in pure oil or fragrant oil and place it on the areas lying between the folds and leave it there.
And if pain or putrefaction is felt in their bowels, as these symptoms are observed, it is necessary to apply a warm black stinging vesicant, especially if the inflammation has spread to the intestine and a discharge is seen penetrating into its cavity.
And know that the one affecting the large intestine has a lighter healing process than that affecting the subtle bowels.
And it is difficult to heal because the intestine called "jejunum" does not receive healing from any plague that occurs in it; and this is due to the great number of veins present in it, and the magnitude of these, and the subtlety of the body of that part, and its nearness to the nature of nerves.
If what you process from the plague is the tissue, and you manage to stop it recently, reduce them according to your method, so that the intestines are generally reduced.
If the wound has been left open and turned red or black, then tighten that thread over the affected area to promote blood flow, for within the fabric are veins and arteries.
Then cut through what is another of those ligaments, and secure both ends of the thread during the removal of the hernia's sac, so that by doing so you can relieve the attraction of it and the emission of the hernia's arm.
Reminder of the hernias that occur in the intestine.
When there is a rupture in the intestine and it is small, it is possible for some individuals to have it restored, for you may find that which was previously plagued in their stomach by the thrust of a lance, and it was an old hernia with a fistula, and they managed its management and ventilation.
Then pursue the treatment of the patient, even if it was not cured by the previous remedies, continue with subtle treatments that ignite healing and the place is consolidated.
And having observed the place now consolidated, pay attention to the illness that has befallen him due to an accident in his belly; do not force anything for this ill-fated accident and do not break his healthy dispositions in eating and drinking, and then immerse yourself in a bath and exercise according to his condition.
And some experienced ones say that when a hernia in the belly is small, it should be treated as follows: take some large needles; then adjust both edges of the hernia and place one needle from those that keep the mouth open on both edges of the hernia; so when they are pricked onto these, tighten your mouth, cut off the head of it, for it sticks and does not dissolve.
And then place another needle near the first, but do not stop doing this until you have used enough needles for all parts of the hernia.
And then return it [the hernia] to its place and heal the inflammation; and cut off those attached parts within the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
And it is possible that the hernia appears as a fine thread taken from the intestines of an animal, thinner than a needle; so take the end of these intestinal threads, desiccation them, and then attach the end of the thread to the hernia with a needle, pass the thread through, and return the hernia to its place.
And this method of stitching with threads is merely a second way of trusting and hoping.
If the hernia is large and wide, especially in one of the subtle intestines, then it is not just a matter of restriction but requires subtle treatment, for it is not entirely healed.
On the treatment of sores and fistulas.
You know that every sore and abscess that forms as a result of aging and becoming antiquated, and it becomes an ulcer that is not solidified and persists for a long time without being incised, is generally called a fistula in any part of the body, and we call that 'zuchem'.
A fistula, in truth, is a hardened, white structure without pain, in which a cavity forms as if from suffering; and because of this, it is called 'alcus' (ulcer), that is, pain.
In ulcers, moisture forms which can cause pain; and the humidity is expelled in some hours. Sometimes this humidity is abundant, sometimes it is scarce, and sometimes it is thick or thin.
You have already shown all those causes, and the signs of those, as well as their cure with medicines in the division.
And thus, it is necessary that you know the cure for a fistula that is caused through surgical means with the hand.
And you should know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; those are fistulas that reach large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the skull, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or any of the ribs, or any of the spinal joints formed by the connection of the hand and foot; and those give rise to proximity to the main member and similar ones.
And therefore, among these fistulas, those according to this manner are of the most difficult to heal diseases, and do not receive treatment, and occupation with them is work and ignorance.
And if it is one of these fistulas whose depth does not reach these mentioned places, and you hope and trust in its healing, and wish to come to knowledge of it, then take care or a knife, and if the fistula is according to rectitude, examine that place with it.
If the fistula is twisted, then investigate that place with a delicate probe, because the weight of their body lifted and curved must overcome the twist.
And if the fistula has an extremely horrible odor, it is not possible for you to treat it with attempts.
Therefore, sanitize the orifices for their filth, because the moisture by which you cleanse those orifices should also clean others and remove their filth.
And now, examine carefully, according to which way it is possible for you to know if here there are bones or nerves, and whether the concavity of the fistula is distant or nearby, or if it is a fistula with only horrible odor, over which all your strength, all your questioning, by which you question the illness, and the discovery of the pain depend on your compression with your hand over the place, and similar signs of the meanings and accidental causes to the abscess.
And when you have considered all those causes with due care, you will see the cure according to your confidence: and it is that you consider whether it is a fistula nearby or in a clean place, far from joints, or of nerves, or of an artery, or of a vein, or of one of the places which you know and hold dear.
Now, let's translate the given sentence line by line:
If the fistula is of great depth and according to rectetut (prescription), then you must incise it in the pronus (supine) position as much as possible, and then clean it of all corrupted flesh; and then administer some wraps with sharp medicaments, and insert them into the concave part of the fistula, which you have comprehended with your hand.
And do this in such a way that the sharp medicine corrodes everything that is broken in the concave part of the fistula caused by corruption.
Then restore that with fire, which generates healthy flesh until it is healed.
If it is not healed with this, then you should cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
If the cause of the fistula is bone and you must certify this, then examine it and dry it according to what we have recommended; if you do not forbid any cause of vein or nerve or of a major limb, as we have said.
If the bone is exposed and there is some corruption or blackening in it, clean that part completely where the corruption resides; and tend to the flesh around it until it heals.
And if the bone does not heal and pus flows out as it did before, then you know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; so uncover it again and carefully perform the treatment and purification of it with the strongest local application, and thus restore it.
So if it heals, then it is good; but if not, you will know that the corruption is in the deep and distant parts of the body, which could not be reached, and therefore your effort in that place is only to clean it.
And if the corrupted bone is small and it is possible for you to remove it, then use subtle forceps suitable for that.
And if they are many bones, extract them carefully from all of those, and leave none due to your strength.
If any cause of inflammation arises from moisture, and in their examination there is no fear or error, then incise those wounds or flesh if they are here, and loosen the bones.
If you are not prepared to extract the bones from your patient, then place your hand on the plague where the plague is most severe, and leave it there until it becomes more flexible, allowing the section that you have incised in your operation to be closed without restricting it.
Meanwhile, if you are afraid, apply hot oil or Egyptian alum or any of the green ointments to that part, for when these bands relax, the bones will separate more easily, and this attraction will be relieved.
If it is a large bone, such as the thigh or leg bone or similar, and what is corrupted from it is only the surface of it, then at once that pain should be treated only behind that darkness and corruption remain, and then restore the plague.
If what is corrupted from the bone is a great fracture, and the corruption has already reached the medulla of the bone, then it is necessary to close that wound completely by cutting into the area where the corruption has taken place, and then treat it until it is consolidated.
And I recommend to you that you overcome the patient in their thigh to hold that in place and assist with your operation.
Focus on a young man around 30 years old who experiences pain in his thigh, and the swelling originates from within the body, concerning the material inside the body until it reaches the thigh, and it is a matter of abscess or great abscess, not an external cause.
And so the time extends until the infection is severe due to the errors of doctors, as the abscess becomes enlarged, and it will be surrounded by hot, moving materials, and its treatment will be paused until the leg is fistulated, and various horrible wounds are made in it that cause pain and humidity in the body.
And so many different treatments from doctors surround the patient for about two years, and they focus not on the cause but on the symptoms, until they are called upon.
And he observed the leg and the materials that were flowing from it through those horrible wounds, covering a large area; and the body of that man was entirely stiffened, and his colour was yellowish.
And so he inserted the probe into one of those wounds and reached the bone with it.
And he then examined all the wounds and discovered the cause of their pain from every part of the leg.
And then I carefully cut through one of these openings and discovered a portion of the bone, which was deformed, hardened, and deteriorated; it had already been corrupted by a part of the leg that had penetrated into the membrane.
And then I secured what I had discovered and prepared the exposed bone.
I then realized that it was not the bone itself but that corruption which I had removed and secured, and I had already weakened it.
And then I stopped the restoration of the disease with consolidating medicines for a long time, but it was not consolidated.
And I then re-examined and discovered the bone a second time according to the first discovery, and I found continuing corruption in the bone.
And I will address what appears to me as that corruption, then return you will make incisions precisely to effect the cure and restoration, but if it is not restored.
And then you will discover over it another time and do not cease to incise the small bone particularly and perforate the restoration of it, but it is not restored until you make an incision around a palm of it, and extract that with its marrow, and then restore it with medicines, and it is slightly consolidated and healed.
And it is not necessary to repeat the operation or section of it except for the disposition of the frail condition of it and due to the lack of tolerance of it and the danger of death, as it experiences weakness throughout all hours due to excessive evacuation leading to fainting.
Therefore, health is through complete healing, and nothing is in place of the hard bone; it is good to arrange it in its body and return its virtue; it is adjusted to its dispositions, and does not cause opposition in walking or damage on any account.
If a bone sticks out in the body, when it is necessary to remove it, you should act as follows: take some lubricant and tighten that around the end of that protruding bone, and ask someone to spread it; then tie the thicker thread over the flesh left on the bone, and extend its tip so that you can pull the flesh away from the parts below, and expose the flesh in the area you want to cut, so that the saw does not harm the flesh.
And place a stick or table under the bone appropriately, for when you do this, the saw should not cut into sound flesh.
And be sure to make the cut in the diseased part of the bone slowly, because if it is in the concave part of the corrupted bone and does not appear on the surface when touched, you may need to repeat the cutting process.
If the bone is corrupted and not prominent, but rather a continuous split with another, and the corruption is in the middle or at any point along it, then expose the flesh from all sides; and place sticks underneath, and cut the first split where the corruption has entered, until the sawing continues through the other split.
And the incision should be according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
If the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupt joint, and cut the bone where it continues to another part.
If the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in a straight line but must be treated ingeniously.
And if the corruption is in the chest or foot of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; nevertheless, you must investigate how the corruption appears to you, open that up, and treat it according to any disposition possible for you, and correct the deformity ingeniously, when it does not cause pain to the veins or nerves.
And you should know which saws and chisels are suitable for cutting these bones, as they depend very much on the position of the bones, the preparation of those, their thickness, thinness, size, rarity, hardness, and other qualities; so it is necessary that you prepare all kinds of instruments suitable for this operation.
And you know that this operation signifies to you regarding the type of instrument of which you are in need; since you have great study and long experience of the methods of this art, and testimony of the ways of illnesses, for when you have already encountered them by yourself, then you know what is appropriate for them among instruments for all illnesses.
And in the end of this chapter, you will learn the number of instruments which you will use with examples as you proceed with your training, thus fulfilling your duty according to experience you will gain on others. Form of saw:
Another form of saw:
Form of another large saw:
Form of treatment: The head of this treatment should be in the shape of a clave (a tool with a cross-shaped head), and the points of it are shaped like the points on a star.
And it is not appropriate to apply this treatment unless the joints' heads are corrupted or the mouth is excessively wide.
Form of the smaller scalpel:
Form of the broad scalpel:
Form of another saw appropriately made: it should be curved less and its edge sharp like steel, and the patient's limb cut gently with a descending knife. Form of it:
The form of the razor with a concave shape:
The form of another razor, more subtle:
The form of another razor with an extremely curved end:
The form of a small razor resembling a hook:
The form of another smaller chisel:
The form of another chisel; this one resembling a ray, with a serrated end, and commonly used in various places for cutting bones:
The form of the ray that is suitable for reasoning about those who are pierced by bones:
And the end of it is triangular with a sharp point.
And it is made of iron from India, and in a way that covers all the causes we have mentioned of razors, scissors, and saws.
Of the incision of the extremity and the locking of the bones.
The extremities may be affected either intrinsically or extrinsically, or if you have treated that corruption with certain medicines and the cure does not follow, or if the corruption is so severe that it affects a member that you do not wish to harm, then you must cut into that member within which the malady resides, in order that the disease may be relieved from causing death or great damage to the member.
And the sign of that which happens is that the member becomes black where it has been cut, as if fire had consumed it, or you may find the blackness spreading until it affects another part of the body which is still healthy and takes over the entire body; so consider this carefully when making an incision on that area.
And similarly, it is caused by the corruption and impact of certain poisonous sources such as a scorpion's sting, or a viper's bite, or a similar one.
And if the corruption or impact is in the tip of the finger, you make an incision on the finger and do not give space to the corruption for it to spread into the hand.
And similarly, if it affects the hand, you make an incision at the root of the finger and do not give space to the corruption until it takes over the entire arm.
And if you change your mind, then incise the arm inside the joint.
And if another corruption passes and the joint is affected again, then it is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause for its cure is a quantity of virtue.
And similarly, for the foot when corruption occurs, you incise it inside one of the joints.
And if you take hold of the sole of the foot, then you incise the entire foot. If it is possible to enter inside the toe, then you incise the leg inside the joint of the toe.
And if the corruption has already spread to the toe, then it is not possible to heal it, but only its release, and you leave the patient to die.
And the method of cutting or severing a member is that you tighten the ligament at the part where you wish to cut, and tighten another ligament over the site; and the instrument extends a ligament to the parts left behind, and the minister extends another ligament upon them; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments without a wide space until all the flesh is discovered; and then it is cut or severed.
And it should be covered with clean cloth from all parts to prevent contact with the site, and bring the injured patient to a calm and safe condition.
If bleeding occurs during the operation, cauterize the site carefully, or apply some powders to stop the flow of blood; and then return to your treatment until it is complete.
And then attach the afflicted member with a suitable ligament, and treat it until it is healed.
And I advise you to take a man in his foot, this injury that you and I have recommended, which occurred due to the dark color on his foot resembling the burn of fire.
And that corruption occurred first in his inner leg, which tends to spread throughout the foot.
And so that man prepared himself for this treatment, knowing that the cure would go to the member with the intensity of his pain and the heat of his condition, and he incised that foot at the joint, and fire healed.
For a long time, that injury caused this corruption in the leg indicated by the hand.
And then it subsided, and I felt compelled to reflect on this phenomenon, which led me to consider the impact of these remedies on the body; and the excess did not recur, and I began to focus on the other leg, as I had started with the one in my hand.
And the doctor tries to cut into the patient's hand, and he does not want to do this fearing the repercussions of that superfluity, rather he must insist on the incision of the patient's dead hand, for the virtue of the disease was in its decline.
And since he had left me, he returned to his land and compelled me to prepare and cut off the hand of that man, and he was healed.
And this narrative is not presented merely to describe this illness but to provide assistance regarding what causes it and to explain its meaning, in order that it may be understood and treated accordingly.
Regarding the treatment of fevers and the quality of enema medications.
When abscesses occur in certain fleshy parts of the body and the space of the abscess is prolonged as far as a collection of pus, then it breaks and perforates itself, and the pus is discharged from it, leaving the area hollowed out as if by a vessel, and the skin above it remains intact, without any posterior corruption, and does not affect the bone or nerves or ligaments. It is called a fever, and is not named a fistula.
However, if the space is prolonged such that the corruption entirely encompasses a member, it is then called a fistula and not incised.
And the treatment for it is to incise that entire cord as it is revolved, especially when it is subtile and made with a needle, and ensure that it does not adhere to the area due to its corruption.
If you hope that the cord will adhere and that that corruption does not occur again due to its last consequence, and the cord has passed through the wall, then treat it with a cleanser.
And consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the arm that it affects has a foul odor, then cleanse it with an Egyptian medicine made of oil, wine, and honey, received in equal parts, and placed in a vessel, then heated over fire until the medicine becomes hot and reaches its best quality.
And then take from him what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; wash out the affected sinus with it, tighten the orifices of the body, and leave the medicine on him for a duration of two hours.
And then extract that foreign body; do this for as many days as it takes to cleanse the sinus and heal the wound.
In some cases, enema with ash water can be used when this medicine is not available; you take ash from the fireplace, mix it with water, and then use that to wash out the sinus until you feel that it has been completely cleared.
If the patient cannot tolerate Egyptian medicine or ash water, then wash out the sinus with a mixture of honey and water, and add three parts of triacet to it; also, wash out with a mixture of wine and honey, for honey purifies and cleanses, and wine helps adhere to the sinus, especially when there is an excess of stiffness and dryness from previous treatments.
And after you have done this several times and feel that the swelling has subsided, then cleanse that part with water which causes the flesh to be born in it.
And indeed, you should take a mixture of dyes and dissolve that oily crust and apply it as a styptic; or cleanse that part with some medicine mixed with ointments which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
And if the orifices of the cavity are narrow in which the catheter of the cleister cannot be inserted, then gradually enlarge them with a small iron, and place on it hot water wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon until it is enlarged.
And if the orifice appears to be wide enough, then close it with stitches and leave it for as long as the cleister is added.
If the orifice of the patient from which the arm emerges is elevated above its usual position, then dry that part in the lower location within them so that the arm runs inside, for when the arm is restricted in the depth of their chest, flesh will be generated there.
And if it is not possible to dry the chest within the environment of the lower, infected bone, then perforate so as to prepare the member for the arm to move slightly from them according to what you have prepared and that nothing prevents the arm from moving.
He who is over the wound of the sinus, which constantly oozes at all times, in order that it may draw out what is adhering to it from the arm. And so that you may know if what flows from the arm is much or little, or digested or undigested.
And so consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is in an abscess.
And when your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that has accumulated over the wound of the sinus has become adhered, or a strong adhesion, then on the third day you loosen it, and when you free the infection, change the bandage for another one and renew the ointment.
If it is a sinus that has gradually created a very narrow space, do not be alarmed by the adhesion of it, because healing in such places is its own, for some people suffer from slow generation of flesh in their wounds, and others from the opposite effect.
And if an indigest bridle has been removed from the sinew for several days, you will know that the sinew does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinew is prolonged, adjust in the drought of medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and their virtue, dry them as with a drying agent, when there is an excess of moisture from the addition of protection.
And the last method by which it is treated, is to take a drying agent and dissolve it in rose oil, then apply it over the affected area, just as you would use any other medicine.
And it seems to work in the same way when there is no bridle, take a drying agent, honey, as if it were thicker, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe, crush them, and sprinkle them over honey while it is on the fire, and wrap that up in cloth and press it onto the sinew; and do the same with the honey which you have observed to be thickened, sprinkle it onto cloth and press it.
And in some cases, they administer to him long extracts and roots of celestial lilies (and these are celestial lilies) and erring grain and centaury, and use those simples or adjust them, triturate them and sieve them and sprinkle the powder over honey which you have gathered; and apply it.
If the pain persists and does not improve with this treatment, you will know that the corruption is in the sinew of the patient, and it has affected the bones or other hard members or their connections; then you treat it with fistular treatment, as it is said above.
On the treatment of pansies (varicose veins) and sore nails, adding cuts to the digit, and making incisions.
Panarici (varicose veins) is an ulcer that leaves the nail of the finger or toe weak, and it strengthens in other parts, and as it continues without treatment, it becomes a more severe ulcer, either cauterized or corrupt, and it bleeds so much that it corroded the root of the nail, and severely corrupts it entirely, and reaches its corruption to the bones inside that emit an unpleasant odor, and it affects the extremity of the finger, and its color turns dark.
And therefore when you have treated that as we have said in the previous section and do not find relief, then you must incise with a sharp instrument all the superfluity that is gathered in the joint and apply a cautery to the wound nearby, for cauterization brings relief in such cases.
But if the bone is sound and the joint healthy, but the additional fluid in the joint already compresses the flesh inside, and you begin to pierce and hurt it, then stop and make a slight cut at the angle of the joint that you are piercing through the flesh, and push it apart and slice that flesh easily, and apply over it the medications with corrosive-burning oils until all the fluid from the flesh is drained; and then care for it with ointments until it heals.
However, if the corruption has already taken hold in the bone, then you must cut into the bone and extract it, for no time is there healing where the bone is corrupt.
And if corrosion and corruption are found in the said part, you incise it into one of the joints according to its recall, and then cure it so that it heals.
If there is necessity for percussion or incision of the finger, and the pain is severe, then you begin by carefully cutting into the flesh at the base of the nail with a sharp spatula or secator in a transverse direction, and be sure that the cut does not penetrate the surrounding flesh that remains under the nail, for this will cause severe pain to the patient and lead to the formation of excess callous tissue at the site; then treat that area with something that relieves the pain.
But rather, consider this condition that is natural in the bodies of many men; some have flesh that is very tender, others have bones that are very hard, or their nails are very hard.
And some of them originate in the inflammation of the joint, or it is a condition that exists in some of the joints. He who is born into certain knowledge does not suffer from this, and he who is born with strong joints is more prone to it.
And of those who are born fleshly, the incision is shallow, and you must insert the blade into its root with a gentle touch.
He who is born with the root of the joint should be careful, for its cure is difficult; therefore, beware of its removal.
In the case of those born with such knowledge, be careful to begin the incision at the flesh's edge near the bone using a sharp, suitable saw, and then carefully tend to it until it heals.
The consolidation that occurs between the joints due to various circumstances such as frequent use or a person's inherent nature, or due to hernias or burns or similar conditions, should therefore be carefully removed until the joints return to their natural state.
And then place between their sheets soaked in warm oil so that the joints do not become stiff immediately, and separate them, or place between them a thin sheet of lead until they are consolidated as needed.
And if it seems that the consolidation occurs in some specific part, like the palm, then you should dry that consolidation according to what is prepared and suitable for the shape of the member.
In the knowledge of veins, there are varicose veins.
Veins, when they become varicose, are thick, twisted veins filled with excessive melancholic fluid that appear in various parts of the body, most commonly in the legs, particularly in those who walk, work, or carry heavy loads.
So, it is clear that you should administer a purge to the body from black choler at times with a strong expulsion, and then draw blood from the patient's basil vein.
The treatment of their pain is according to two methods: one is to incise and drain that black pus, and the other method is to elevate the vein and extract all of it.
The incision is made according to this method: at the beginning, the leg is pierced with a sharp instrument until the thick pus is resolved, which is foul from the leg, and then the leg of the patient is tightly held at the dominant part of the pus within the space between the thighs using a bandage, and the vein is cut in one, two, or three places with a wide incision, and the black pus is raised with the doctor's hand from the space beneath the leg until all the quantity that is desired and sufficient to cure the patient is extracted.
And then close it up, and order the patient to abstain from hot foods that generate black bile.
And the cure is repeated through phlebotomy when the veins are filled and this causes pain to the patient.
At this point of the treatment, the elevation of the patient should be done as follows: if you unbind the leg of the patient and find it covered in hair, wash it immediately and immerse the limb in water heated by a flame until it becomes numb and the veins are relaxed; or if the patient has been engaged in intense exercise, without the possibility of washing, then the affected member should be rubbed with cold water.
Then, using a knife, cut the cord at the right of the vein, either along its entire length or near the end, or, if it is very low, cut it off close to the base.
Then, using scissors, cut the cord and carefully extract the vein from its entire length until it becomes sensitive, and you must assess the patient's condition as the disease declines towards blackness.
And thus, after you have extracted and removed the cord, you should observe that white is the remaining vein.
And then you insert your fingers into the space that should be elevated and moved away from the spine, and suspend them with a light touch to avoid any pain.
Then make another incision approximately three fingers away from the first, and carefully extract the spine from its attachment to the vein until it appears.
Then elevate that one and incise it in the rear section behind the toe, and extract that one, raising it until it passes through the second incision, and then extract it from the section above that one.
And do this until you extract the one from the highest or most superior section of all the incisions, ensuring that all are passed through, and then make an incision there.
And if you do not obey to extract and elevate, then insert a strong double-ended needle and tie it, and extract it, or insert the finger into the space and turn your hand over until it is completely released. And be careful not to incise; for if it is cut, it will be difficult to lift that part and it will cause further harm to the patient.
And once everything has been removed, place your attention on the affected area, immersing it in vinegar and applying both scented and unscented oils, and treat until it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted without twisting, and it does not follow the straightness we have mentioned, then you should cut across all parts of its twist and at the sites of its involvement, and then suspend it until you raise the whole of it.
And be careful not to incise the vein and do not harm it, for it will be difficult to lift it, and use your caution in this regard.
The form of the injury which is dried out:
It is not as sharp with ulcers nor does it have an acute extremity so that it does not affect the vein; moreover, it has great flexibility, for if it were too thin, it would pierce the vein because of its thinness; we have said this regarding its superfluous thickness.
Of the extraction of the vein of the thigh.
This vein is generated in the legs in hot regions, as well as in the groin area in Arabic lands and in the rear and arid parts of India with little moisture and no grass or open spaces.
And very few are generated in other parts of the body other than the legs.
And the process of decomposition is such that it emits a foul odor as serpents, worms, and maggots emerge from within the wound and breed between the wound and flesh.
And the sign of the impending arrival of gout is this: a sudden inflammation in the leg, then the affected area becomes swollen; and soon the vein begins to withdraw from that inflamed spot, resembling a plant being uprooted.
And when the onset of gout is apparent, you will see that you must wrap around it a piece of lead as heavy as a dragon's weight. Within this lead, place the affected limb and leave the lead suspended from the bedpost.
And as often as you encounter any cause for gout external to the body, wrap it in lead and note this. And if the pain persists for a prolonged period, you should insert a sharp object into the affected area and wrap it; do not insert it all the way until it's out, because if you do, it will contract and penetrate into the flesh, causing abscesses, pus, and bad ulcers in that spot.
So that it can be treated further and gradually extracted, until it is completely removed from the patient's body and no cause remains in their body.
And from this vein, some people have reported that it extends to the length of their palm and fingers, and I myself have also seen it extend to a length of 20 fingers.
And if it is incised during treatment, then insert the ray into the tract of the hernia and perforate that long tract through the body, so that everything inside is evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the place for some days with medicines; and then take care of it for the healing of abscesses.
This vein has been observed to have many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it causes great pain, and it arises from every painful branch.
And therefore treat it thus as we have said in the division and pay attention to what has been mentioned above.
On the section regarding worms generated beneath the skin, and it is called bovine affliction.
This affliction is called bovine affliction in many lands, for it causes great pain in the body; a small worm is born between the flesh and the bone, and it spreads throughout the entire body, pushing and breaking the bones until the worm comes out.
And the generation of these worms is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, which cause worms, serpents, roundworms, and hookworms in the belly.
It is feared by the evil of these worms, for when they enter the body and rise to the head, they affect the brain, violently shaking it within and destroying it, which should be observed.
And so when you want to cure and extract it, you do not do it unless you first understand its movement and appearance, and then grasp what is above it and what remains beneath it, tightly, and after that dry it and extract that.
If it is embedded in the flesh and does not cause pain, then apply a hot cautery to the place where it resides until it moves, and the main cause that is feared is the corruption of the hernia which damages the location as we have said.
If you try to cure that which is closest to the head, then tighten over the forehead with firm pressure, and dry it, and extract that; and take care that the disease uses purification of the body through medicines that evacuate putrid bad humors, and be wary of foods causing putrefaction.
On the section regarding the treatment of pain.
This illness is called nephritis in our land, and it is a pain that appears in some members, and then changes from one member to another.
And you have already seen that second one that I recommended to you. You were called to a woman's house in a village, and you discovered her arm, and saw a small inflammation on the vein at the wrist, which you punctured for an hour, and as you pulled out the needle, you saw that swelling go away, almost like it was alive as it moved from place to place.
And then all at once the pain in that place disappeared and you felt it in the muscle, and so you left this pressure for an hour.
And then you repeated the same process on the other side, until you reached the other arm.
And then I began to examine the whole body, as I had seen him, and was amazed by the transformation of it and the speed with which the parts were changing. And I had previously seen this in my own feet according to that manner, but I have seen many others who are tormented by pain as they are changed from one member to another. I have never seen this in the feet like this in women.
And I do not think that this is otherwise but that it is for this reason that the woman was crippled, with her weak body and exposed veins, and in this condition, the sensation of that changed wind is felt.
And it is necessary that this backward treatment does not appear in those who have healthy and moist bodies with veins covered.
And when you wish to treat him and the patient feels that pain, it will not be as we have said, then tighten on that part and leave it slightly and dry over that until the airiness is stopped, and cauterize the place.
If you do not know the causes of these pains in your feet, then cure that which relieves the body and removes airiness, and bind those with foul-smelling pills and pills of snake venom and similar things.
On the extraction of arrows.
Arrows vary according to species and the parts of the body they hit, for their diversity lies in that some have sharp points, others small, concave, or dull, being solid; some have three angles, others have tongues, and others are notched.
And among the signs of the servant is when an arrow strikes it and pierces the bone, and it arises from the base of the skull, which is above the brain, due to the violent heat, and scotomies, vertigo, pain in the heels, inflammation and pain in the tongue, spasms, loss of speech, vomiting of bile, strong loss of words, and destruction of voice, and it leaves the afflicted area with white humidity resembling powder, and blisters like the consistency of flesh.
And therefore if these signs appear to you, then abstain from treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is protruding.
However, the signs of an arrow embedded in the heart, where it is close to the left breast, and you feel a sudden sharp pain, not visible cause; and strongly feel the movement of the arrow similar to pulse and the flow of black pus, and there is a chill in the extremities, and fainting, then know that death is at hand.
And the signs when the arrow has pierced the lung, showing pus-filled plague, and the vessels near the collarbone are filled with blood, and the patient's complexion changes, and they breathe heavily, and requests a strong draft of air.
And if the arrow catches in the membrane in the foot, and the pain is felt near the small ribs, it causes great pain with strong sobs, and all the muscles of the limbs are not relaxed.
And if an arrow pierces the stomach, immediately you will feel strong pain from the poisonous food causing indigestion.
And if an arrow pierces the abdomen and becomes stuck in it, causing a wound from the poison or a tear in the organ wall, there is no hope for its cure unless the arrow is extracted.
And if the arrow pierces the bladder and it leaks urine outside, causing pain to the patient from some internal cause, and strong pain is felt, then you should know that it is fatal.
Similarly, the other parts like the face, neck, back, shoulders, elbows, legs, and their corresponding joints in the body can be saved according to the best dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a poisonous arrow.
And I will tell you about what I have seen of the nature of these arrows, so that it may be meaningful for you in regard to their cure.
Which cause is this, for in a man there is an arrow in the lacrimal duct of his eye at the root of his nose, and you remove that from him on another occasion, leaving the grays of his eyelid intact, and he recovers, with no harm to his eye's socket.
And another arrow was extracted from a Jew, which had become lodged in his eyelid, leaving the upper eyelid intact, and the arrow was hidden, so it could not be removed except for a small tip that clung to its fur, and it was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, capable of penetrating a lion's hide without leaving an imprint.
And the Jew, being sensible, did not suffer any further harm to his eye.
And extract another arrow from a Christian man who had been struck in the gullet, which was an Arabic arrow, and it is the one with the sharp point; then I incised it between two guides, and it was already immersed in the patient's gullet; then I carefully removed it, and thus healed the Christian.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who had been struck in his stomach, and I thought he would die from it; so, after having passed 30 days without any change for the better regarding his condition, I incised upon the arrow and removed it, and thus healed him, causing no further harm.
And I saw a man in whom an arrow had been embedded in his back, and the wound was severe, so after setting a fire nearby, I carefully extracted the arrow at the base of the wound.
And I saw a woman who had an arrow embedded in her stomach, and the wound was severe within, but it did not change regarding its condition, and the woman did not suffer severely from any of her natural functions.
And he sees another man whose face is pierced by an arrow, the wound is deep and the arrow is broken, causing little pain but many similar symptoms to these.
And he extracted the arrow from the man of the king's princes who had been wounded in the middle part of his nose and had already turned slightly to the right, and the entire arrow was hidden.
And you were called upon for the treatment of him, so that within three days the arrow's wound would heal.
Then he examined the wound of the arrow very closely; and then he inquired about it gently, and did not feel it, but he felt a slight prickling behind his right ear, and then he hoped that this prickling was caused by the end of the arrow.
Then he applied a poultice to the place with an astringent and digestive effect, confident that by doing so, he would draw out the arrow from that place, allowing it to heal over time.
And do not be concerned about the location of the injury where the arrow has struck; continue to apply the poultice over it for several days and no adverse events should occur; as the wound heals, break up the swelling from the extraction of the arrow every few days until on one day you feel the arrow within its base and I will attend to it.
And then you should apply acute corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until a fire opens up, and you should gently try to extract it, and cut off the tip of the arrow, which adheres to the wood.
Then you should adjust the opening of the wound with that acute medicine until I visually see the tip of the arrow, and I will devote my time to it for periods of time over four months.
And when the wound has become inflamed and I can insert scissors into it, I will persevere as much as possible without causing pain, but if I do not succeed in subtilizing and ingeniously removing it with these methods, then one day, through these ingenious ways of removal, I will extract it using forceps designed for descent, according to the form of those mentioned at the end of this chapter; and I will restore that wound.
And some physicians judged that the nasal cartilage was not restored, and they restored it, and the disease became solidified, and the illness was cured entirely, without any further complications.
And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some arrows so that it provides rules and meanings regarding what I have not mentioned, for the parts of this art and the definitions of those from this text are not understood from narration nor do those comprehend the book.
And the skilled artisans compare a little about words; and regarding what is present, about what is absent; and they find new operations and new instruments for understanding the descent of foreign causes within the art when accidents occur.
And therefore you say that arrows are not forced out of the members in which they are embedded, but according to two manners: either by attraction towards the place where they enter; or conversely, from the other part.
And that which is discharged from the place where it enters, or is a sharp arrow proceeding in the flesh, and is thrown out and withdrawn.
And if you do not adhere to the timing of when cats should be fed, then know that you must leave it for a few days until the flesh around it improves and the attraction of the cat and its exit are alleviated.
And similarly, if it becomes lodged in the bones and you do not adhere to feeding times, leave it for a few days until the attraction and motion are reduced each day, and it is eventually discharged.
And if you do not adhere to feeding times for a few days, then know that you must pierce the path of the arrow in that bone at a subtle point where the location is widened by the arrow, and then extract it.
If the arrow is already lodged in the body and resides in a specific location, and if it affects a certain sensation, then you should question the patient, and if you sense that, then use various stimulants to aid its attraction.
And if you cannot get to it due to the constriction of the plague and the length of the arrowhead, here there are no bones or nerves or veins, then make an incision on the plague until it is enlarged and it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if there are auricles attached to it, which is often the case, then carefully cut away the flesh in which they are embedded from all sides with all the means at your disposal; and devise a way to release the flesh in the fracture of the auricles and their torsion until you achieve complete healing.
And when you perform the extraction of the arrow in any location, use a twist of your hand and forceps from all sides until it is completely freed; and with great care and subtlety, ensure that the arrow is not broken and that it can be easily extracted along with the affected part.
And if you cannot access it at the time, then wait for a few days until the swelling in the affected area subsides, and then repeat the procedure when it is eased. If you experience difficulty with bleeding, then administer what we have said about treatment in its chapter.
And observe your skill in incising veins or nerves, or string, and administer remedies in every way possible to facilitate the escape of the arrow; do this with ease and calmness and delay and firmness as you would for yourself and as recommended by others.
And therefore, contract the arrow so that the malady is according to the figure by which you must aim the point of the arrow into it, for this is more beneficial. If this is not within your ability, then administer what is within your abilities according to the figures.
But the arrows that are shot against the opposite side, or which already process any opening in the outer parts, or make the end of the arrow swell due to the pressure from above the designated cord, then focus on that; and cut it according to the quantity in which the forceps grasp it; and shoot it, for it is made light for departure.
If it is held in the bone, then cut with a knife according to the direction of the arrow inserted into the bone, and amplify the cut, and then extract it.
And if that does not help after several days, then repeat the procedure as often as necessary.
And if the point of the arrow is embedded in it, then push it towards the body.
If the point has fallen and you want to give an impulse, then insert a sharp object and, if it is dull, sharpen it by fitting it into the concave part of the bone where the arrowhead was, and then push it towards the body.
If the arrowhead is concave, then push it strongly towards the stimulus, as the arrowhead will be diverted by that.
And if the arrow is deeply embedded, you must press your concave hand into all the flesh where it is situated, as much as you can, and tend to that part as best you can.
If the arrow strikes the foot, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side, and it is close enough that you can feel it through the skin, and if it is possible for you to remove it without causing injury to a vein or nerve, then remove it and treat the wound as necessary, and bandage it until it heals.
Design of forceps for extracting arrows:
Their ends should be shaped like a bird's beak, which is equipped with serrated edges to grip the arrow firmly, preventing its release.
And these are made in various shapes and sizes, large and small, according to the amount of the arrow's thickness, its fragility, the extent of the wound, and the tightness of the affected area.
so that it removes the arrow's head from the concave wound and pushes out the lump.
On venipuncture
The veins of fleubotomy, of which there are six principal ones, are: two pulsatile veins near the auricles, called the maxillary veins; two veins in each temporal region, known as the superficial temporal veins; two veins on either side of the nose, termed the lacrimal veins; a vein located at the middle point of the forehead; a vein at the tip of the nose; two jugular veins at the back of the neck; and two veins on the lower lip. These are referred to as the 'glandular' veins, and lastly, there are two veins beneath the tongue. But the veins that are flebotomized in the arms are; for one is a cephalic, and it must be the wild latz; and the people call it "the vein of the head", and deaf, and it is the middle vein, and it is composed of a branch of the basilic, and another branch of the cephalic; and they name that the people "the vein of all the body", and the basilic is the vein that is stopped in the domestic latz, and is named "citellar", and they call those vulgar "the stomach vein"; and the brachial, and it is stopped over the fossa, and it is that in which flebotomy is performed, and that which appears on the arm by manifest appearance; and the temporal, and it is the vein that is between the said auricular and the smaller said vein, and only in it are two branches.
And on the foot and leg are three veins; one of them is left at the curvature of the end of the wild latz; the second is superficial, and its place is left by the camba of the domestic latz; and the sciatic vein, and its place is left by the camba of the wild latz; and on the camba are other veins similar to those.
The treatment of veins that are close to the auricles is for ancient catarrh, emigration, and ulcers of the head, old malaises.
And as for the quality of bleeding, it depends on what you have observed: it should be near the patient's head, and the head of the patient should be rubbed on the occipital region at the place where both veins are located close to the auricles; then, tightly wrap the patient's head with a bandage that exposes the two locations where the auricles appear; and try this as they say, and if you feel the pulse of those parts as they say, do so.
Now, take the cutting scalpel, and it is one that is sharp, and insert it into the vein in the neck until the flail botomy reaches the bone. Then, raise your hand over the vein and neck, and cut the vein with a sharp incision. And the length of the incision should be two fingers wide or around that; and make the cut as deep as you wish.
Then, apply strong compresses and leave it until it heals.
And it is already mentioned at the beginning of this text the incision of those and their cauterization.
But regarding the two veins and arteries that are near the temples, the primary cause of flu syndrome, ancient and severe, recurrent and persistent eye problems, and acute excesses in the body, are the main factors.
And the quality of performing a fleubotomy is as follows: restrict the patient's movement so that the two veins appear in sensation by manifest perception and it is demonstrated that their pulse has stopped; and then you should proceed carefully.
And then, raise the cord over the vein as indicated above, insert the sharp phlebotomy instrument here, and elevate the vein; cut it likewise in the other two veins; and allow the blood to flow according to your need's quantity.
Then, carefully tighten the patient's tourniquet, place the indicated pressure on the vein for an hour, and apply compresses and heat to that part until it is healed.
And having previously recalled them, and made the incision, draw them in at the commencement of the opening.
Thus, the application of phlebotomy to the vein of the forehead is appropriate for ancient facial diseases, migraines, and painful, foul ulcers.
And the quality of the phlebotomy depends on what you recommend; it is that the disease tightens its hold with a band until the vein appears; and then take the instrument called the phlegetor, which has this shape.
Stop the bleeding at the point where it is on top of a vein and press onto it with your finger or some other tool in the appropriate manner, and allow the blood to flow according to the amount you desire; then close the wound from the incision made by the surgeon until it heals.
And in some cases, the artery is opened by a lateralis flebotomy, but it is not understood that this flebotomy should be of acute severity as with the other flebotomies, but rather from a lateral extremity, and the flebotomy is made transversely, because the bone there is strong and would break easily if a subtile flebotomy were performed.
However, the two veins that are the tear ducts of both eyes for the discharge of tears from the eyes due to irritation and sebaceous in the eyes, as well as eye diseases on the face.
And the quality of the flebotomy is that it tightens the cloth on its own, then make flebotomies on them, and you stand over their head.
And the fluotomy is performed according to the transverse direction along a slight incision, for in that place there is little flesh; and if the fluotomy is delicate, then the extremity of it is easily broken.
Then allow the fever to run as much as necessary, rest on those parts, tighten them for one night, and then loosen them.
The fluotomy of the nasal vein is effective for acute fever and violent pain, and for facial maladies, migraines, and redness that occur on the face, especially when it has been long-standing.
And the quality of this fluotomy is that it tightens the patient's collar and then places the nose with the left hand, taking a delicate, long incision at the middle part of the nose according to its straightness, because the vein does not appear sensitive here, and because the fever begins to flow soon.
Ensure you complete the procedure of fluebotomy slowly with your hand, allowing blood to flow according to need; then close it up again the next day, as it will be slightly healed.
After the healing of the flebotomy on both sides, constriction of veins and commencement of leprosy and other malicious diseases and corroding ulcers should also be considered, as well as the use of potent remedies.
And the quality of the flebotomy on those is that the disease tightens them all in their place with adhesion; and the expert should be over the head of the patient, and the patient lies on their side.
Then make small incisions on the vein with a wide flebotomy, and extract blood according to season or as much as is necessary for treatment; then do the same for the other veins.
And then carefully loosen the ligament and tighten the two veins with a gentle pressure to prevent the illness from spreading, and leave it within the bandage until the pain is healed.
And regarding the young people who suffer from phlebitis of the veins, it causes small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, inflammation of the gums, and bad ulcers and fissures, as well as bad ulcers on the nose and around the anus.
The quality of the phlebitis treatment for these individuals is to stop the illness in its track, tighten the affected area with a bandage, and then carefully retract the lips to expose two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; each vein is identified by its darker color due to the presence of smaller veins beneath, and you make an incision with a sharp knife at the point of greatest prominence.
If there is any doubt on your part, and you do not know which one it is, then proceed with the incision on the larger of them, and examine the pus that comes forth from those.
And it appears as if there are two veins on their lips.
When both veins that are on the tongue cannot be treated, it is appropriate to perform a phlebotomy of the cephalic vein at its origins, which are in the throat, to the malady of the uvula, and to mouth maladies.
And the quality of phlebotomy for these is that it follows the disease among your fingers in front of the sun, raises the tongue, and looks below the tongue, from one side of the vein to the other side of the vein, and the color of each is declining towards blackness.
And so perform phlebotomy on each one; and be careful not to finish your hand with phlebotomy on those, because those are arteries.
And your veins that are flebotomized in the groin are those through which blood usually flows in all men; the flebotomy of them is done in two ways, either by using a flebotomy syringe or olive oil with subtle declination; or cutting with a flebotomy knife, and this is called arteriotomy, and this is the form of it.
both the width of it with times, and it needs to open the concave veins full of thick blood, and to those that contain large clots.
And this type of flebotomy is performed on the smallest and most delicate extremities, suitable for flebotomy of subtle veins containing subtle citrus blood.
However, the extraction of blood from the basil vein, one of three veins, removes the venom from ailments remaining in the gullet and colon, and also from the feet and belly.
And it is necessary for the flebotomist, when performing that flebotomy, to be very careful and cautious in that area, as leaving an artery there, if he mistakes or misplaces the puncture of the flebotomy, he will incise that artery and cause a flow of blood, so it is important not to perform flebotomy on that part with a sharp instrument, but rather with a less invasive method.
And if the basil vein does not appear by clear observation, then you must leave that and change to another, or seek some branch of it; or perform flebotomy at the end of the arm, as that one is manifest; and perform flebotomy on it with a less sharp instrument as we have said.
If you wish to perform an artery ligation, then cover in front of the constriction of the arm that you touch the place within recognizing the location of the pulse, and then place a seal over it tightly; then bring close the arm and cut the vein with a concave section for an arteriotomy as we have said; and be careful to avoid the percussion through any space of the location of the artery.
And when you observe, with strength the ligament, inflation in the place that you have sealed tightly, then that inflammation is inflammation of the artery, and therefore avoid it.
And if you observe the blood flow in an arteriotomy as with a ear of a child, and the blood is thin and clear, then know that it is from the artery's blood; and then cut and press on the wound over a long space; and close the wound, and if the blood clotting occurs, as you see the clots forming, tighten the arm and release it.
And watch over the patient from their excretion, and be overly careful of them for a few days until they are healed.
If the gangrenous part does not separate, and it is not suitable for any medicine, then you will have to incise the artery if it appears necessary; for the end of it is contracted and the gangrenous part separated; or take some fistic, make a hole in it, and insert half of it at the place of the vein's constriction with bandages and poultices for the next day.
And if the gangrenous part is separated, then it is good; but if not, treat it with the water mentioned, in memory of the place of the absorbed powders' flow of gangrene.
And the removal of gangrene from them is difficult due to the small size of the affected area and the possibility of binding in the arm.
But for the dark vein, phlebotomy is quickly done to extract the blood from the upper part of the head and leave it from the lower parts of the body; for this reason, it is composed of branches of the basilic vein and branches of the cephalica, as we have said.
And be cautious in phlebotomy for those who have excessive fear of phlebotomy, because there is a nerve; and then, when you reach the point of phlebotomy and find the nerve, it will cause stupor, and it will be difficult for him to heal, and many times he will not be completely cured. This nerve causes movement in sensation; and if it is hidden from some people and is subtle and not shown, you must know that you pause the phlebotomy with which you cut off the vein and avoid the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein along its length.
The immediate effect of phlebotomy on the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and provides relief for illnesses in the feet.
And in this case, if you want the flebotomist to puncture the vein with an olive or myrtle flebotomy, it is because it is the safest of all veins, as it does not leave behind an artery or nerve.
However, in some cases, it may be strongly painful in certain people when not punctured in the first percussion, but do not pay attention to that pain again regarding the apothesis.
The first sentence translates to: "The first [point] is that you must know that phlebotomy should only be performed in the interest of health and with the hope of preventing illness, and it is done on one of the veins located in the groin: cephalic, femoral, and basilic; it is performed at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in spring and autumn, and during winter, when signs of replenishment appear.
And phlebotomy should be performed on the third day or, if performed immediately, within three hours of rising.
Phlebotomy may be performed when it is convenient and necessary, at any time of day or night, during any hour or any period.
And it should be noted that phlebotomy should not be performed on children under 13 years of age, women who are pregnant should not undergo phlebotomy until the fourth month, and the elderly, those who have already passed 60 years, should not be subjected to phlebotomy.
And when someone wishes to be freed from some condition by any means, it is necessary that he purify his bowels in advance with a lion's enema, if there is a significant fissure therein, so that the veins do not expel the excess fluid during the fleubotomy of the bowels, which are clean, and they do not affect the main members.
And let the patient not be subjected to fleubotomy unless he has been purified by sacred rites and fasting, nor should he escape from illness or madness until this is remedied in him, nor from hydroptic diseases; it is better for a colic, vomit, abdominal pain, multiplication of urination, defecation, work, exercise during meals or vigils, or any cause that depletes strength, whether physical or animal, to be treated by other means.
And it is necessary to consider the subtlety of humors in this regard, if the swelling is due to heavy food, drink, or medicine, if it is possible for him to avoid these things.
And then immerse in a bath if any cause does not prohibit or if some exercise is performed to alleviate the pain.
And stop the phlebotomy on the patient's leg at around the third hour of the day, as we have said.
And pierce that foot, which is to be watched on that day from all animal misfortunes, as when there is anxiety, anger, fear, and from all bodily accidents, as when there is too much work and unnecessary effort and pain similar to them.
And at his bedside, have the causes be present of the which corruption usually occurs in men, aromatizing and perfuming them, and applying balms and similar things according to the amount of possibility.
And follow the phlebotomist over another cushion that is pus, rather than the cushion of the one who was to be bled.
And then extract the arm, and with your hand, rub the flebotomator two or three times; and afterward tighten the ligament with a strap and wrap it twice.
And the stricture should be tempered, for when the stricture is unequal, or it is superfluous, then forbid the flow of the sanies; or if it is for softening, then forbid the movement of the sanies altogether.
And afterward, applying the stricture, ensure that whoever has been subjected to flebotomy rub their hands together repeatedly between each other until the veins are inflated and visible.
And the flebotomist should apply a small amount of anti-inflammatory oil to their flebotomy site; then, using their left hand, they press upon the vein, slightly indenting it, leaving the area where the flebotomy will occur, so that the vein protrudes slightly, and the pressure is relieved. This is because when the veins are inflamed, they should be contracted after the flebotomy, and if they remain open, they must be tightly bound to prevent further bleeding.
And therefore, because it appears that the fleubotomist (bloodletter) should be stopped and diligent in all these causes.
And then, after making the fleubotomi (bloodletting), if the vein is swollen at once, it is good; but if not, repeat this another time, leaving that place a little, or applying compression over it, if the location is not abscessed.
If the location is abscessed or the illness worsens, then leave it for a day or two, and do not strain the ligament; for severe abscess will quickly become worse, nor should it be bathed.
And then repeat the fleubotomi if necessary.
And if the opening is small and the pain subsides subtly, and you fear that it does not open enough to achieve the desired amount of bloodletting, then repeat the fleubotomi in that place according to correctness and adjust the opening a little, and apply compression before the location becomes abscessed, for in many cases a small opening is sufficient.
It may sometimes be an already inflamed spot, and it does not matter where it is located, as it provides no specific cause for concern; apply some oil to that particular part of the wound, as it soothes the body. And it is better at this location than other oils.
And it seems that the oil-soaked pad is used in every flebotomy where veins must be freed from body heat restrictions; it acts as a tire and an aid to wisdom when pressure is applied from one of those on the site, as the heat is dissipated and circulation is improved when it becomes hot.
And if a significant abscess is formed at the site of the flebotomy, due to various incidents, especially when it is not bleeding but rather that spot becomes inflamed, or in the perception of a thin vein, then you apply, and press on the place with a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly warmed, for an hour, as it dissolves.
And then cover this with the bandage of that vein, completing it with the aid of another vein or some other method.
And if after some days a blackness or green discoloration appears, do not worry about it; and if you wish, apply to that place a mixture of aloe, myrrh, or any other similar substance.
And often accidents occur, requiring the removal of abscesses and prominences through flebotomy from the basilic vein.
And therefore place your hand over it, and if you feel any tenderness, you should apply pressure to that area; for this prominence is a sign of evil and ill health, and thus be cautious not to place your hand over any cause of what we have said, as strong blood flows from the sanitarian artery.
And apply plaster to the area of tightness, so that the location is held firm, and take care of the other treatment until it is healed.
And take care to extract the sanium from each person in accordance with the amount of its virtue and according to the dominant color appearing over the sanium as it appears.
If the sanium is black, leave it to drain until it becomes thin; and similarly if you have a thick discharge, leave it to drain until it becomes thin; and if it is acute, then preserve its sharpness.
And be mindful of one who is full and strong and requires extraction of sanium all at once: enlarge the flebotomy of the vein and make the flebotomies broad.
And for one who is anemic, do the opposite; and when extracting sanium in several instances, make the flebotomy narrow.
And the best for administering flebotomy of a vein is that it should be transverse section, not puncture.
And this method of phlebotomy is free from blood flow and nerve incision, and it is more laudable and safer than phlebotomy according to length and width.
And in cases where syncope occurs after phlebotomy, it is customary to treat that immediately with a small amount of wine infused with mint or simply diluted oxymel; and extract the blood from the wound in three or four times.
And if there is a complication from the phlebotomy, then take before the phlebotomy a pa (a small amount) of infusion in myrrh or honey-based infusion seasoned with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar, or an aromatic and strongly smelling infusion.
And if syncope occurs after phlebotomy and it is due to the sudden loss of a great deal of blood, then take in a beverage made from meat water and slightly fragrant herb infusion; use fennel seeds for their aromatic properties, and apply liniment to their feet at that area.
And use other causes as mentioned in the division in the chapter of fainting for evacuation.
And here he should extend his arm and dissolve the ganglion a second time, as with the one from which flebotomy is performed for maximum evacuation, and the virtue of it is cold, which evacuates the small ganglion little by little, according to the quantity of virtue in the continuous days.
He who extends his arm and dissolves his ganglion a second time, and whose body is strong, should do this about seven or nine hours after the first flebotomy.
He who throws the ganglion of the body in the opposite direction of the decline to which it is inclined, should do this on the second or third day after it has extended.
As for the body in which there is much ganglion and it is acute, causing fever, it should be evacuated all at once from the ganglion, with a great quantity being discharged, and the perception of pain should be amplified within so that fainting occurs; because you will have preserved all the conditions of flebotomy; and you must place your hand on the body of the ganglion so as not to allow it to cause death in place of fainting, since repeated attempts are necessary when the flebotomist is ignorant or negligent.
And do not cover when you want to free the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, as the orifice of the vein is already closed and it becomes difficult to extract the blood, press down on it with great force and gently bend it slightly, for this is too painful.
Habitize the lay person in a position where they can perform flebotomy secondarily; or maintain this with the acuity of the flebotomy that coagulates the blood in the orifice of the vein; or place your hand on the area of tyriac alfarach, or of sagacity, and compress lightly until the blood has completely exited.
If the vein is inflamed, lay it aside and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
And if it becomes necessary to evacuate the blood a second time, and there is no excuse, then you may bleed them at that site or on the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called the "funnel of the arm" is phlebotomized in place of the fistula or basilica, when they are not found or are obstructed, as it is composed of those parts.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that the physician inserts his hand into the patient's arm until the wound becomes inflamed and the vein appears clearly.
Then apply pressure to that stricture with a tight bandage; and phlebotomize according to the transverse cut, not longitudinally or laterally.
And it should be an ample opening, and your phlebotomy should be such that you phlebotomize over the joint of the hand a little.
And if the flow of blood is blocked, then insert your hand into the water and let the blood run in the water until you achieve your need.
If you were in the summer days, then you are excused from the passage of the hand in cold water, and in winter, the body of the sansevieria is most immersed in cold water at certain times.
And the incision of this vein is more safe than all other veins, because it has neither pulsating nor nerve.
And the phlebotomy of the vena cava on the right side is indicated for liver ailments.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is that you should tighten your hand strongly on it, as you have placed it in cold water, while the vein is inflated and clearly visible to the eye; then make a transverse incision on it; and if you pierce it from top to bottom, it will not reap any harm.
And be careful not to cut off your hand during phlebotomy, as this will leave the nerves of these parts exposed.
And then repeat the hand in the warm water and let the blood flow through that, for if you do not repeat that in the warm water, the blood will clot in the opening of the vein, and it is forbidden to flow.
And once the blood is extracted according to the amount needed, you should place your hand on the vein with oil and salt, so it does not close tightly; and pay attention that you do everything correctly.
But the healing of the arteriotomy of that hand with the left one is appropriate for the illnesses of the chest.
And do the same for the arteriotomy of it as you have done on the other.
And the healing of the vena saphena in the arteriotomy is for illnesses that are on the outskirts of the body, as with illnesses of the mother, and to prevent menstruation, and for illnesses of the joints and ulcers of things old and new, and similar to the illnesses.
And the nature of the flebotomy is that the patient immerses their foot in water and friction until the veins appear; then it is tied over the joint of the foot with a strap; and the place where the vein is to be cut appears, from which it branches out in various directions on the surface of the foot.
And therefore, after the vein is cut, open it widely with a knife and place the patient on their side near the ankle, which is better and more salutary.
And if you perform a flebotomy on the foot, be careful of the nerves that are left underneath the surface of the foot, and place your hand over it when performing the flebotomy, taking care not to cut through them.
And the flebotomy should be powerful.
If it is forbidden to raise the leg, then immerse the foot in water and let the blood flow out until it is evacuated.
And if the flebotomist makes a mistake on the first attempt, repeat the flebotomy in that place a little more, since the spot is open; and do not fear the patient's ill will, but rather be careful of the nerves as we have said.
And it seems to do the same thing on the other foot equally.
And for sciatic vein, the spot as we have said is beneath the knee at the hollow of the femur's attachment to the wild branch.
And the wound of the flebotomy on him is at the hip joint when it is done with a hot cautery.
And the quality of the flebotomy on him is that the patient enters a bath, and immediately and strongly squeezes the flesh of his thigh from the outside to his ankle with a thin, long bandage, so that only that appears.
And therefore, when it appears, you perform an incision on that part according to each method at your disposal and the direction, which is best; or cut through it with a scalpel or sever it with secation, since the location of it is exposed.
It is also not uncommon in many people; and if you find it, and it does not appear to be painful at all, perform a small incision on one of its branches, and that is the one that appears on the back of the foot opposite the big toe and the little finger.
And be mindful of the nerves, and allow the blood to flow from the wound as much as desired.
Then tighten the bandage around the area of the incision slightly and press it firmly, as gently pressing will promote healing.
Of ventilation and the qualities of use of those.
Vents are from corns, or scabs, or blisters.
And ventilation is performed according to two methods: one involves the incision and extraction of pus, and the other is ventilation through incision alone.
And this ventilation, which is through incision, is performed in two ways, either with fire or without fire.
And the ventilations that are performed through incision and extraction of pus are in 12 places on the body, of which one is where ventilations are paused, and it is the last opening at the top of the head; another opening in the middle of both parts of the neck; ventilations under the jaw after passing through the mouth; two openings on the cheeks; ventilations on the shoulder blade; two openings below the armpit; ventilations through two needles; and ventilations through two cushions.
And the extraction of wind should not be from small veins scattered in the flesh, and for that reason, do not catch the virtue through them, as it is the case with phlebotomy; nor should it be covered with fire or heat in any illness caused by congestion until the body is completely evacuated.
If it is necessary to provoke wind for an illness or continuously, we should permit it at the beginning of the month and at its end, and in the middle part of it and at any time.
And therefore when pain appears in any part due to those causes, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the night, they order a ventilation to be made after two or three hours have passed from the day.
And the immediate ventilation of the neck consists in when that condition imparts gravity to the head and causes it to sink into the shoulders; more importantly, this is a proper evacuation for all the body.
And this ventilation is in the location of phlebotomy of the head.
And it is not advisable to use that which is of cold and wet composition, or in which catarrh exists, as this causes great harm.
And for this reason, one should not use those on the feet, and on the tops of which are incurable injuries.
May he who is lying on his back feel relief; and for that reason, make sure the bellows operator places his hand lightly on the suction parts, so as not to cause loss of consciousness.
The use of bellows (ventozacio) can replace phlebotomy of the vein and basilica: thus it confers relief from asthma, constriction of the larynx, incision of the windpipe, coughing, and congestion.
And it is necessary to gently apply the bellows to the lungs a little, for if it is stopped suddenly, it generates weakness in the body and stomach.
And the bellows application to the head (alhagdahan) confers relief from accidental pains in the head and eye, migraines, and facial pain, and is an alternative to phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
And beware that you command the bellows handler not to press his hand during scarification so as not to pierce the artery and cause bleeding.
And the bellows should be applied to the mouth to relieve congestion of the gums, and to similar conditions in the mouth, and is used instead of phlebotomy with a knife that is done on both lips.
But the bellows applied to both palms brings warmth, which is done by means of repletion with heat.
And the bellows applied within the armpits brings freshness after phlebotomy of three veins, namely the basilic, the femoral, and the cephalic, as it draws blood from all those manual veins within the flesh, and from those smaller veins of the other, larger veins until it attains the three mentioned veins.
And order the bellows to not force further the scarification, for the place is stripped of flesh, and leaves its nerves and arteries exposed.
And it is a bellows that is blown over openings and conferres aid to hemorrhoids in the rear end and to pus ulcers left behind.
And it is necessary to command the bellows that it be a powerful bellows, and of iron, for the place requires a strong section; and its sharp, thin blows should be applied gently during the scarification.
The gentle blows of the leg bellows, by their minute manifestation, draw the sanium from all parts of the body, and provide relief from ancient pains in the kidneys and bladder, and from fever; they provoke menstruation, and provide relief from pain in the loins and sides; and they serve in place of phlebotomy for two veins, and also for scourging and binding.
Nevertheless, these weaken the entire body and cause fainting in many men.
And from the openings of the throat, the healing is also directed to the openings of both legs.
And the quality of the position of the openings is that it stops the opening at the beginning of the flow, allowing suction to occur in a timely manner, and does not prolong the position of the openings; rather, it releases them slightly, and retains those firmly, and allows the humors to come to the area by their own occurrence. And do not cease to repeat this until the area becomes red and swollen, and the pain of the inflammation appears.
And then you scarify and repeat the suction little by little, and consider the disposition of the body.
For that man who has tender skin, be careful to cut him once, and not again, so that the place is not ulcerated.
And command the fan to increase the cutting and press slightly, and facilitate the suction with ease.
And if the swelling in the vein is great, you must cut twice, for the first cut opens the way for drainage of the vein and its contents. In the second, apply the scrutiny acquired from the extraction of the thick vein.
And if the vein is very foul-smelling, you must make a third scarification so that you can achieve the last (result/effect).
Lastly, when we wish to extract the vein little by little or a small one, it is enough for us to make a single scarification.
And if we wish to extract a hard stone, make a deep incision; and if we know that the stone is large, then we should make an incision sufficiently deep.
And the term "scarificacio" refers solely to the depth of the incision.
And if the stone is very large, hard, dense, and its pores are very tight, then the places for the suction cups should be softened, opened, and resolved; if it is in summer, use oil of aloe or violet, or pressed oil of hazelnut, or oil of nettle root; and if it is in winter, use butter, or oil of lilac, or chamomile, or stone root, similar substances.
And if the excess is very thick, sticky, then use oil of marjoram, or balm oil, or aloe oil, or oil of anise, and similar substances.
If the leech is of ample size and has tender flesh, it should be prohibited from oil, and at these places where the leeches are applied, the leeching should be done with warm water or with water mixed with salt, or with hot water from a bathtub, or similar.
And that one whose leech has a lot of humidity, washes its leeches in wine or in water mixed with myrtle and sumac and similar things.
And for those whose excesses are abundant, wash their leeches in ancient wine or in water mixed with fennel, which is marjoram, or from the infusion of anise, or chamomile, and similar things.
And be it known that leeching should be avoided immediately before a bath; as it is recommended to administer the leech just after or during the bath for an hour or two, and that the patient should sleep with the leech in place.
What is it that must be done to regulate the bloodletting after phlebotomy before bleeding?
When beginning the process, if the phlebotomist or the one who has undergone bloodletting is irritable and has severe pain, inflammation, then you should take measures to counteract the cold, such as with milky herbs, endive, vinegar, salt water, and similar things.
And their diet should be restricted to light foods such as chicken and other lean meats, seasoned foods, and similar items.
And for those whose condition is severe, they should take in plenty of warm drinks such as almond milk or poppy seed milk, sumac, and fragrant herbs between meals; and it is recommended that they consume little to no alcohol, avoid chicken, duck, and small birds, and limit their diet to herbs.
And it is necessary that on days of vomiting and bleeding, the patient should take more liquid than food.
It is also necessary to give drinks containing tyriac, or a mixture of musk, which is peppered, or alcelite before vomiting or bleeding, or afterwards, so that the main parts of the body are comforted and the pain is alleviated; and they should not take anything causing a rash.
However, all the openings (scarifications) that are made should be on areas of the body that do not suffer from cirrhosis or gout, such as the liver, the perineum (area between anus and genitals), and the armpits, except for the joints, which should not be subjected to scarification.
And it is not desirable for these (openings) to drain the pain from a member, but rather to stop it with a pause over the breast in cases of severe blood flow from nasal sinuses; and they use this so that the trapped air in the member is dissolved, just as they pause over the stomach and navel, because it refines the member and opens it up, relieving pain as it resolves the trapped air.
And it is now held in place over the bruises when they occur by pressure or impact, because due to the power of attraction the bruise has a healthy pressure and eradicates the clot from its location.
And it seems to happen when it is held over the liver and gallbladder, requiring ventilation in those enclosed spaces.
And these ventilations are administered using suction, sometimes only, and occasionally using fire.
And sometimes they are administered full of hot water for the ailments of the gallbladder.
And this is so that the ventilation is filled and a great pus is produced, it is only hot water or water in which appropriate herbs are steeped.
Form of a wound dressing applied over fire: the size of the opening should be two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and the quantity of material should be the thickness of a palm; and in the length, on the side where it is in the round, half of it, the edge should be small according to the amount that fits into it with a needle.
Use erysim or citrus, with thick margins, lion's paws, nails and thorns to prevent the member from changing its position.
And place across it a transverse blade of iron or erysim where the candle is held over the fire.
And this dressing is much greater than that which we have previously used, and its quantity is less according to the illness and the condition of him who uses it.
And the suckers on children's bodies are weaker than the suckers on young people and those with strong bodies.
And the quality of stopping this pain with fire on the member is to extend the flame from a decent piece of firewood in front of a small candle made of wax, and place it over the middle of the transverse tongue at the exact spot of the pain, so that the fire is ignited around the area to prevent burning the patient's body.
And once it is stopped over the patient's member, as we have said, when we have the pains and do not require what has been mentioned, and the heat causes the vapour to rise over that place, then the pain will be quickly dissolved.
And ignite the fire according to its manner, and repeat it if required by that.
A ventose may be applied to the pleurisy patient without a transverse tongue or a place to insert, and it should only be filled with water and stopped over the member.
And this is the form of it: And this windbag, the larger it is, the better, because it can receive a great amount of water.
**Chapter LXXVII**
Bloodletting instruments are not applied to all parts of the body, but only to those where it is impossible to use cupping glasses, due to their small size, as well as in places like the nose and similar areas.
And the quality of using those that you have found bloodletting instruments, which are in the infected wounds of animals.
And it is well to lay them in water, both day and night, until they become numb, without causing any cause of pain in the belly of those; and then evacuate the body at the beginning with phlebotomy and cupping glasses; and rub the patient's members until they turn red; and then place them on it.
And when they are filled and bound.
And if it is possible to suck out the area with a vent, it is more beneficial in youth.
If not, wash the area with vinegar and then apply warm water; and both should be rubbed and pressed.
And if the swelling of the wound persists and it drains, then you should immerse a cloth in hot water, and place it over the wound to stop the drainage.
And if the wound becomes enlarged, sprinkle over it vitriol mixed with salt and similar things according to the causes of stopping bleeding, as long as the wound is drained; or place on the area the dried seeds of poppy and leave them until the seeds adhere to the wound, and the swelling goes down.
And if it is necessary, apply bloodletting, when it is possible to change them.
And if bloodletting is forbidden, then the place should be rubbed with a warm compress or a needle should be inserted into the same place until it bleeds; and once they are stopped, because those who feel pain will soon give in.
And when you want them to fall off, sprinkle some Aloes trisate, or salt, or ash on that place and it will soon fall off.
Thus begins the treatment for the third stage: restoration. This chapter is mentioned frequently in the art of medicine; it is the restoration of broken and dislocated bones.
Oh, child, know that those who boast about this chapter are foolish doctors and common folk, and those who at any time did not study the books of the Ancients nor read a single letter from them.
And for this reason, it happens that this manner of science in our land is neglected; and you should not forget it at any time; and I have devoted myself to this only after a long study of the books of the Ancients and an understanding of their minds, so that I might extract the science from them.
And I have dedicated myself to experiments and studies throughout the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter everything that relates to my science and on which I have gained experience; so that others may benefit from it and be spared the labor of expansion; I have summarized it at the end of explanation; and I have demonstrated it in the final part of declaration; and I have formed in it outlines of the tools that are administered there, as an addition to explanation, just as I have done in two preceding chapters.
First Chapter.
The summary and compilation of fractures of bones, especially those whose prior mention is necessary, before we begin the recollection and recall of fractured limbs and their differences. Therefore, let us set forth in the preamble of this chapter the sums of the discourse; and the chapters to those who understand them, at the beginning, the artisans are compelled and at ease regarding the truth of these; it is for you and for those who are prompt to know or learn this noble art from no one other than yourselves.
And therefore it is said that when you encounter any fracture, dislocation, twist, or misalignment, you must immediately consider whether to begin with a fleubotomy or to separate it, or in some other way, if no other cause prohibits, with the utmost urgency and virtue, or it is the one who suffers, or weak from decrepitude, or exposed to violent heat, or to intense friction.
And then it is proper to content oneself with one's own food of bitter herbs and flesh of fowls and crabs; and you must abstain from thick meats and any foods that fill the veins with blood, as long as you are certain of avoiding apostema caut, and if you have no fear of material effusion in the member.
And then return the patient to their original position, to which they are accustomed.
And as the broken bone begins to be restored, you should know that the hernia should be deprived of nourishing foods with rich and heavy nutrition, also making meals from wheat cooked in water, and rice, and eggs, and meat, and cow entrails, and goat, and fresh fish, and large vegetables similar to these, and according to this regimen, there is a gradual and lighter coagulation of the fracture.
And you should know that the bones are brittle in old men and those who are weak, it is not possible for them to continue and be consolidated according to their nature due to the lack of blood flow to their members.
Nature nevertheless adjusts and amends the broken bone from any cause resembling gout, in which there is an accumulation that adheres and strengthens that part, until it becomes solid and firm, just as fire at the beginning, unless some cause prevents it from performing its functions.
And for this reason, it is necessary to restrict the patient's diet, foods that have weight and viscosity and bulk, as we have said.
And you should know that the species of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of members, for the fracture of the bone of the leg is different from the fracture of the bone of the head; the fracture of the bone of the foot is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the arm; and similarly, all other members differ among themselves.
And now let us recall all kinds of fractures, expounded in their separate chapters.
A great variety of fractures exists in itself. And they are diversified in their kinds; for some fractures are bow-shaped or occur elsewhere; and sometimes they are according to the length of the bone - such as stage fractures, sternum fractures, and additional ones arising or not from trauma, as is the case with fracture due to a blow to the head, small fissure fracture.
And every kind has its own specific pain or torment in restoration according to the distinct remembrance of itself in its places.
A clear sign of bone fracture. And this is how it is known to be a broken bone: its twist and turn, and the prominence and sensation of it upon touch, only when you press upon it with your hand.
And therefore, if there is no obvious twist or turn in the location and touching the bone does not cause any agitation or pain, then it is not a fracture.
It is possible that it is a twist or a small fracture, where you do not realize it with your hand and when compressing it does not hurt; then apply over it the remedies of which you have memory suitable to the moment, and make it tight for a thin constriction.
And you know that the location when it is curved and does not break into two or other parts without any accident in it, as the entire part of its comparison is restored, then you must begin from your hour to correct it with caution after it has happened.
And if it develops into gangrene, leave it for a few days until the gangrene disappears; then treat it in any way that seems most effective and suitable.
And you know that the restoration of the intestines and the stitching of them is lighter work than the treatment of bones where an injury occurs.
Then strengthen it as much as possible when the memory of the pain comes back.
If the bone is broken in two places, it may be necessary to extend this member from both ends, if it is a hand or a foot; or with one's hand if the member is small; or with two strings or one string and the hand.
And position the member to which it was originally attached in its natural shape, while holding the broken parts of the member extended; then pierce so as to cause those additions to return to their places, using whatever means you can think of.
And be mindful, according to your strength, not to harm the patient with your operation or cause any injury; and perforate as best you can, applying one instrument to another in accordance with their most effective forms.
And take care that at this opportune moment you apply your hand with the strength of yours, and if you sense any different cause here, correct it and overcome it by the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid violent extension and compression; thus do foolish doctors often cause gangrene through their operation, or bring about contraction in the member as we have seen with this in the operations of their misguided attempts.
And the quality of the tightness of the member at rest is what you should consider, because you must know that the members can be diversified in their smallness and greatness and in the form of those.
And of those that are small like the arm and elbow and similar to those, you should know that the wrapping should be of very fine cloth.
For those that are thick like the skin or leg, you should know that they require a tight and durable wrapping, as the binding on each side connects the large member and tightens it from every direction, so that nothing enters inside.
And then begin, carefully remove your evacuation of the swelling, apply appropriate pressure to it, over the place of that fracture with three or four layers according to the member's needs; and tighten your hand slightly with the bandage.
And then apply it to the beginning of the fracture site, pressing strongly so that you do not tighten your constriction which you have strengthened the location of the fracture. Then gradually lengthen your wrap around the fracture site, gently loosening the constriction little by little, until you take away from the site a great deal.
Then take another bandage and cover that other side over the twisted site with the wrap, and remove the wraps from the beginning beyond the fracture; and it is your operation on the constriction of the wrap and its mollification according to what we have said about the first wrap above.
And then place between the wrapping bands a lion's wool or cloth to which is attached the twist of the fracture, if there is twisting in it; otherwise, do not place anything on it.
And then place your hand over the other part, and wrap these sterile bandages nicely around it, as long as there is no swelling or abscess at the site, and press upon what has the abscess and alleviates the swelling; leave it for a few days; and then tighten the bandages.
And the bandages should be of various types, wisely chosen; they can be made of cane, or wood, or palm fronds, and their width should be according to this form and figure.
However, remember that the bandage placed over that fracture should be thicker and wider than the others, and its length according to the measurement of the limb in terms of size and compactness; then tighten the bandages over the other part as per your initial structure; wrap them closely around it as we have said about tightness, and this should be according to your structure, specifically for the fracture's location, and the longer it is from the fracture, the less tight it needs to be.
And ensure that the threads are of suitable thickness and fineness, and are many; if the threads are thick, as you have seen in the operation of some stiff sheets, slowing their thread cords, it is a great error when the tightness becomes uniformity.
Moreover, very fine threads are not suitable because you cannot achieve the desired tightness with them, and you will not be able to fit more than one finger between them.
If the hernia is located at the joints of the bones, then tighten them in those places without using sharp objects or iron threads, as long as it does not cause harm to the patient.
Sometimes the pain is so severe that it breaks the bones and causes disruptions in the joints, leading to a return of symptoms as described in the second chapter, according to their specific nature.
And you should know that a completely broken limb is not immediately tied with splints; the cause is that when a member is large, it cannot be held by splints right away, but after a few days, or seven or ten, according to your certainty of avoiding gangrene.
And this is the manner of the splints that the ancients used to restore, which are placed over fractures and dislocations and twists.
The method of splinting as an emergency restoration for fractures, suitable for complex cases and especially for women and children, where heat or friction should not be applied: take flour dust, which is the essence of flour that prevents the movement of the millstone against the walls of the mill.
And if that is not possible, then take a thin piece of wood and form it to fit the shape; do not make it too thick or too thin, and use it accordingly.
Another method of applying plaster for restoring fractures and dislocations: prepare a mixture of assafetida, labdanum, acacia, enula, and myrrh, all ground from dragon's blood, mirra, and aloe in equal parts; or mix it with licorice water or egg albumen if the patient's wound is not severe; and apply this plaster, for it is of good composition and gently restores broken bones, and proves beneficial to many.
Another method of plaster for fractures and twists: prepare a mixture of myrrh and white alder, dragon's blood, mirra, aloe, acacia, and Armenian wool in appropriate proportions.
All these ingredients should be ground in a mortar, mixed with water or egg albumen and administered accordingly.
A method of plastering and separating joints and bones from their locations, causing accidental pain in those areas and to cracks and fractures: take fine lint and immerse it in a mixture of wine and oil, and place it over the affected area.
This plaster is not meant for restoration, but to prevent pus and expel pain directly.
Another method of plastering for restoring closed bones: take dried fig leaves and poppy leaves, mix them together, and make a paste from them.
A method for a quick plaster used for bone fractures and to aid in the healing of abscesses: take alder branches, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, all-purpose flour, mix them together with wine; crush them until they form a paste, but not too finely, unless the member is scraped.
If it is scalded, then apply that to the affected area with cold water from parsley or cold water and use it.
Another way to apply a strong poultice for resolution after the first, when there is a hard abscess, is to prepare from fennel seeds and dill seeds, and hyssop, and melilot, and marjoram, and violet flowers, and chamomile flowers, and any other herb in equal parts; all are crushed and mixed with savory water or rosewater or vinegar, according to the quality of the member and the rest of its color.
However, Hippocrates does not say in his book that it should be placed on the affected member before its restoration unless certain preparations of wax and oil are made, and not otherwise; and he recommends that it be applied with a mixture of coarseness and fineness.
A Gaul may be seen applying poultices to the member that has been broken before its restoration, and the causes for which it is dry, seeking heat in such things as myrrh, onions, and similar herbs, just as we have recommended for those causes.
A method of applying a poultice for injury and pain: take equal parts of chamomile, nettle leaves from a man's beard or goose feathers, and salt, mix them well, crush and sift them, and make a poultice.
The amount should be adjusted according to the extent of the sprain and its separation; if there is no pain or discomfort or if the bone is not broken, it is not necessary to completely dislocate it from its place; in that case, do not force it for several days. And if a severe pain, pressure or swelling occurs at the site, immediately release or remove the poultice and avoid applying any further treatment to it.
Take a piece of linen and a sponge from the sea, moisten them in hot water, apply this to the area until the pressure and pain cease, then let the member rest for an hour; then place over it a cloth soaked in vinegar and oil or rose oil, wrap it up and leave it for the night, ensuring there is no further infection and that the swelling of the member subsides and the pain disappears.
And then apply that thin restriction and a small plaster without straining it with your initial tightness, and gently use it on the inside until it heals.
And if the abscess, pain, swelling, and all the other symptoms have already subsided, and you find yourself in need of a plaster and restrictions again, then apply that same method as you did at the beginning.
And if no other cause occurs to the member from those we have mentioned, then do not remove the plaster for three days or four or five or seven; and sometimes it is left for twenty days, as you judge by the loosening of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and it approaches the coagulation of the flesh over that spot.
Then adjust the restrictions more than in your initial tightening, and adjust the diet of the patient according to the progress of their recovery.
If you examine the site of the fracture and find it already dried out and weakened, then know that nutrition is prohibited from reaching that area; so you should apply a poultice of hot water to it every time you treat it; and this for three days; and slightly relieve the tightness, and with this operation, direct the nutrition to the member, and heal it gently.
But here is what the foolish restorers of a member's fracture do another time when it is not restored from the beginning, according to its covering, and is restored according to its crookedness, it is an error according to their operation, and great fear, and if it were a right surgeon, he would open up these ancient spaces in them and heal towards this.
And you have not seen any of them do this, so it is much more reasonable that they should not do it.
Chapter on: Fractures when they occur in the head.
The fragments of fractures are diverse, and their shapes vary, and their causes are distinct, for some fracture is caused by the impact of a blow, which stops all the bone within the joint, leaving the bone thus, as it were, torn from its place, and this type is called dislocation; or the space cuts through a part of the bone, cutting the flesh, and the incision does not pass through the rear of the bone; and this type of fracture is called absolute levation.
And the affliction of these two fractures is either great or slight, and from fracture caused by compression or strain; and its cause is a blow with a powerful object or an unexpected impact upon the bone, and they resemble each other in appearance.
And this fracture is either penetrating, causing the pancreas to be pushed towards the bone, or it is on the surface of the bone; and the affliction of these two fractures is either great or slight.
And from fracture, it is meant that it is endangered in the bone, in the subtlety of the hair small, and for this reason this specific type of fracture is called capillary.
This is a fracture caused either by an accident or by the impact of a stone and resembles, as it causes some lamina of the bone to break apart inside, and it occurs in the concave location, just as it happens with the ribs when they are struck and their entry into the cavities breaks.
And it is most commonly caused in the bones of children, as well as adults.
And with all these types of fractures, the bones are separated as if they were stars. And then you must return to the original state of all that is in its place.
And I have come to know all these types of fractures by examining them and trying their strength and the evident corruption of flesh that is upon them.
And the capillary fracture is known for being discovered when one looks at the bone, and it is cleaned, and pressure is applied over it, as the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, one must consider from the beginning the accidents that arise from the illness, and if you examine these accidents for what they signify by their manifest signs, such as vomiting from cholera, extent, loss of understanding, absence of voice, fainting, acute fever, discharge of pus, and redness of those areas, and similar symptoms in the major dispositions, it is a sign that one is not healthy.
If one examines non-corrosive accidents, one hopes for health, then one begins the treatment of it.
The cause is that if the pain has come upon you at the onset as it does and this happens during the winter days, then you must study the bone's exterior from the 13th day according to your disposition.
And if it is during the summer days, then you must know that you should study the bone in front of the 7th day, after which what remains of the bone is corrupted by the panniculus, and accidents as we have mentioned occur.
And if the fracture has already reached the panniculus covering the brain and it is in small pieces and inflammation, then you must know that you should incise the divided and inflamed part as you have learned.
And it is that you remove the patient's pain-afflicted head, and discover the bone according to custom and manner as possible according to the shape of the pain, and it should be lighter on the afflicted.
And if you should chance upon the detection of a bone fracture, pus or abscess cauterize it carefully, hold it with what covers it, and apply cold compresses soaked in wine and olive oil; allow the wound to rest until the abscess subsides and be certain of the flow of pus; then begin with the circumcision of the bone and the removal of the abscess.
And this is according to one of two surgical methods.
And one method is that you cut the bone with a narrow scalpel, and this is its form: Then administer another scalpel to it, a little wider than the first one; and this is its form:
Then administer the broader scalpel more deeply than the second one.
And you must use various scalpels, some broader than others; and some of them shorter, with the latter being more sharp at their ends, made of iron or steel.
And use their aid to facilitate percussion over the incision so as not to hurt the head and injure that part.
And if the bone is strong and hard, be careful that you perforate in the circle of the hernia before administering the incision tools, which are called non-deep incisions.
And they are not called this way, but rather because they do not reach the end of the bone in the testis to which it is attached; so that at the edge or margin of the incision there is a rounded tip or curve over that which leaves the head of the hernia exposed, resembling a small margin or circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take a great number of these incisions, each suited to the specific nature of each bone, as long as they are present in all parts of the brain; the end of which is sharp, the amount in length and brevity should be according to the quantity of specificity of this test.
And this is the method for three types of treatments: When perforating the channel of a broken bone, place the treatment over the bone and rotate it within your hands until you know that the bone is penetrated; then move the treatment to another location and pause where it intersects all or part of the thickness of the ray or surrounds it.
And then you cut with scissors what is between each part of the bone, making it thin enough to be able to place over it in a lifting motion, as we have said, to remove the bone, or with your hand, or with any other tool that you use to press upon it, using pliers and fine forceps.
And be sure that you take great care so that the scissors do not touch any cause of injury to the patient.
And so when you have perforated the bone and it is separated from the injury if it continues at it, and you extract it, be sure to clean and smooth it on the roughness of the bone from what is in the bone, like scissors, but nevertheless be sure that it is more gentle and subtler than the other scissors.
And if you pull out any part of the small or thin bones, take a tool suitable for this from your instruments, and apply it to cure the wound with lint and bandage it as we have said.
And another method of operation is light, free from pain, which cuts through bone and flesh for great praise; and this is the speech of it: It is necessary for you at the beginning that you begin to uncover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most violent and evident, until when you have uncovered that part and paused, leaving the extreme end of this cutting tool slow and gentle, of which this is the form:
And the lenticular cut is wide and does not cause any harm, while the acute cut is in two parts advancing lengthwise, thus; that the lenticular cut be adjusted to the shape of the face of the acute cut in the bone.
Then strike with the instrument on a cut of a part with a small mallet until you have cut through the bone completely, so that it is easy to remove, and you are sure of the panniculus that it does not occur in it an accident that you fear in any way, and if the medicant14 (presumably a type of salve or medicine) was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of their conditions; certainly, he would be asleep.
When a bone breaks due to a cause attached to the tissue in certain parts of the bone, he will cut it from that part with a curved scalpel and release it from its encumbrance, for it is freed from its discomfort and pain.
If the bone fracture does not penetrate the tissue, and what is detached or remains attached to the bone is the fascia, containing roughness and subtle filaments, you will need to shave off that roughness and eliminate those filaments with delicate razors that you have prepared in various quantities so that you can apply them as appropriate in all areas for the most convenient and accurate use of these according to how you conduct your operation on the broken bone and its shape.
And you must apply in your reasoning, with which you shave the bone at the beginning, the most sharp of these razors, and then use them sparingly, not ceasing until you have administered the most precise and delicate application to all these parts.
Place a small capillary and subtle fracture in each of the other broken parts, ensuring you administer treatment according to what you find during rectification.
And it is because not all who have studied that art follow it perfectly. And let us dwell on what he writes, having shown in great fractures.
And if the pannicle is retracted when you remove the bone, then take cloth from it according to the quantity of the ulcer, submerge that in warm oil and place it over the ulcer; then take another piece of cloth or one folded twice and immerse that in wine and oil, placing it over the first cloth, gently pressing it over the ulcer so as not to damage the flesh; and then apply a thin layer of lint, not tightening it unless the ulcer is large.
And leave this treatment for a day or two until you are certain of the abscess being healed; then remove that and administer medicines as necessary to reduce dryness, such as linseed oil and flour of elm, and powder from herbs and aristology, and similar substances.
And you should make this medicine into a powder that is sprinkled over the wound when it is dry; and generally, administer to the patient all medicines of the right kind from which they should abstain and not bite.
And be careful according to your ability that the wound in your treatment is clean; and do not allow any pus or other impurities; nor should you add virulence to it; for when it is attached to the tissue of the brain, it corrupts and harms it, and brings about a malign evil upon the patient.
And it happens in the brain, when because of it the bone is corrupted and more so when the treatment of it is delayed, and it becomes black on its surface; and therefore consider carefully if this accedes to the patient the accidents that we have said, knowing that it is pernicious for all its skills.
And if a blackness does not occur from the medicine placed upon it, but rather from that very medicine which causes the blackness, then take some honey and finely ground olive oil in equal parts, mix them with a cloth, and apply that to the affected area; and then treat it with the healing spices appropriate for its cure until it is healed.
**Chapter III**
On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken in two places at once, but rather one of those bones or perhaps some of them, since it has two bones within it; for the broken part is cartilaginous and not actually snapped, and it does not harm it with cracking and distortion and inflammation.
If one of the two parts is broken, then you must insert a small piece within it and hold that fracture together from inside with a thin stick, and apply pressure from outside until the nose returns to its natural shape. And this should be done to facilitate your work and beware not to cause pain during your operation on the patient's illness.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and it does not reach that point, then it should be equal to the end of the line where there is a slight bulge.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should make it similar to this.
And open the fracture for its restoration on the first day after the fracture, if possible; otherwise, return to the seventh or tenth day to observe the healing of the wound.
And insert a piece of linen cloth into the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part, or insert two cloths, if the fracture is in two parts, and make sure the cloth fills the nasal cavity to its fullest extent.
And so some of the ancient remedies are that the swelling should be immersed in a bath, and changed throughout the day, which I have not seen; after having discovered that the joint is immersed in an albumen of chicken cooked with flour powder; and then apply it until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardened.
And sometimes it is found that it is inserted into the nose instead of swelling, due to the high amount of pus that is wrapped in a cloth from lions; and this is because the fracture of the nose is very painful and the injury does not prevent inspiration.
And this treatment is not always necessary; and if you wish, do this, and if you prefer, use swelling.
And if another incident occurs of nasal abscess, apply a plaster to the nose with wax or a strip soaked in hot oil and rosin, or with vinegar.
If you do not accidentally cause an abscess, then cover that external wound with a paste made from sea-nettle flour and powdered enssence mixed with egg albumen, and place your hand over it for some time, without allowing the nose to touch it for any reason.
If you break or crack the bones of the nose or they are displaced, then carefully divide them and extract any pieces that do not belong there; and with the cut, cure it by packing it with what is appropriate to promote healing and solidify it, and apply suitable plasters.
And if you suffer from an infection inside the nose, then cure it with hot compresses and insert platinum tubes until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not severe, observe if the fracture is only on the outside, and not split into two and bent inward, then its healing will be light.
And if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; conversely, if the fracture is on the left mandible, insert your right index finger; push gently to facilitate the separation of the fractured parts inward, with your other hand from the outside of the bone's broken side, until they are equally aligned.
And if the mandible fracture is already separated into two parts, then you must apply extension to both parts, according to their rectitude, so that they can be aligned as much as possible.
And if tooth concusion leads to displacement, then tighten those of which you expect to break free using gold or silver or silk thread; place a cerot over the broken mandible, and place a doubled cloth over it, and lay a large, properly cut sterile dressing on top, or a piece of single thread along the length of the mandible; then secure it as appropriate according to your equipment and what application is convenient, so long as it is not destroyed.
And order the patient to rest and be quiet, and abstain from eating any rich foods.
And if you estimate that the shape has been altered in any way, then on the third day, you should cut and loosen the bandage; correct what has been distorted by it and apply a powder made from millet, or egg white, or chamois flour, since you will have removed the cerate from it, and place over the plaster a woolen cloth.
And having thus attached and adjusted this plaster over him, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave it, unless it becomes loose, until it heals and strengthens the fracture; for usually this fracture heals in three weeks.
And if another case of gangrene occurs, then as we have said regarding the treatment of this disease in the previous instance, apply it until it heals, and renew that treatment for the abscess.
And if the fracture is a severe one, consider whether it's a complete separation of the bone or fragments, then carefully apply pressure to those fragments in a way that suits the removal of those from the instruments.
And if the wound of the fracture is narrow, then widen it through flailotomy according to the extent of your need.
And once you have secured those fragments, and they no longer move, then widen the wound of the fracture if it is narrow; otherwise, place a splint over that one of the appropriate tools and encase it, until it heals.
Chapter .V.
On the restoration of the furcula (a bone in the neck) when it is dislocated.
When the ribs are seen to be broken, the fracture is caused in one of three ways.
If it is broken, separated, or divided into two parts other than accidentally, it is less prone to restoration; or it happens that the bones adhere, making restoration difficult; or the fracture is as if it were a plague.
And for the operation on that one, when the fracture is as if it were a plague, you must have two assistants present, so that one holds the adjutor and continues to hold the broken ribs, while the other stretches out the collarbone towards that parted area.
Then bind the fracture with ties as it is done according to its form, and not in a few prominences or convexities.
And if you need more extension, wait until the cushion of the patient is covered with cloth or wool, and adjust its size according to your necessity; then extend and raise the splint and tighten it with your hand until you feel the fracture as needed.
And if you cannot extend the end of the splint to the desired position due to its curvature, then you must reposition the patient so that their chest is elevated, and place a cushion over their muscles, one-and-a-half times larger than needed.
The assistant should then press on the muscle at the joints, while lifting the splint's end towards the fracture, ensuring that the bone is correctly aligned; then, you will adjust the fracture and secure it in place as needed.
If you feel any resistance from the splint or it is difficult to move, then you must cut into it and extract that interference to facilitate its movement.
And if it is retained in the bone, you will make an incision with one of the scalpel tools that you have prepared for this purpose, having previously placed the fork, the instrument used by the surgeon, to one side; and this is the form of the tool:
It resembles a cup, and its depth should be according to what is necessary for it, whether the bone is large or thin.
The length of it should be according to what is possible for the operation; as there are two ends, one end should be wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the abscess that you have incised when extracting the tissue from the bone is wide, and it is secure from post-operative infection, then you will adjust the two edges of the abscess with stitches.
And if the disruption is minor or you fear a post-operative infection, use clean drapes and powders according to the extent of the wound's incision.
And if an infection occurs post-operatively, apply clean bandages with rose oil and honey, and place them over the area.
And as long as the star (scintilla) above the broken bone is not dislodged; and so that you see the malady each day, if the ligament becomes softened or you notice the star already dislodged, then correct it and strengthen the binding.
Then hold the patient's sleep (or rest) over their collarbone, and place a small cushion beneath it to keep the pressure on them during the night; so that at that time, the assistants supporting them from the side of that area are elevated, and thus the fracture of the furcula (a term related to the shoulder blade) is raised from the muscle's position; or, alternatively, their arm is lifted to the collarbone.
And do not loosen the binding unless you notice improvement in the area or an aperture (postem) within twelve days.
Then renew the plaster if you see that it is falling off, adjust its tightness, and restore it; leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the furcula (shoulder blade) is healed and hardened.
And it is strengthened and relieved according to the need in 28 days, and in some cases in certain men it is done in less time than that.
**Chapter VI**
**On the Restoration of Shoulder Fractures**
The blade of the spatula is broken in the lateral part of it, not the root but the edges.
And therefore, when the root is broken—and it is broken in the middle part of it—it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture, you must prepare it and reduce it back to its natural shape in every way with all the skill at your disposal.
Then place a powder made from almonds and honey over the wound; also, use a double cloth poultice; and place a thin table side by side according to the length of the spatula, or a little more.
If the blade is concave in any part of the spatula, then you should cover that concavity with a stop and adjust the blade according to equality.
And then tighten it strongly over the dilated tongue with a constrictive band, keeping the blade in place so that it does not move from its position.
And consider the condition daily; every time it becomes softened, tighten it again and adjust the blade if it moves from its place.
And keep the patient on their side.
And the spatula is restored in 10 days or 25th days. (Assuming 'xx' and '.xxv' represent numerical values, with 'xx' being 10 and '.xxv' being 25th)
And therefore when this number is completed, you dissolve the ligament, and be sure that it is from among the bones of which the beginning is not to be feared nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed from the place of the pes (foot) bone and place a clamp there, then cut over it, hold it, and act as we have said in the fracture of the spur of the ischium of the pelvis, carefully if this should happen here.
**Capital VII.**
**On the Restoration of the Broken Foot.**
The foot is sometimes broken in the middle part, and this heals slowly; its ends, however, are quickly healed and solidified.
And among the accidents of the body when the middle part of it is broken, it inclines to the sides and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, severe leaning and vomiting of blood; it is manifest in the cavity of the broken bone and not hidden from sensation.
And the restoration is that the patient be placed on their back, and a cushion be placed between their thighs; then press upon their muscles, adjust their ribs with both hands, delicately perform the operation in every way possible that is suitable to it, so that the shape of the bone returns according to its original state.
Then place a plaster and stopgap over it, using a thin sheet of willow or calamus and similar materials in elevation, wrapping them in cloth; delicately attach that to the broken bone without damaging it; periodically adjust the binding according to the curve of the back, tightening that with due stricture; and consider the binding at all times, tightening it when it softens.
And if it is necessary to cause the detachment of that corruption or pressure or pain or abscess that occurs in the area, then you cut and loosen it and remove the plaster and correct what happened through the method of treating it; and then return the plaster to its place if appropriate, so that it heals.
**Chapter VIII**
On the restoration of bones when they are broken.
You know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur unless there is a severe impact on the back; and in the case of their ends, away from the point of departure, it does not cause compression to those parts except through what they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of it is not hidden from the sense of the patient through the inquiry of it in these places.
And the restoration should be such that it joins the fracture in the best way possible, as it is covered, and then apply a plaster and tighten the broken bone with a splint, if necessary.
If the fracture of the ribs is inclined towards the internal organs, it causes severe pain and piercing to the patient, similar to the pain caused by a stab wound; due to this, the bone sticks into the body; and it results in difficulties in breathing, coughing, and severe vomiting; and this condition is difficult to treat.
And the ancients were ingenious with their knowledge of these things.
And from their knowledge, they say: Cover the food that causes inflammation and flatulence, so that the belly is swollen and extended, and the fracture is pushed towards the outside parts.
We should consider this before it causes a slight delay in healing and leads to an abscess if not treated; and if it does occur, then immediately provide aid for it.
They say that some rest on the windward side and suck in strength from it, which seems reasonable, but there is fear that the wind might blow excess fluid to the affected area due to weakness.
They say that one should cover the affected area with cloth previously soaked in hot oil, place pillows between the ribs until it is filled, and wrap it according to its shape; also, treat the illness with food and medicine pleurisy.
If the pain is intense and the patient suffers greatly, and the bone punctures through its covering, one should be concerned about the illness, uncover the affected area, exposing the broken rib, and then place a tool over it to preserve its integrity; remember how it happened, and carefully cut the bone to extract what is stuck.
And then we carefully adjust the two edges of the wound, if it is large, by sewing, and treat it with bandages until it heals.
And if an abscess occurs inside the hernia, cut it open and insert poultices in warm oil over the area, and treat the patient with what covers the abscess inside.
And it is recommended that the patient be turned over onto their side on which they sleep until it heals.
**Chapter IX.**
**On the Restoration of Fractures of the Spinal Vertebrae and the Collarbone.**
In some cases, fractures occur in the bones of the collarbone, and they should be treated by compressing and securing them, resembling the treatment of spinal vertebrae. And if you encounter this in anyone and wish to know whether it will heal or not, consider: for if their hands or feet are already softened and numbed and dead, and they cannot move them nor tighten them, and when you press them with your fingers or pierce them with a needle they feel no pain, then you know that it is not curable, and in such cases the condition is fatal.
And if you feel constriction and pain in the joints and pressing and piercing, then know that the night of the bone is safe and that the malady will heal with treatment.
And if you see the spine of the neck resembling this and wish to know whether it will heal or not, consider the patient's feet.
Now, if you find that they are already softened, and it happens to those parts that were affected in the hands or feet, and when they lie on their backs, they have difficulty breathing and movement is against their will, and sometimes they turn over onto their backs and want to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is fatal, and therefore do not bother with their treatment.
If you do not cause any additional damage, the cause is better and more easily treated.
And the treatment for it is that you pierce the seat of the abscess with a cauterizing iron that is heated to a moderate temperature, or use poultices of hot oil or vinegar; apply this to that area several times a day until the abscess is healed by the cauterization.
Then remove one of the comfortable and effective bandages, tighten it around that area, and instruct the patient to rest, maintain tranquility, and not sleep on the affected side until the pain is gone.
If it becomes necessary to remove the attachment of a bone or any other cause that is already separated from it, then clean the wound thoroughly and expose the cut bone; adjust the two edges of the wound, suturing them if necessary; and tend to any inflammation around the incision until it heals.
If the tail of the bone is broken and it is the end of the leg, then insert your left hand's little finger into the fissure, and swallow the broken bone with your other hand as best you can using a second-degree leverage; then apply a plaster and bandage over it, if needed, and strengthen it.
And if you feel fractured bones in it, then apply pressure over that area and immobilize it, and treat the wound with the treatment that precedes its healing.
**Chapter X.**
**On the Restoration of Health.**
The bones of the limbs are often broken, and when they break, the fracture is usually a communication to the extremities of those parts, extending in length and declining inward; it causes pain to the patient at the site and a numb sensation when broken.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over that area which is above the fracture, as the shape of it.
And if the fracture is only in the end of it, then you should wrap that second according to what you have been equipped with, just as another part that is assembled to its natural shape.
If the fracture is in the long bone or has already declined to the parts, then you should make the patient lie on their stomach so that you can prepare for the restoration of that fracture. And so when you have done that, place a plaster on it, and then place another on the splint of wood or leather, and tighten by compression without fear of puncturing the fracture or removing the sternum.
And fill the concavity with something that will give it compression equally, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
If you encounter an apothema (abscess) cautiously, stop the extension of it and its restoration until the apothema is sedated, and place over it what has been mentioned before; then return to the restoration of it, and tighten it thus with a bandage.
And if fracture occurs in the long bones or they are broken, then treat them.
Chapter XI.
On the restoration of the fractured assistant.
The assistant (adjutori) is the space between the thigh and the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which one is to take a plate of moderate thickness and shape it as follows:
And two ligaments are seen in both extremities, then they should be suspended from the elevated position.
And follow the patient on a side; then, with a swift motion, throw your broken arm over the pole until it reaches the middle point of the curve of the pole where it is attached.
And then suspend over any heavy cause or the minister extends this to the parts below; and the doctor should place his hands on the fracture, holding it until the break returns to its place.
And another method is that the patient should be placed on their back and hold the collar of the neck with one hand, while the other two ministers hold the parts above and below the fracture, each extending it to their respective ends.
And if you wish the extension to be stronger, tighten your hold on the fracture with ligaments and on another ligament, so that each of the two assistants extend in two directions.
And so if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, you must stop half of the ligament over the tendon and leave the other half behind the fracture towards the elbow.
And if the fracture is close to the elbow, you must stop the ligament at that place and over the elbow.
Use all of those that are easy and suitable for the task, and then as they are wrapped according to how they should be applied, tighten them if there is no risk of apoplexy with caution.
If there is a risk of apoplexy, do not tighten it within the seventh day, and cover it with woolen thread soaked in vinegar and rubbed oil until the swelling subsides, and then tighten it.
And the method to tighten it is to place a plaster over the fracture, then wrap new cloth around the plaster, adjust the arm over that helper, and keep your hand open on its muscle.
And then secure the cloth and tighten it around the arm helper to keep the arm in place without any movement, if it doesn't contravene any cause of the broken bone.
And then use splints.
And it is that over the fracture, one splint should be placed on each side and made stronger than the others; and between each splint, the distance of the said bone should be maintained, and the length of the splints according to the break, adding three parts from the whole length.
Then tighten the splints with the tension already mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And it is that your tightness over the fracture site should be made even tighter. And the tighter the fracture is held, the less pressure there will be.
And therefore, by adjusting the position of the bones and maintaining the tightness as we have mentioned in the time when you restore the member to its proper place, you will succeed.
And if you fear infection, then release the tightness and reposition the bones within the next seven days as we have said.
And consider the ligament in all cases for three days to prevent any further damage or inflammation at the site; avoid food that reaches the member due to excess tightness; and therefore, correct everything as we have said.
If you are certain that no such cause exists, then do not loosen the bandage but leave it for three days or more.
And let the patient's rest in this position with their thighs supported, and their hands on their stomach.
And apply a hot compress filled with wool fat, and consider at all times during the night or day that the shape of the broken member should not be distorted or loosened, so correct it as much as your ability permits.
And provide the patient with food as previously ordered, beginning with a light diet so that it does not begin to strain them; and then gradually increase their food intake.
As for the usual practice of using supports and leg rests, they should be kept tight for about 10 days; and then they should be loosened and baths should be administered and medications applied to those parts to correct the condition.
And if the fracture is clean, you must not remove the ligaments and stitches for one to two months.
**Chapter XII**
**On the Restoration of Broken Arms**
An arm is composed of two bones, which are called the forearm and the upper arm; the smaller one being that which ends in the wrist, and the larger one being that which rests below it, extending upward.
And if the larger bone is broken only, or the smaller one, they are usually shattered together.
And when the smaller bone is broken at the wrist, its restoration is easier, and healing is quicker.
And when the fracture of a bone is severe, the healing of it is bad and difficult.
And another bad consequence is when two bones break simultaneously.
Therefore, if the bone that is broken is a small bone at the end, it is appropriate for the doctor to intervene, and you should restore it with small extensions until it is completely healed.
If the broken bone is a large one, then it requires more extensive restoration as it is more severe.
And if both bones break simultaneously, then the extraction must be done with greater force.
And you must position the hand in such a way for restoration and the extension of the fracture over a cushion, with the palm of the hand above all other parts, the thumb lower than the rest, and the patient's discomfort centered on a well-prepared bed.
And place a cushion before them or behind them, directly against their condition, so that the illness does not worsen.
Then the minister extends the arm of the person suffering from pus further down with his hand or bandage, and another minister extends similarly on top.
Then the doctor aligns the bone within that reduces according to the best shape possible.
And if in the fracture of the bone there are many pieces, then you must completely reduce them all to their place with your skill.
And if there appears to be a complete separation that cannot be restored, then you should terminate it and maintain the position as we have said above.
If the fracture is a serious matter, you have already made a specific point to it, so now take care of that.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your recovery, you should wrap a linen bandage with a paste made of rosin oil and white wax, applying it gently between the bones and joints until the abscess subsides; then remove the bandage and apply a poultice prepared from powdered chalk, and place staples; and let the staple be the one that holds the fracture most securely.
And know that the names of the bones in the arm are arranged in the greatest order, either in a single focus or in two foci together.
Then tighten your bandage over the fracture most firmly and vigorously, and as the tightness on the parts above the fracture or below it increases, loosen the bandage slightly according to how much relief is felt at the beginning of the treatment.
And the sheets that you wrap around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough, the thread used to bind them should be of medium thickness, as we have recommended.
And consider the members and their ligaments after some days. And if any cause arises that requires correction, as you perceive what happens to the member, then apply water or some other remedy to the affected member until the pressure ceases.
And allow the member to relax until it rests, then return to the stricture (or original position).
And if the tightness has already been relieved and the bone has healed and seems like those (before), then correct everything with your virtue.
And consider more if the nutrition is blocked from reaching the member due to excess tightness, for then you know that you must soften it a little and leave it for some days until the nutrition reaches it, and then strengthen it.
If the patient does not present any of the causes we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to expect relaxation within a few days or around those times.
And it is also necessary to keep the patient's hand suspended due to the virtue of its agitated movement, and make them sleep on their back.
And you know that this fracture is healed in 30 days or 33 days, or a strong one in 28 days, and all of this depends on the disposition of the complications and the virtue's dispositions.
Chapter XIII.
On the restoration of the broken bone of the hand and its joints.
You know that the joint of the hand and its bones often suffer from wear and tear, and this is not caused by sudden accidents but rather by gradual motion.
And when an injury or strain occurs in the hand, you must ensure that the patient remains calm and lie them down with their injured arm extended. Then place your hand over it to provide support.
Then the physician should extend the broken bones and align them so that they grow together correctly.
And you should know how to apply bandages and stoppages carefully, otherwise gangrene may occur; then cover it with a cloth according to the area's size, and you have already wrapped it in linen cloth.
If the fracture is within the deep parts of the palm, then make it like a thread of cloth, and command the patient to squeeze that part of their fractured palm; then pull the long cloth tightly.
And let the star of light be like a cloth in which the body is enveloped, and squeeze it according to how much it covers.
If the fracture is in the external parts, then cover it with a cloth and another cloth on the opposite side of the palm, so that the hand is covered and straightened; and then apply pressure, as the hand is rotated to its normal position between the said ligamentz.
And if a fracture occurs in any of the joints, and it is the little finger, then bind it tightly according to how much it covers, and press it against the palm; and if you wish, place a small cloth right under it so that the fracture is raised and not damaged.
If the fracture is in any other digit, just as in that of the middle joint, or in the index, or in the little finger, it should be enveloped and tied to the finger itself; or all the joints should be tied in succession, which is better; or it should rest on that small bone, as we have said regarding the foot.
And consider, in your restoration, and return that, the arrangement of abscesses carefully and oppositely - in accordance with your operation - regarding what covers when any cause of those occurs, as is described repeatedly about it.
Chapter XIV
On the Restoration of the Fracture of the Bone in the Thigh.
The bone in the thigh moves and breaks, revealing itself to the air according to its conversion to the surrounding condition and the pus that surrounds it.
And the restoration of it is done in such a way that the ligament is tightened over the fracture and another ligament left over the fracture, and the patient is prostrated on their belly and face.
And then the physician should extend the ligament to its proper extent according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
If it is deemed necessary to open the wound, then its ligament should be pulled in the opposite direction from the thigh, so that extension occurs within it, and another ligament left over the fracture.
And similarly, if the break is deemed to be on the opposite side, then its ligament should be pulled in that direction, and the extension made at the parts left over.
Then the physician should align the bones with both hands, reducing them as much as possible according to their natural appearance, and the bone is united by a good joint; then it is necessary to cover with plaster and tension, if not the member will become amputated. If it occurs in an abscess, leave it for a few days until the abscess has healed, and then return to your treatment.
The compression should be done thus: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, fold it two or three times, and remove the excess; then wrap the leg until it reaches the thigh and the root of the bone.
And insert a long strip of cloth between the thigh and the leg band near the joint, bringing the ends of the cloth from both parts above the two joints, then wrap again over the leg and the thigh where the excess of the bandage is.
Then place your weight on the thigh at the location of that fracture gently, and put a splint across those bones of the leg.
And then fill the space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloth, so that the constriction is coagulated.
And then begin with a strong constriction around the middle of the fracture site using three or four layers, and as you move further away from the site of the fracture, the constriction should be less severe and more gentle and moist.
And then extend both ends of the bandage to the sides, keeping them within the foot's cavity, and tighten both ends of the bandages from the other side to prevent the ligament from moving from its place.
And then secure the constriction so that it does not cause any damage to the corrupted member or lead to gangrene or inflammation and similar conditions; and if any of those occur, then it is necessary to remove the constriction and correct what has happened immediately, as we have said repeatedly.
If there is a bone pain in a bone that you cannot remove, then cover it with what is available to you; otherwise, wrap it and treat the one from which the pain arises until it heals.
And in some cases, this fracture of the thigh is so severe that it cannot be aligned with just bandages, as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
However, in restoring it in this manner, do not cause the patient to limp; and if it is only restored, then another bandage should be applied to the other leg, because it is necessary that he does not limp from the one that was troubled.
And you should know that the thigh is strained in 10 or 30 days, or a month, and all of this depends on the diversity of the conditions and other dispositions.
**Capitol .xv.**
On the restoration of the broken collarbone.
You know that the fracture of the collarbone in the shoulder often leads to prolonged pain, and may result in chronic stiffness.
If the fracture occurs, it is not merely a crack or break in its parts, but a severe injury that becomes a great affliction, and over which one has no control.
And its restoration involves reattaching what has been broken from its parts, and rejoining them as closely as possible through appropriate means and with ease in their fabrication.
And then apply a plaster over that round scar, if necessary; and use tightness on it as appropriate.
And now consider all the dispositions that we have recounted in other fractures, thus with care and similarly to those that oppose any accident that is suitable for it until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
You know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is thick, and it is called the femur; and the other is thin, and it is called the tibia.
And it happens in some cases of fracture that occur to the two bones of the arm, and for this reason restoration is made to them equally as with the restoration of the arm itself, and the operation on it is one.
If two bones are broken at the same time, the leg is completely shattered.
And if the bone is broken subtly, the leg is shattered in pieces above.
And if the bone is broken very thickly, it will protrude, and it is among those causes that are not easily healed.
Then apply extension, compression, and traction of the bones according to that engagement.
However, if the fracture of the leg is clean without many pieces, extension should be less and more gentle, and it is better to leave it to nature's healing.
And in the leg is no cause for operation on the arm, and it is when you engage the steels and complete all the tie operation that you will take wooden splints from the part left with the causes that are set alone, and they are made entirely of palm leaves; you align them from those to which coarse treatment is required, and do not use excessive force on the hands, and the length of those should be according to the length of the leg, and from the inner side to the outer side.
And then wrap each drape in two layers according to its length, place one at the opening of the leg from one side and another from the other side, ensuring they are all within the proper depth of the foot.
Then secure the two splints at three points on each extremity and in the middle point, so that with this structure the leg is prevented from bending at the left and right openings, and it remains in a stable position.
And now a splint of wood is applied according to the length of the leg; it should be placed on the leg to prevent any movement.
Especially ensure that you do this in case of fracture, and when that pain is truly acute.
And then consider the leg in each subsequent day, studying it closely to discern any delays or inflammations or other similar causes; and when some cause of those occurs, be prepared to treat it with what is appropriate until healing takes place.
Chapter .xvii.
On the fracture of the talus bone and other bones of the foot and toes.
The talus bone does not suffer a fracture completely; rather, it is the bones of the foot that sometimes suffer fractures, and the toes rarely experience fractures but instead undergo atrophy due to poor positioning.
If the bones of the foot suffer a fracture and those bones become dislocated from one another, then the patient should place their foot on the ground in a prepared position as they heal.
Then place a foot over what is elevated due to the dislocated bones, and press down on them, and tighten them until they return to their proper places.
And then apply a plaster and bandage over it, and place the foot's belly on a small table with two legs.
Then tighten it firmly to the foot with its natural curvature, since you have wrapped it with cloth and other materials as needed.
And after three or four days have passed, you will loosen the ligament, as you will find the bones entangled, or broken, or dislocated, and the operation on these is as well-known to you.
But if someone says it is broken, then restore them, entangle them as they were, and with your skill, re-align the bones in their place. Then make the split according to the length of the bone, and a little on one side; and place the foot on this table which is now aligned, and tighten it firmly with its natural curvature.
If what is broken from the bones is two or three pieces or more, then place your hand over each piece as it is wrapped in a cloth, and tighten the table at the bottom of the foot, and while standing on one of the table's legs, make an incision in the sole of the foot so that it has good retention.
And it is important for you that you do not forget to consider all the causes that we have mentioned regarding other fractures from accidents that we have discussed; and pay attention to every accident related to this.
**Chapter XVIII.**
**On Fractures of the Hip Bone, the Thigh Bone, and the Shin Bone in Men and Women.**
When the hip bone of a woman is broken, make her lie on her side, and gently tilt her towards the broken leg slightly, and hold her behind.
And then the midwife fills the cavity with warm water and makes it so as to expect; and the woman is made to bend, and slowly lifts her two legs, until everything is removed inside while the cavity is open and the broken bone returns in place.
Then place poultices on the patient's back, and when they want to urinate, help them remove the bandage easily, collect the urine, then clean and return the poultice in the same manner as before, and bring them back to their initial position.
And do this for seven days or around those times, for that is when it is restored.
And if you wish, take a bladder of sheep and stretch over the patient's wound a tube of canvas; then insert the entire bladder into the cavity, and blow air into the tube until the bladder is inflated inside the cavity, for the fracture returns.
And then it is filled with a bandage and remains for some days as we have recommended, until it heals.
And when the bone of the thigh of a man or woman is broken, then in the restoration and healing of it we administer what we have recommended for the hip bone.
And what is right is not obscured in these close fractures and poses little danger, especially for those who have some knowledge and understanding of this my written work; for that fracture indicates to you in the greatest dispositions for the correct treatment of its restoration and stricture. And therefore understand well.
But in the case of a man's leg when it is broken, take a splint from above and place it on the leg; then wrap it with a cloth bandage, and let it be so wrapped, and lay it up for three days or around those times, and it will heal.
Chapter .XIX.
On the restoration of broken bones when they are afflicted.
It is convenient for him who suffers a fracture due to an accident, especially if the bone is large, as in the case of the thigh or any similar bone, that you immediately perform a flebotomy on him if the conditions for flebotomy indicate it, as we have said above.
And if the infection spreads to the blood, then you must stop the flow of blood by applying pressure over it with a clean cloth as soon as possible, unless there is another reason that requires immediate attention.
And then begin to restore the fracture as soon as possible on that day, and do not delay it, if otherwise there is a risk of abscess formation.
If an abscess occurs cautiously, leave its restoration within the ninth day, until it is resolved, and do not touch it on the third day and the fourth of every month, lest you cause more harm.
If a bone breaks off prominently at the exposed joint, cover and protect yourself from perforating to reduce it, and bind it with your hands as easily and sparingly as possible.
If the extension is beyond your control and the condition of it requires your hands, then reduce it with your hands or this instrument; an instrument that is made of metal, with a length of seven or eight digits, and a width according to the extent of the injury; and for this reason, it is necessary for the physician to take three or four of these, according to the amount required for treatment in all types of fractures.
And once done, it should be in small pieces to prevent the risk of it bending during the operation.
And it should be of sharp extremity where its margin is in their extremities; and the upper part of it should tend to thicken, and from its middle part within to the fissures.
And this is the shape of it:
And it is called "voluntary lip hernia" in Greek, hence the term is rare.
For the part that requires the acute extremity of it to be raised above the prominent end of the bone.
And it should be applied at once as soon as the bone returns, and be wrapped with some bandage.
So therefore wrap the extremities of the fracture between them, and if the broken extremity is thin, and you do not grasp it with good force, then you must insert the end of that bone within while the instrument has power over it.
If you cannot return the bone to its original position, then cut open that part which we have mentioned for it using scissors or saw in any way possible.
And then cut away the one that is stuck on the rough bone with small splinters.
And when the bone is returned to its place and the hernia is reduced, if the patient feels intense pain, you will know that the bone has not returned to its natural position, and thus you have brought great relief to the malady.
Once you have completed the bone restoration, immerse a sterile black cloth in vinegar and, especially in summer, do not place it directly on the wound or any other area where there is oil, so as to prevent putrefaction and corruption.
And then apply staples at the appropriate time for the complete restoration of the bone, leaving the wound exposed so that you can incise and use forceps and wraps according to the extent of the wound.
And be very careful not to strain the wound against the fracture, as you have seen foolish doctors do this, and cause death or severe corrosion or putrefaction in their patients, which is unclean. If the contraction is slight, flexible, different from the contraction of other fractures,
And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you are afraid of further complications that we have discussed, and there is pain in the area, do not apply pressure to it, but rather use a hard wrap of cloth instead of staples and tighten it around those parts.
And when after one or two days the pain begins to manifest itself, with heat generated in that part, then remove from over it the cloth which you had placed there, and administer certain remedies, applying those which according to our custom we use for such plagues, thus as a poultice of tetracyclic and similar substances.
And it is expedient that you clean the wound and consider the plague each day and evening until it is consolidated and healed, and make sure that the member is prepared in such a way that the pus flows from it to the surrounding parts with ease.
If the plague passes many days and is not consolidated nor does the pus leave the affected part, then know that here are only measures to alleviate the pain so that you can always tend to the wound. And of those remedies, some are separated and removed, others cannot be separated and place the member under pressure, causing pain; therefore, incise them as you find possible.
And if the wound is infected with pus or ulceration, which is a sign of inflammation and decay, then cover each one of these with whatever is appropriate for its cure, as described in its chapter.
And concerning what I must say and you present your case: when the flesh is torn, it protrudes over the member, resembling the bones of the thigh and its support, and does not give way or allow extraction, as these movements cause death; after leaving that space open for a few days, perhaps 2 or 3, then cure the wound if you have observed it, but leave it if not.
**Chapter XX.**
**On the Cure for Nodules That Occur at the Site of a Fracture.**
Motions witnessed occur during the healing process of a fracture, particularly near joints, and it is hindered by the shape of the member; thus, it prevents the member from performing its natural function.
Then consider whether the displacement is recent and administer those medications that have been strictly indicated for it, such as aloe, senna, digestion, and similar ones; in this way, take some or all of them, and apply those with a styptic effect, or albumen from eggs, or vinegar, and place them over the nodule in a compress, and tighten those around it with good constriction.
And note that the compression should not be released for several days; then loosen it and repeat with another, as long as the nodule persists; or fasten a lead sheet over it, as lead has the property of reducing any swelling in the members.
If the nodule has already changed to a hard state and its tightness causes discomfort, then cut it away from the surrounding tissue carefully, remove any excess and prominent parts, or clean it with a sharp knife, as long as it remains undeterred; and treat that part until it heals.
Chapter .xxi.
Regarding the restoration of a fracture, once it is healed, then the delicate member should be wrapped gently according to its natural shape.
When a bone fracture is healed, and the delicate member is gently wrapped, it should not be done for trivial reasons: among which one is an abundance of solution of the ligament and the binding done improperly; or due to excessive tightness of the ligaments that prevents nutrition from reaching the limb; or because of too much excess in application; or due to inappropriate movement at the wrong time; or because of poor circulation of blood in the patient's body, and due to weakness of the member.
The treatment for this is to restrict the patient's movement and make their body relaxed while increasing the blood flow in the affected area; administer baths, and use gauze and bandages with care and joy upon it.
And then place your hand over the member, so that the poultice attracts to it the most nutritious moisture or continues the application of lukewarm water, until the nutrient flows and returns to its natural form.
Chapter XXII.
On the healing of broken bones that have been restored crookedly and the prohibition of their operation, if it covers them.
When it happens to the already restored member, then the healing of its crookedness and bulging bone should be sought, and this is done by reshaping the form of the member; however, the member is not prohibited from its natural operation, as long as you receive the permission of him who considers that member newly broken.
There have indeed been many foolish doctors and healers who have done this on our earth, and this operation is highly reprehensible, losing great fear of the sign of which it is deadly.
If recent claudication and nodulation are present, then immerse them in tepid water containing herbs that soften the affected areas, such as althae and razite, and melilot, similar to those used in preparations; apply a mollifying plaster, or use a mixture of althae razite and either a grey of guine or oil of cerame, and cover with a plaster; or employ fresh fat figs pressed between women's thighs, similar to the medicaments known as consolidants.
And sometimes it is dissolved with regular gentle friction on the moistest areas, and movements of the affected member should be repeated at all times during the day.
If the deformity has already progressed and becomes rigid, twisted, and transformed into a stone, making its cure necessary by knife, then it is important to note that pus on the surface ceases and the continuation of the bone is dissolved, and a cut is made at the excess of nodules from that side using fine osteotomes, and ease is provided to that part with diligence and care.
Chapter .xxiii.
On the subject of dislocation.
Dislocation is the dislocation of a joint from its proper position, preventing movement and causing deformity in the affected member, leading to severe pain and injury in the patient.
Therefore, when any dislocation occurs, it should be reduced as soon as possible; if delayed, the joint becomes stiff and its reduction becomes difficult.
And for this reason, if it is not reduced immediately during the period of stiffness, spasms and severe pain occur in the muscles and joints.
If this happens, you must then perform a fluoroscopy of the affected area to identify the dislocation and reduce it as follows: place a cushion under the patient's body to rest the dislocated joint; immerse the member in hot water and oil, and then carefully reduce the dislocation.
And every member should be treated with the liquid whose recollection will come to its proper place.
And you have already arranged the chapters of dislocation as mentioned in the fracture; from the part of the body above, go down to the part below.
**Chapter XXIII**
On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
If both jaws are dislocated without pain, the displacement of both is caused in one of two ways: either they are slightly moved from their places with a little pressure, and then softened a bit; or they are completely dislocated and swollen, so much that saliva from the wound cannot pass, and neither can he close his mouth, nor can his tongue be moved.
When the dislocation of a limb is slight, it returns to its proper position on its own without much cause.
If the dislocation is complete and serious, it is necessary to administer a gradual reduction of the limb without delay.
And it is that the practitioner has the patient's head, and the doctor inserts his finger into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the patient's mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts two fingers together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and all the other fingers are outside, which equal them; and he orders the patient to cease moving their jaws and to relax so that they return to their proper place. The doctor also holds the jaw and gently pushes it back until it returns to its location.
And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are simultaneously dislocated, then administer evaporation with water and oil, while gently performing the reduction of both until they return to their proper place, as we have said.
And so when they return and are properly wrapped up, the opening of the hernia is closed and not relaxed, then place a layer of cloth over those dust-like poultices, made of cera and finely ground oil; and apply it easily and gently.
And let the patient lie on their back with their head between two pillows, so that they do not wince to either the right or left side; and do not force them in any way to swallow; having taken their food, wait until the pains are relieved and the jaws are relaxed, then let them cry out what they will.
And this should be facilitated; do not work on the opening of the mouth due to eating, drinking and belching, as long as the jaw is sore and healed.
And if it is difficult to reduce two jaws that are dislocated at any time and do not return to their proper places, then feverish events occur, frequent vomiting, severe abdominal pain in the patient, and strong, clear cholera is thrown up.
And when you see this, you will know it is a loss; and often the man who suffers from this dies in a few days.
**Chapter 25**
**On the Reduction of the Dislocated Furcula and Extremity of the Muscle**
The furcula is not dislocated from the shoulder within its continuation towards the leg; however, sometimes it is dislocated at the point where it departs, and this is evident upon examination.
And the restoration of it is that the patient retains the pain in their back and extends their arms. Then tighten the area with your palm using a firm compression, so it returns to its place.
And then apply pressure to that poultice and compress it firmly.
If the end of the limb that is affected is dry and continues to be so for some time, it will not become dislocated; then it must be reduced and bandaged as we have said and according to your equipment.
And then apply pressure to that poultice, and compress it, and use restraint to make the patient adhere to quietness and rest until it heals.
In this treatment, the cure is to reduce the end of the muscle when it is separated from its place.
Chapter XXVI.
On the reduction of a dislocated muscle.
You should know that a muscle is not displaced in one way only but according to three manners, of which one is its displacement at the attachment point on one side.
And the second is that it is displaced at the attachment from above on the muscle, and this is done with care; and it is not displaced at the rear attachments through the shoulder; and it is not displaced at the front attachments by the nerves.
And it is most commonly displaced and comes out at the attachment points on the sides after the tendon, especially in those where there is little flesh, it is slightly displaced; but more so in those where there is a lot of flesh, it comes out with difficulty.
And many people suffer from sudden impacts or falls, and the muscle of him is attached to a fixed cautery, and it is cut through what has already been displaced.
Then, understand that your strength enters here while you are superior to it, and you will proceed with its treatment.
And it is known that dislocation occurs when the tendon slips; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy one, for you find among these different manifestations; you find in the head of the muscle its concavity and place the thorn after touching the head of the muscle thus as if a bow, and the patient cannot return his hand to its normal position nor move it.
If it is dislocated in the foot or ankle and you find obvious touching, it is not hidden.
And from this dislocation, slight reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is young.
And the reduction of it is that the minister raises the patient's hand to its place; and he places the cushions under the thorn of his muscle, and supports the joint with strength in its place, and the minister raises the hand of him, and extends it until it returns slightly.
It is not possible to provide a precise translation without further context and knowledge of the specific dialect or historical nuances involved. However, based on the given text, a possible translation for this line could be: "Since what has been said does not return, from the beginning that the dislocation occurred, for several days, it is necessary that the illness be bathed in warm water and administered herbs that soften and line the joints as if they were cut with fennel, fenugreek, and melilot in water.
Then the patient should be placed on their back and rested with a cushion under them, awaiting that it becomes engulfed in relaxation and tension, and then the doctor places his hand over the area, raising the head of the muscle towards verticity, pulling the patient's limb away from the joints to prevent further damage, and another attendant holds the patient's head so that it is not damaged by the movements, for then it will return to its place.
And if you wish, reduce the second in this manner: it is to make present a man who is taller than the illness, and stands on the side of that joint, and inserts his muscle into the area below the cushion where the illness is, and raises the cushion above the joints until the illness is suspended in the air, and another assistant pulls the patient's hand away from the joints beneath their belly. If the disease is light, then it is necessary to understand what other cause might be suspended, so that it does not worsen, for the dislocation may return soon.
And it is reduced in another manner: take a long stick with a rounded end like a pestle, neither too thick nor too thin, and place it beneath the patient; then press down on the head of the stick with lion's cloth, and the pain will stand according to the length of the stick, and extend your hand from the other side to the opposite part; and strengthen the other side, for the joint will return to its place at great speed.
And if the reduction is difficult due to all the causes we have mentioned, then use this cure: take a stick whose length is equal to the span of two arms, and its width is four fingers, and its thickness is adjusted according to this form:
And then cover the head with soft cloth to prevent the wound from becoming infected.
Then place yourself in a comfortable position, extending your hand or arm over the wound within the opening, and position the cloth over the wound, covering the assistant, arm, and end of the hand.
Position yourself with your arm at ease on a scale according to the wound's location, extending your hand over the opening, while the other assistant holds the patient from the opposite side, ensuring the joint is stabilized momentarily.
And once the insertion is complete according to any method you find feasible, wait until you place a thick layer of woolen thread, prepared in advance with powder from a mill and egg album over all the muscles, ensuring it is thoroughly wrapped around it, and then bind the thread tightly; wrap the ligature over the padding, attach the patient's hand to their collarbone, and leave it for seven days.
And ensure that the patient's food intake is limited, until the member is comfortable, as it is lighter on the healing of the injury.
Then gradually increase the food intake and exercise; and thus if it is stopped and not softened, then healing has already occurred.
If the joint is dislocated due to humidity that occurs in it or for another cause, then ensure that a hot cautery is applied to it as described in the chapter on cauterization.
And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the bandages and tightness are reduced several times, but it cannot raise that arm to its normal position, then know that the nerves of the muscle, which are at the top of the muscle, are already damaged or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its proper place.
From the dislocation of that which is affected, you must reduce the foot and ankle or the joints behind, by pressure and extension of the limbs, so that it returns.
And both these treatments should be applied to that other constraint, and care should be taken until it is healed.
And if the healing becomes critical in the member and delayed in its movement, then the malady uses numerous baths at intervals until that gravity is alleviated and it returns to its original state.
Chapter 27.
On the cure for dislocation of the hip.
You know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; it is dislocated in all parts, most notably in front of the rear part, and the dislocation of it is not hidden from you when the bone is out of place or by some figure dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip, this is declared manifestly to you, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm nor touch its muscle.
And take care to cover the wounds and reduce the dislocation as soon as it comes close to becoming gangrenous, for if it becomes gangrenous, its reduction is difficult, and its cure complete; especially when it is in the rear parts, for it is worse than all other types of dislocation, causes greater pain, and often leads to death.
And the restoration of the dislocation, when it is possible to reduce it, involves extending the patient's hand with two more people, expanding their arm, and the doctor's hands should be on the thigh and beneath them, pushing the joint with the fingers of both hands until it returns to its proper place.
If the dislocation is in the front parts, then return the hand by bending it with the other hand, striking the thigh with the back of the palm.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply violent extension and strong motion.
And it is that two ministers extend their arms, and they hold this object with two ministers so that it does not slip from the extension.
Then turn the arms over all parts, because it is wrapped with a long folded cloth over their hand, or bandage.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he applies some oil to it in order that these causes which lead to the friction of the joint be helped, and then he gently pushes and rubs the joint until it returns to its place.
Then the hernia should be reduced and placed over the paste in which there is stiffness and the application of egg albumen, and it should be extracted with relaxation and lowering, and the arm should be suspended from the collarbone and left for a few days.
Then it should be loosened; and thus, if the joint is formed in its place, you loosen the bandage from it and leave that.
And if you see the joint is not too strained, apply the plaster and lubricant, leave it for some days until it becomes detached, then remove it.
If it is a case of severe inflammation and the joint is in a state of movement, then apply moistening in the form of baths and subtle friction, and keep them elevated, until it is healed; or place a cooling compress on the affected joint, especially if it involves fatty movement; and after it is bound, leave it on the bone during the day and take it off at night. Then remove the bandage and immerse that part in a bath; when clean, gently rub the joint with a warm friction, repeat this process three times daily, until it becomes mobile again. in the bath, until it is relaxed.
And if you wish, place your hand over that moist and scalped slit of the cow's flank, press and tighten it; do this several times, for that part is moist and returns to its condition.
Chapter 28.
On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder joint, which is between the arm and hand.
In some cases, the shoulder joint is dislocated, and its reduction is delicate; on the other hand, other joints are easier to reduce, but it is essential to be quick in reducing a dislocated shoulder right after it occurs, before the area becomes inflamed or develops an abscess.
And the reduction of the dislocated shoulder is that you place the patient's hand on a table and make them extend their arm, while the doctor places his hand or palm over the joint, pushing it until it returns to its position.
However, it is necessary to consider that if the palm has already been placed on the patient's abdomen, then the illness rests the back of the hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation precedes this, then the position of the hand from within should be over the table, so that the doctor's hand can act upon that imminence of the joint.
And therefore, if this can be done soon, it is good; otherwise, strengthen that compress gently, give time, and let it heal; for if you do not allow it to heal, neither will you be able to achieve the reduction of the hernia any further than by passing days.
However, the joint should be moved according to its stiffness; do not force the patient, for the hand must be softened and cannot grasp any cause; then know that the nerves are torn or stretched, and it is only by cauterization near their attachment that you can strengthen them, which will give them some cause.
Therefore, when the disease returns, place your hand on the poultice we have prepared and leave it there for several days; then loosen it, leave it be, and exercise your hand upon it.
If the movement of it is stopped and some gravity occurs in it, then apply gentle heat and friction a few times, until it is relieved.
**Capitol .XXIX.** (Note: The number XX9 indicates a chapter title, not a page number.)
**On the Treatment of Dislocation of Joints**
Sometimes, the joints become completely dislocated.
And when a joint is dislocated, either to the back of the hand or the belly, then straighten the joint and push the dislocation back into place with your fingers, until it returns.
And then support the head of the finger, suspend the affected part, and leave it for two days.
And then suspend it and stretch it until it is properly aligned on that same day.
And at night, according to this narration, continue to stretch it as described during the day and exercise movements with it, and do so for several days until it is completely straightened.
And do the same thing if it is dislocated in the mother's womb, stretch it and attach it to that opening, performing the first operation carefully until it is healed.
And do the same thing when it is dislocated in other parts.
This appears to be a section heading or a chapter title, possibly indicating "Chapter XXX" in the treatise. Without further context, it's difficult to provide a translation.
On the treatment of dislocation of the spinal vertebrae.
When a spinal or cervical vertebra becomes dislocated, it often results in severe pain as the adjacent vertebrae are displaced from their normal positions. Without prompt treatment, this condition can be life-threatening due to potential damage to the patient's health.
Another indication of this condition is that the patient cannot voluntarily control their symptoms; they may experience weakness in one or both legs, arms, or hands, as nerves are affected. Sometimes, a vertebra becomes dislocated and, in such cases, it is imperative to reduce (realign) it immediately, as prolonged displacement can lead to permanent damage.
Once the dislocation is reduced (back) to its original position, it is referred to as subluxation.
The treatment for this condition involves careful consideration, especially in cases of childhood dislocation, as it may not heal properly on its own and complete recovery might be unlikely.
In those cases that occur by chance or through percussion or similar to these, the Ancients have already described treatment methods in lengthy speech, from which the greatest benefit returns; you may have already been briefly excused from that of too much light, due to my close proximity to my intention, which I hereby expose and shape with various instruments, from which I will now show and space out that.
And of these, only the one that occurs on the spine itself is curable with what you have recommended.
For the disease has spread over his face, touching both sides near the wall, and it has caused great pain within him such that his feet cannot be moved.
And then place a straight stick under them, pressing it into the ground at the end of the foot near the head, and another stick on the other side of their feet at the opposite end of the foot.
The minister should hold the stick, but not press it into a pit; another minister should hold the other according to that form.
Then wrap around the patient's head and leave the titillating liens to hold them fast; extend the end of the ligament to the stick which is against their head, and bind that to them; and then tighten the other ligament over their hips, supporting their legs, and adjust all the ligaments, binding those to the other stick which is against their feet.
Then the minister should slowly extend the ligament to the end of the stick, and the two sticks and the ligaments in their respective places where they are fixed should not be loosened, but nevertheless they should not be tightly bound as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or he places them on a table, and then adjusts the patient's feet on the table until they return.
If it does not return in this manner, take a table whose width or length is three bras long, and dig into the wall of which we have said that it is very close to where the patient's malady lies. And then place the weight of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, pressing firmly until the spine is bent and returns to its place.
And if you wish, open again the space which is turned with the hand; and it is that you place yourself on the ground, holding the patient's head at the back of his legs with two fists, whose length is a brass, and hold his head at the back of his eyes with two fists exactly; and let the distance between each fist be a palm, and make incisions in each fist where the pain runs out, and hold each limb firmly on the ground so that it is not moved.
And take a rod made of wood, in which the thorn is embedded, and turn it around in both channels of the two rods.
And at the end of it is a channel in which the rod is formed, its length being about a palm where it is turned; and the other two rods are similar to that.
Then tighten the ligaments that you have straightened on the patient's foot in the passage where it is necessary to remove its head, and the ligaments that you have tightened on their thighs in the turn that leads to their legs.
Then remove each turn and place a minister who twists the turn with his hand, and the doctor ties the spine as we have said.
And when the spine is returned to its place and the area is cleaned, then apply a dry, albumen paste, and stop; then place it on the paste as a board whose width is three or four times the length of the affected area, and its length is such that it covers the region of the redness, and above the departure of the spine.
And then use the aforementioned remedy, employing subtle nourishment for the patient until they are healed.
If any signs of recurrence appear in the area at the end of healing, then medications that soften and soothe should be administered through a long course, as we have recommended; indeed, this has already been applied to that site in the form of a lead plate.
And in some cases, there can be an imminent danger at the end of the spine joints, resulting from dislocation; it is that bone which you must not ignore, as it requires prompt attention to this treatment, for otherwise it will cause severe pain and potentially death.
Capital .XXIX.
On the cure of a dislocated hip.
You know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle should not dislocate unless there is a sudden movement or a concave shape, which does not happen to other joints with small removal.
And the hip joint is dislocated in four ways: either inside or outside, in front or behind.
And it is most commonly dislocated inside, and rarely in front or behind.
And the sign of dislocation inside is that when you straighten the patient's leg with the aid of a splint, it becomes longer and the inner side is more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their foot normally, and this is the place where the tendons become inflamed from inflammation, so that the tip of the bone has already been damaged here.
And the sign of that which happens when a dislocation occurs is that the parts are outside, as the accidents of it are contrary to this accident.
The sign of that which happens when a dislocation occurs in the front part is when the leg expands fully but does not bend at the joint, and if it perforates to go backwards and cannot return to the front parts; then the urine of the patient is retained and the engorgement of the limb becomes apoplectic, and you must move the limb of the patient over the sole.
The sign of that which happens when a dislocation occurs in the back part is that it does not expand the leg, nor can it bend the joint opposite to where it bends, and the leg becomes shorter than the other, and the swelling is softened, and the head of the matter is turned to that place.
However, the reduction of the symptoms of this dislocation is that you consider, when the dislocation is old and ancient, that it has already been reduced by itself or with appropriate treatment according to its position, then it is not necessary for that same cure to be performed; and thus it does not cover all that should be done in such a case.
Place it on that which has a recent dislocation, and it is one of the four types of dislocations, then reduce the joint by bringing it back to its position and stretching it within and without, and turn it to the right and left, for thus it returns strongly and does not require other treatment.
If it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong support and extend the patient's leg from the joint further below, or apply a bandage, or a ligament that is tight over the leg; another minister should extend the hand of the patient above thus applying pressure to the joints; and yet another should tighten the ligament at the root of the thigh, and have someone else hold the end of the ligament.
And either extend the leg or the part within to angle the part of the furca, or the back part to the part of the spine.
And it is the extension of all of these at once, so long as the patient's condition is elevated to their chest and the hanging parts are relaxed.
And this type of extension is especially common to all four (parts/sides).
And therefore, if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it will be good; otherwise, it will be necessary to consider all sorts of things regarding its treatment.
In the reduction of the hernia, when it is dislocated and the dislocation occurs within the gaps, the patient should be placed on their side; then, the ligaments should be pulled over the edge of the gap at the location where the base of the hernia and the area left between the hernia's head and the place enter meet; and then extend the ligament above the angle from the part of the bone to the highest point of the furcula.
Then, another assistant should firmly grasp the patient's arms, press the bulge of the hernia, and extend it outward by vigorously stretching it, so that it returns to its place.
And this specific type is of a lighter cure by which this member is reduced compared to other types.
If it is excused from you and you do not adhere to the treatment of this type of cure at all, then understand that both feet of the patient must be tied together lightly, less tightly, on both the toes and both the heels.
And the length of each part should be such that it is four times as much as the other, and the patient's leg should be extended more than the other by a quantity of two times.
Then the hernia should be suspended over the top of the foot, and it should be in the bottom; and the length of it from the ground should be two arm lengths.
Then command a strong young person to reduce the head of the thigh, and suspend it from another young person over the hernia; and another young person should press the thigh with great force, so that the joint returns to its place at speed.
In the reduction of a dislocation that has occurred outside, it is necessary to keep the patient in a position of flexion as we have recommended regarding its gel-like state; and tighten the ligament specifically on the affected thigh and on the patient's chest.
And then place two sticks as supports: one at the patient's feet and another at their head; and place a moist cloth over the affected area to prevent the pain from being aggravated by the stick being wedged between their thighs, so that you can avoid any further damage.
And each minister should extend their expertise, and the doctor should guide the reduction according to art (or skill/method).
And when the dislocation is in the front parts, you should ensure that the leg is extended slightly, and according to this method, the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the affected limb, then with his other hand he pulls it gently, and by applying this traction, he returns the limb to its proper place.
If the dislocation is in the back parts, you should not extend the patient on the sides, but rather elevate him above the ground; once you have ensured that he lies still on a firm surface, just as we mentioned regarding his position over two sheets, and his face and limbs are extended, as we have said, without any hindrance.
And it should be administered compression with a splint over the area where the joint is dislocated.
Therefore, when the reduction is complete according to need — and the sign of the reduction of the hernia is not concealed to you, since you spread apart two thighs from the patient, and when you see those folds and the hernia extrudes its thigh and you expand that excusion, then you know that the member according to need has been returned; and then you adjust two things, place a bandage, and bind tightly so that the opening is not worsened in any part; and keep the patient at rest for three days or four.
Then carefully remove the ligature and bandage, and compare one thigh to the other.
Now, if you see those folds on the surface, you will know that the dislocation is already healed, and then you can release the patient.
And if you see any sign of softening, then return and bandage it, and pull it back according to your initial stretch, and release it in three days.
And then, he should be slowly mobilized again over some days until he is strengthened.
**Chapter .XXXII.**
On the treatment of dislocated joints.
The joint is dislocated in three ways: when it shifts to the outside parts, and when it moves inside, and sometimes in front of the parts, but not in the front.
And the sign of joint displacement is that you command the patient to apply their leg against the thigh; then you know that the joint is dislocated.
And the restoration of all these ways is that you make the patient cease directly, so that they extend their leg if possible; hold their back with both hands, and place their foot between your knees; then do adhere the joint of the patient to your palms, and press those between your fingers over the joint of the patient until it returns to its place.
And the sign of the patient's recovery is that their leg adheres to the thigh in a non-painful manner.
And then apply a plaster to stick the leg to the thigh, and bind those parts with a bandage for three or four days, and then remove it.
And do not use the patient's mobility for some days, unless they are healed and comfortable.
If the reduction of the hernia is not urgent, then administer a strong extension to the ligament mentioned in the previous description of treatment.
Chapter .xxxiii. (Note: The number xxxiii indicates the chapter number, not a line-by-line translation.)
On the treatment of the dislocation of the talus (a bone in the ankle).
The foot, sometimes, is damaged by small removals, and sometimes it is dislocated entirely; the dislocation occurs either within the joints or outside them.
And the sign of the dislocation is that the foot appears swollen proceeding to the part where it is dislocated.
The treatment for the dislocation is of gentle reduction, and it is that it be extended with ease to the limbs and be guided back into place before it returns.
However, in the treatment of it when dislocated entirely, you must cease the malady directly, and have a strong and capable minister at the back of the joint near its middle location.
And then with your right hand, you should hold the foot from the top dominant part, and with your left hand, hold it from the lower part of the foot at the location of the ankle.
And then stretch the foot towards you with your right hand, and with your left hand pull it twice upwards, and extend your left leg; push the foot of the patient towards the bed on the side opposite the limb being worked on.
And do this twice as we have counted.
And then push the foot of the patient towards the bed for the third time, and you are at the ankle.
So if you return in one or two turns according to this manner, and if you turn the foot inside out, it is good; otherwise, continue the operation over that area.
If it is impossible for you to reduce it in this way that we have recommended, then cause the patient to lie on their back on the ground and make a narrow indentation in the earth, and place a piece of cloth over them between the thighs, and you have already wrapped them in a blanket so that they do not hurt.
And then the minister holds his legs, and another minister stretches the foot with its toes or with the ligature that lies on the top of the foot; and another extends each minister against the extension of his part, and the padding between the patient's thighs retains it, so that the hernia is not pulled away from its position beyond.
Then the doctor reassures the dislocation with his hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh at the sides, so that the dislocation returns to its proper place easily.
And when the dislocation returns and you perceive the reduction of the hernia to be healthy, then apply a poultice and reinforce that ligature strongly, and tie the foot with the ligature to the leg.
And be careful of the nerves that are behind the foot, so that the ligature on that does not become violent and injure it severely.
And then place it there for two days or three; if the swelling subsides, remove it.
And on the third or fourth day, remove that (bandage) and forbid the patient from moving for ten days. If, against the doctor's advice, the patient must move and open that space again, it is not certain that the dislocation will not be worsened and left untreated, which is harmful.
And if an abscess forms during the treatment, apply what has been described previously for care and cleansing in that area, as long as it is not healed.
Chapter .xxxiiii. (Note: The exact translation cannot be determined without additional context from the treatise.)
On the treatment of dislocation of the feet's joints.
Understand that one who is dislocated should be immersed in some extent of water for treatment; and what is not difficult, it should be lifted before.
If the dislocation is in some part of the foot, then you should make the patient lie down with their foot elevated either on the ground or on a table, and keep it that way as if they were walking.
And then you stand over the foot, place your weight on it to relieve pressure from the joints, gently press the toe against the ground until it returns to its normal position, and observe that it is re-aligned and does not protrude prominently from the joint.
And then place a board under the patient's foot that supports the entire foot, which has two ends, and tighten it gently but firmly for three days; afterwards, remove it and allow the patient to rest from walking for several days until it is completely healed and its strength is assured.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of the types of dislocation that are caused by illness or fracture or any other injury.
When any of these causes occurs and you focus on the treatment and restoration of it, you may often see deaths succeeding each other.
And for this, he who presumingly prescribes a cure for it, without understanding, but rather that one who is skilled in the art, patient, merciful and compassionate, should not be hasty or presumptuous; and he should begin medicines with caution, only as much as is necessary, and leave the diagnosis to divine judgment, unless he hopes for salvation from destruction, alleviation of suffering, and in which there appears some hope. And so, as soon as possible, strive to reduce it at the beginning of the cause, rather than waiting for serious complications.
And then, when the member returns to its normal position, administer treatment that prevents further apothema and cure the infection with whatever is suitable for it from the dry ointments.
And if dislocation occurs as a fracture and causes separation of the osseous joints, then you should drill through their statements and do as we have said regarding simple ailments of this type that precede in the places of those mentioned.
And beware and avoid, according to your virtue, the instrument in the ways of fear as it is preceded by my prediction; for what is better for you than your Creator, more enduring to your glory, and brings greater health to your true body in due time. Thus ends the words of Albucasim perfectly, of which God be blessed. Amen.
