Oh, my children, as you have completed this book, the last of medical science, through the fulfillment of its purpose it has come to an end, and due to its expositions, explanations, and declarations, I believe you now possess great knowledge from this treatise, which is a part of the most important operation, namely surgery.
For surgery, considered the most important operation in our region and time, has been largely forgotten due to the lack of knowledge about it, and the study of it has ceased; its principles are closed, its force weakened, and its art neglected, as is evident from the few descriptions found in the books of the Ancients.
And it has seemed to me that I should revive the order of this treatise according to the second way of exposition, declaration, and abbreviation; so that the forms of cautery tools and other surgical instruments may be added for clarification, and preparation, which is necessary for its execution.
But the cause why our skillful doctor lacks mastery in this our time is that the art of medicine is lengthy, and he does not have sufficient training in the science of anatomy which reveals how the joints work within each member and their forms; and the connection and separation of them; and knowledge of bones, nerves, and tendons, and the number of these, and their extraction; and also of pulsating veins and static ones, and the places from which they emanate.
And for this reason Hippocrates says that the name is worthy, yet in practice it is small, especially in the art of healing.
We have already spoken of this in the introduction to this book; for those who are ignorant of what we have said about anatomy, it is not surprising that they fall into errors from which men can die, as you have seen many such people, some formed in this science and others having gained knowledge of it through experience.
You see a foolish doctor who has cut open a pus-filled abscess in the breast of a woman, and he has cut some arteries in her breast so that much blood flows out until the woman dies from it.
And you see another doctor who attempts to remove a stone from a man who had passed it, and the stone is large, and he comes to him and extracts that stone with a part of his bladder, so that man dies on the third day.
And you have already called for help to remove it, and you see that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, he knows that he will die.
And you see another doctor who is paid handsomely by a duke of our land to perform surgery, and he takes a black cat that was badly broken; due to his ignorance, the doctor extracts the fracture over the wound, with pincers and forceps, but does not allow the wound to breathe.
And then dislodge it according to their wishes, and apply rest, and elevate for some days, and order that the bandage be removed; and thus also for the foot, if it has healed, so that the matter does not recur and cause harm.
And they have often called upon him, and prepared to loosen the bandage, and as a result, there is peace and thus an end to their pains.
However, if the corruption is already confirmed in the member, then it cannot be restrained, and the corruption does not cease to spread throughout the member until the danger of the illness increases.
And I have seen another doctor who perforates a cancerous fistula, and it becomes an ulcer that takes several days to heal, until the malignancy of the disease increases under his care.
Which causes the pain to be purely from melancholic humor, and it does not cover that it will harm them completely, but rather that it should be in the member where they suffer most.
And for this reason, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation be divided into two parts: one is in an operation associated with health, and the other is in a work which is perilous to the greatest dispositions.
And you have already encountered this throughout all parts of this book where operations are discussed that contain error and fear; for it is necessary for you to keep this and reject that, so that people do not take the wrong path and speak against you.
So take up your tools with diligence and the protection of God, and your patients as an ease and a stability.
And use the best means by the grace of God to achieve salvation and glorious success, leave behind terrible illnesses with difficult healing, and set aside your fears so that your faith and your name are not abandoned: for more remains to your glory, both now in this world and forever after in your sanctity.
He already dissected in some of his own members: Do not cure bad ailments improperly, lest bad doctors become renowned.
And you have already divided this book into three chapters.
Begin the division of the book, and first, from the first part. The first chapter ordered deals with the feet, in the forms of instruments and the craftsmanship of cauterization tools, and what is necessary for the operation.
Division of the second part. The second chapter discusses incision and perforation, and the use of cupping glasses, poultices, and extracts from arrows and similar objects, all chapters and ordered according to the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the cure of twists and similar conditions; a well-ordered chapter on internal foot issues and the shapes of instruments.
Understand what I have said about the quality of the materials for that cautery and the documents related to it, and in what circumstances cautery is prohibited.
Therefore, it is said that the discourse on the quality of cautery materials and the documents related to them is long, prolix, and subtle in its knowledge, and secrets are hidden within it; and much has been written about it by scholars, but there are disagreements among them, so I will content myself with a brief discussion of their points.
And therefore it is said that cautery will relieve every condition universally, whether it be of material or its matter, except for two conditions, which are conditions that have their own matter.
In the condition that is dry and hard, the matter is out of balance; some say that cautery is beneficial for such cases, while others say the contrary, claiming that cautery is not appropriate for ailments caused by dryness and hardness, as the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it would be counterproductive to treat a condition that is dry and hard with heat and dryness.
And those who say the contrary claim that cautery is beneficial for all dry and hard conditions seen in the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of man and its humidity to the condition of fire, you find the body of man to be rough.
And he says through the discourse of those who claim this, that he has already experimented with it several times to discover.
However, it is not advisable to attempt this without proper training and knowledge, as one who has already been initiated and practiced in the art of cautery on various parts of the body, knows well the diversity of human anatomy, the disposition of ailments within their members, the causes of these, and the circumstances surrounding them, and the passage of time regarding these.
In other complex cases, there is no need to fear, especially in gouty and humid ailments, for all doctors are in agreement about these, and they do not disagree on the treatment with cautery in these cases.
And know, my children, that the secret of healing by cautery with fire and the goodness of it, lies in cautery as a medicinal remedy, for fire is simple; its action affects only the member being cauterized, without causing pain to other members nearby, except perhaps with a slight sensation.
The action of the medicinal fire reaches those members from which it draws its strength, and it strongly affects a member suffering from a difficult-to-heal ailment, aiding its recovery.
Kindle the fire, due to its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, for it does nothing but superfluous things. It has long been known to us from experience and from the longevity of studying the art regarding the truth of causes; and therefore you are excused from the length of speech. If it were not that it is read at my own leisure in this brief moment, I would secretly keep the fire from you, as well as the quality of the operation in the body and its expulsion by which you expel illnesses, demonstrated through philosophical discourse, which would be sharpened in your minds.
And know this, my children, that the timing of when to perform cautery and place pads is best during springtime.
And you say that cauterization is convenient at all times, so that the damage caused by time's accident is overshadowed by the healing of what is thrown off by cautery, especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary aches, severe and acute, which do not suffer from delay, since it is feared of those who come with evil, that it is better to inflict minimal damage entering at the right time.
And thus, do not sit on your feet, my sons, for it is only the common people and foolish doctors who value such things; for that illness which is healed by cautery does not always return, but leaves its consequence.
And the cause is not as they believe, for cautery is merely a place of medicine that alters the composition and dries up the humors which are the cause of the pain.
Yet, one may use cautery superfluously over medicine because of the desire for its validity and virtue in operation and the greatness of their lord.
And it is possible that their illness may return at some time in the future, depending on the composition of the illness and the location of their affliction, and the strength of it, and what is prepared within them from the addition of excesses and humors, and what has come to them through their food and similar causes; but the illness in which cautery is administered is a subtle illness in a few excesses and humors, just as dental cautery for pain and similar conditions, so it may be that that pain does not return, but this is done in small doses.
And it is often said in popular speech that a cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is true speech, not to those who understand it, for they believe that it is not a cure that profit through medicine or any other cause near cautery.
And the reason is to the contrary; and I understand that saying a cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when one administers methods of healing in certain illnesses, and those medicines do not take effect, and then at the end of the cause, one applies a cautery and profits from it. And from here it follows that a cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding of the vulgar and too many lay physicians.
And they said that a gold cautery is better than an iron cautery, and they did not say this but for the equality of the gold and the subtlety of its substance.
And they say that the place of cautery does not cause pain, which is not entirely true, for you have already seen and experienced that it only causes pain in some bodies; cautery with fire from gold is good and better than what they said; nevertheless, when you make a cautery with fire, be careful, because gold melts according to the quantity you want, due to the intensity of the heat, and if you place it over the fire, some sheets may fall into the fire so that the artisan suffers from occupation.
And for this, cautery with iron requires that we hold it lightly and precisely to ensure the correctness of the operation.
And you have already organized this chapter on cautery according to other chapters, and you have ordered those from the beginning related to the feet, so that now I am asking him what he wants from it.
The first chapter.
This cautery confers dryness and coldness upon the affected part, which is the primary cause of sudden and numerous rheumatic fluxes, called chills, from the head to the extremities of the arms and legs, as well as many sleep-related issues, toothache and throat pain, and generally any illness that arises from cold, also causing paralysis, stiffness, and apoplexy, and similar conditions in those maladies.
The method for this cautery is as follows: first, command the evacuation of the illness using laxative medicines, three or four nights in a row, according to the nature of the illness, the patient's age, and their usual condition.
And then command them to shave their head, and make a cut between their thighs on a clean bench, and place their hands on the afflicted foot.
And then place your palm's pressure on the bridge of their nose between their eyes. However, if the said condition of the middle part is overcome, mark that place with a try, and then apply the olive-shaped cautery whose form is this:
And then place that over the healthy area marked with a try, descending in such a way that the patient's hand is gradually constrained, and you turn it.
Then gently lift your hand and inspect the area, and if you see that any bone is exposed, as well as any amount of gum or stone (calculus), lift your hand, and if not, return your hand to that instrument, or another one from it, while keeping it cold until you are able to see the bone.
And then take a small amount of salt, dissolve it over the area, and leave it for three days.
And then place your hand over the area soaked in border and leave it on the inside until the wall of fire is destroyed. And then apply the treatment to the area with the four-part remedy until it is healed.
And it is said that when the Roman plague opens up, the better the brace, as it is more beneficial and restorative.
And they say that some of them cauterize the cord within the bone and hold the cautery until some part of the bone's specific nature is hardened.
And then they remove what is adjusted to the bone, and then it is cleaned.
And they say others that with the cautery to reach the deepest, it strengthens the bone from within, so that the bone does not break, and this is the form of creating small incisions: They believe that from that place, vapours from the head escape.
And if the wound remains open for a long time, it should be treated until it heals and hardens.
I do not recommend these two types of cautery to everyone, but only to certain individuals out of fear; and in those cases, when it is necessary for healing, it is best done as soon as possible, as we have seen with the other members, especially when the head of the malady is of a feverish nature.
The specific type of cautery, when applied correctly, is the safest and best method for healing; and from that practice and with that work comes health.
Second chapter.
On the head cautery.
When chronic and prolonged pain occurs in the entire head, and this persists for an extended period of time, and various remedies such as herbs, combs, caps, plasters, guazes, caldrons, goats, sheep, and similar treatments are used, especially if a cautery has already been performed that does not address the root cause of the malady, then one must consider whether the nature of the head ailment is robust; if there is no significant or severe pain, then another cautery should be applied. And then cauterize that area on the side of the head where the hairline is parted using an internal cautery. Cut the hairline and expose the bone as much as we have found, and cauterize that area with a cautery at the rear part of the head in the place called "vas" - it is the location where the wind is stopped. And apply your hand to it, do not expose the bone, for the illness finds great pain through this, different from the pain of all other cauterizations on the head.
And you should perform this cauterization in its proper place, because you know that the cauterization which treats the horns of the head and the occiput is a more subtle cauterization than the one performed on the middle part of the head; and this is its form.
Capitol terms. (Note: This appears to be a heading or a title, not a sentence to translate.)
On the treatment of old migraines.
When a severe pain arises at the base of the head or a burning pain extends to the ear, it is treated with medicines that cleanse the head, and other cures, as I have mentioned regarding the deviances of illnesses; and if these do not prove effective, cauterization on it is performed in two ways: either with acute medicinal fire, or with iron.
May there be cauteries or burning medicines, you should take a hot cloth, cut it open, and extract the extreme ends of it from both heads. And then you should incise the painful area on the temple with a lance, carefully so as not to cause further harm, until the pain is alleviated.
And then you should stretch it strongly after the swelling has subsided, and leave it for three hours; and afterward, extract the foreign body, and apply a poultice for two or three days, and keep the affected area submerged in cold water until the pain ceases.
And then you should apply a cure made from a potion, as long as it heals.
And if you wish, perform these using some of the burning medicines that I have written about in the two treatises on burning medicines.
Apply the cautery according to this manner: take a hot iron whose shape is as follows:
It is called a claw clamp because its head has the shape of a claw with some curvature, and in the middle part there is a small eminence.
Then apply pressure over the painful area, hold your hand—to prevent the skin from being burned—and slowly turn the iron at a controlled speed.
And if the amount of blood stuck due to the specific condition of the vein is such that it equals or exceeds the capacity of the vein, raise your hand so that the artery below is not affected, preventing any flow of pus.
Then soak it in salt water and place it over the area for three days; also apply a lot of heat, and take care to use ointment until it heals.
And if you see, burn the end of the knife with a cautery, and be careful not to make an incision into the artery in this fresh wound especially.
Capital quarter.
On the cauterization of old wounds.
When treating an old wound as we have discussed in the previous treatment and the divisions of illnesses, and if the treatment does not improve or worsens due to the illness that does not allow access to what we have said about the initial cauterization with medicine or fire, then you must ignite the cuticular cautery until it is whitened, indicating over the area of pain along the length of which is the most intense, or where; and rest your hand for a moment and press deeply as you make an incision into the arteria.
However, it is necessary for you to be careful about the continuation of the jaw, which is damaged and affects chewing, that the fracture is not healed and the nerves which are affected by it, and that a spasm does not occur.
And if it concerns the care and caution regarding the flow of blood from an artery that is severed, as in the case of its abrupt separation, there is fear, especially for those who do not understand what they are doing and lack study and patience; and thus, surgery on them should be delayed.
And you should return to the recollection of the regulation of the flow of blood from an artery according to its nature in its proper place within this book.
And if you find that this illness does not respond to the cautery and see that the patient's condition is tolerable, perform the cautery in the middle part of the head as we have mentioned, and treat the wound until it heals.
And if you wish, apply the cautery as we have said in the chapter on the tightness of archery with a cautery that has two blades; this is the better and more effective cauterization.
**Chapter: On the Treatment of Joint Pain (Gout)**
On the treatment of earache.
When there is pain in the ear caused by cold and it is treated with purgative remedies and other cures as mentioned in the previous section, and if the pain persists, apply heat with a cautery, which is known as a 'point', and this is its form:
Then apply the point close to the heat source, and turn it around the entire ear or in any direction if the pain is in any part of it. Keep the heat application on the ear gradually, until the area is healed and free from pain.
And if the heat application with these points is done on the entire ear, and some are left, then treat the areas until they are healed.
**Capital VI.**
**On the cauterization of tortuous (varicose) veins.**
The tortuous veins that are cured and treated by cauterization are nothing but the species that arise from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
Cauterization should be avoided for this species that is meant to dry up or spasm the nerve.
When you treat that species of tortuous vein with squeezing and purging, but do not confirm your treatment, then know that you cauterize the illness in three places: first, you cut the ear's edge, second, you make a small incision near their temple, and third, you target the junction of two lips.
And apply your cautery to the opposite side of the diseased part, for relaxation is only found in the part that appears sound.
And the method of cauterization is that you cauterize with a hot iron on the right side of the ear's lobe, slightly above the ear canal, and on the temple, whose length corresponds to the length of the finger, and place your hand over it until the quantity of the substance of the cord is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is specifically from a cutting tool, the shape of which is placed face-up. However, it may be even more subtle, as you can see with your eyes, and take care to avoid excessive roughness on it.
And then take care of the area that is exposed during the procedure until it heals.
Capital VII.
On the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and treatment with what we have said does not help and the patient has no fever, then cauterize as follows: first on all corners of their head; second, at the middle point of the head, as we have said; and third, on the joint (or 'coguot'). And the manner of the cautery is done according to what has been said above.
And it is cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is more delayed; and then it is carefully treated with what you have processed.
Capital VIII.
On the cauterization of an oblivion made by inflammation.
You should give the patient herbs and small pills at the beginning, which the servants will prepare and administer.
Then thoroughly wash the patient's head, and place on their wound the plaster described in the treatise on plasters.
And repeat this several times, for that is the manner of cauterization. And do it according to the order of those methods I have already mentioned.
And thus, if it is for the good of the patient, do so; otherwise, make three cauterizations to them on the back part of their head, descending from the higher part of the head towards the lower part of the neck. And between each cautery, he should pay attention to the thickness of the skin, and then take care to apply the cautery correctly.
If the patient endures the pain, and the disease is in the middle part of the body, then make the cautery on the middle part; but if greater suffering occurs, cauterize it over both humps.
Take care of that which is healed; and make the cautery olive-shaped according to the form given above.
Chapter IX.
On the cauterization of parasites and the softening of the whole body.
Remember that you must proceed in the softening of the head according to what we have said; then, shave the patient's head, and cauterize it with an olive-shaped cautery on the middle part of the head, and cauterize all the humps of the head, and cauterize over the last joint of the body, and make three cauterizations over the spine of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the case of softening the body from too much stiffness and the pain is tolerable but intense, then apply four cauteries on the spine of the back, and later apply a cautery inside until the severe pain is relieved, and raise your hand. Then carefully tend to it until it is healed, and this cautery should be olive oil.
Chapter X.
On the treatment of epilepsy.
The epileptic should not be cauterized, but rather the type of epilepsy caused by phlegm.
And so it is important to cleanse the brain of the patient at the beginning, applying heat and other cures as we have discussed in the previous division when the illness is severe and tolerant of medicinal treatment.
And if it is a child who does not tolerate medications, then administer liquids and easy-to-digest foods for several days, to the benefit of their diet.
Then shave the head of the patient, and apply a cautery to that area with a cautery in the middle part of the head according to the previous manner, and apply another cautery at the back of their head, and over any corners of the head that have been cauterized. And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then apply cauteries as mentioned above, with a view to having a paralytic and relaxing effect on the body over the cervical and dorsal spines.
And apply the olive cautery as mentioned above.
If the patient is a child, then apply subtle cauteries according to this manner.
Chapter .XI.
On the cauterization of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted corrupt humors and excessive phlegm, cauterize it with cautery as we have said in the case of paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess of fluid leading to melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then give him something that purifies his brain according to what has preceded in the division.
Then shave the patient's head, and apply a suitable twist to the torments around the circle, and rest it in the middle part of the head.
And when the patient feels the pain subsiding, and is free from all parts of the body.
And then apply a liniment; it is more worthy to be done before shearing sheep. And warm that above the fire with gentle heat for a measured time, which gives her relief as it increases in intensity. Then take the cloth and place it in the middle part of his head in a circle, and cool it until it is cold.
And do this to the patient every day for a week, or follow another regimen of his good food until he is cured; or if you prefer, cauterize those making small dots according to what is most appropriate for him, but always hold your hand over it in an orderly manner: this is a type of cautery that moistens the brain equally.
Then apply that warm compress on the edges or in the colors of sheep's wool.
Chapter .xii.
On the draining of water from the swelling.
When you recognize the onset of water in the swelling through the signs that I have mentioned in the previous section, then commence and cause the patient to drink something that purifies their head, and monitor them from all humidity.
And do that soaking in a bath with herbs for several days.
Then command the patient to scrape their head, and cauterize the affected area with a hot iron at the middle of the head; and cauterize with two irons over two temples if it is the onset of water in two swellings, or on one side if it is the onset of water in one swelling.
Cut with a cautery all the veins and arteries that are left in the leg; and the cauterization should be done at that length, in the breadth of the temples.
And be careful of blood flows when cauterizing; and if you see blood flow from it, stop any further treatment, which is within your power.
And seek knowledge that is extracted from arteries, and amputation of those, and cauterization to prevent blood flows.
Sometimes, the neck is cauterized between two bones using two cauterizing tools.
**Chapter XIII**
**On the cauterization of old tears.**
When tears from the eyes are chronic and through veins and arteries in the manifest location of the head outside, and it is verified that this causes superflux of weak muscles, cauterize that with a pointed cautery as we have described in the chapter on starting hot water in the eyes, cauterize in the middle location of the head, and two cauterizations below the temples, and two cauterizations below the bones of the neck. And if there is additional indigestion, cauterize that across the entire surface of the eye's coat on the extremity of the upper eyelid with a small cautery.
Chapter XIII.
On the cauterization of nasal discharge.
When treating the condition we described in the previous section and if your treatment does not benefit the patient, prepare and make them drink a mixture of herbs for three nights; then shave their head and cauterize with a middle-sized cautery or an olive-sized cautery. And then apply a cautery to that, using two cauteries on each of the eyelids, leaving the hairs intact.
And be careful not to burn that.
And the shape of the cautery claw is as follows.
Chapter XV.
Of the cautery for softening the eyelids of the eyes.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by disease or moisture, apply a cautery to that eyelid with this lunar cautery; and this is its shape:
And if you, apply a cautery to both eyelids with a small cautery across the entire area, and they should be elongated from the temporals. And the length of each cautery should be according to the quantity of the swelling.
And do not press too hard with the cautery, but according to how much the third part of the eyelid is adhered.
**Chapter XVI.**
Regarding the cautery of the eyelid, when the hairs turn inside out and place the cautery on the eye.
When the hairs of the eyelid are turned inside out and placed on the eye, cauterization is done in two manners: either by making a cut or by using a medicated burning cautery.
If the cautery is with fire, command the patient to open their eyes wide, so that the hairs are pulled out along with those that remain, as long and thick as possible; and if you have to put them back, tighten the eyes with a bandage so that the hairs do not grow again.
Therefore when they are born and equally engorged, you shall place the patient's head in a low position, then gently press over the eyelid of their eye, signaling according to the shape of a dead leaf, and this is the beginning of the signal near the hair.
Then apply a cold compress or a thick paste of owl's egg or bird droppings to the eye.
Then ignite the cautery whose shape is as follows.
And then cauterize according to the shape that is indicated, gradually, in multiple attempts, until the surface of the wound is completely sealed, just as it is with myrtle leaves, appearing properly.
And the sign of healing of the eye work is that you see the eyelid of the eye contracted and the hairs raised above the point of the eye.
And so raise your hand and place it there for three days, and then apply a bandage to the affected area until the swelling subsides. And then apply that ointment until it heals.
If it returns through the skin for any reason and the eyelid becomes soft, then do the cautery again on that entire area just as you did originally.
If the hairs are on the eyelid, then cauterize it until it is raised to its natural position and healed, so that the hairs do not reappear.
But the cautery with medicinal fire is what you order for the patient to remove the hairs until they are prolonged and healed, and then make a bandage in the shape of a myrtle leaf from cloth.
And then take some known soap and a live cause, or whatever it is, and mix those good causes together, making a feast of it so that it is not chilled; and spread this from it on the paper which is made thus in the form of a myrtle leaf, and place it over one or both wounds; and leave the fragrant edge wrapped in white honey, and the patient's head in the tiara.
And now let me tell you about the medicine, and apply it gently, not forcing it, so that the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for the bite is like fire within them.
And so as you continue with this that the disease bites, then cease the medicine and apply it again to the right place; thus, when the biting stops, remove the medicine and wash the wound with water; and consider whether the eyelid is lifted as it should be washed daily with either fire or an incision, for that is good. And if it does not return to the application of the medicine to the place where the medicine was not absorbed and does not disfigure your work, but rather tightens the wound.
And then apply pressure to the area until the pain of the adhesion is eradicated, and take care of it with a definitive ointment or another until it heals.
And it is necessary for you to perform your operation with careful vigilance so that no part of the medicine falls out, and if the eyelid after a few days becomes softened due to any cause from the hairs in the socket, then repeat your medicine on that area which has become softened from the eyelid, and precisely as you did at the beginning, and envelop it until it is healed.
And this is the method of extracting the myrtle.
And you know that the eyes of men differ in size and smallness, and therefore your compression should be made accordingly.
And the way of correction should not be hidden from him who is studied in this art.
Chapter .xvii.
On the cauterization of a fistula in the lacrimal duct of the eye.
When treating a fistula using the method described in the previous sections and your treatment does not yield results, you should proceed as follows: have the patient lie down with their head raised on pillows, and hold their head steady with one hand between their thighs in such a way that it is neither moved nor agitated.
Then apply some hot compress or a paste of egg whites and poultry feathers to the eye of the patient.
And make the cautery as follows:
which should be convex, shaped like a cane or a feather pen, from one end where the cautery is made.
And if you look, they penetrate into the other extremity. And if you want to get out this way, do so with caution.
However, he who is calm is better suited to the surgical work.
And press the fistula if it is open, and try to clean and dry it. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
Then place on it a cautery that has been well-ignited, and with your hand, slightly deviate the cautery from the nose's opening, so that your hand or the patient's pain is not aggravated, and afterward, apply the cautery to the grays of the nose and burn it.
And so if, at the beginning of applying the cautery, it enters into the bone, that is good; otherwise, repeat the cautery once or twice, as necessary; leave it in place for three days, and then apply pressure to that area with a border, and surround it with a drying agent until it heals.
If after passing ten days it is not healed, then apply a sharp, corrosive medicine to it until the bone is exposed and it heals as it should in its chapter.
And there is another way to make a fistula cautery that some masters have said: enter the place of the fistula and close it, then apply pressure on the smooth crack from which it is formed; and pour into that as much molten lead as necessary; with your hand held in good retention, do not let the patient's condition worsen so that the melted lead does not reach the wound; and cover where you are applying pressure over the wound with a cloth dipped in oil or water, so that the lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it miraculously.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cautery and treatment, it is good; otherwise, it will be necessary to administer a drain from the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose as it will come in its proper place.
Chapter XVIII.
On cauterization of the fistula.
Various accidents cause fissures in the lips, especially in children's lips.
Therefore, if you treat those fissures as we have said in the previous sections and do not benefit from your treatment, then use a hot iron in the shape of a knife as follows:
And the depth of the wound should be according to the thickness of the knife.
Place your hand carefully over those fissures so that the cautery reaches the depth of the fissures.
And then take care of that wet compress until it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
On cauterization of fistulas in the mouth.
When, during the extraction of the uvula or the palate or the roots of the teeth, bleeding occurs and it is then clamped and becomes old and a fistula forms and you treat it but do not allow healing, then ignite a cautery according to the amount received in the fistula, and insert that fire into the opening of the fistula, and with your hand bring the burning flame to its depth, doing this once or twice; and take care of that compress as we have said about treatment until it heals.
And thus if the wound is clean and healed, it is good; but if not, it will be necessary to expose the location and remove the corrupt bone as will be discussed in its chapter.
**Capitol XX:**
On the treatment of teeth and the softening of arteries.
When the arteries are softened by moisture and the teeth are loosened, and these conditions are treated with medicines rather than surgery, then place the patient's head in a low position, and shape the cautery so that it can be inserted between the tooth and the gum, applying the hot cautery quickly so that the patient feels only a slight pain from the heat of the fire, aiming for the root of the tooth to be freed.
Then lift your hand, and repeat the application of the cautery several times as desired.
Then have the patient rinse their mouth with salt water and do this for an hour, after which they should spit it out, because the loosened tooth will be securely held in place, the gums softened will tighten, and the moisture corrupted will be dried.
Chapter .xxi.
On the treatment of tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to cold, or there is swelling or pus, and the treatment with medicine does not help, then cautery should be performed in two ways: either with a cow's gut cautery or with a fire cautery.
Cautery with cow's gut involves taking a piece of cow's gut and slicing it open lengthwise, then wrapping it around the base of the tooth, heating it over fire, and applying it to the painful tooth while keeping it warm until it is numbed by cold.
And repeat this several times until the heat from the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you see, dip a cloth or cloth in the wound of your side, place it over the painful tooth, and place the ignited iron on it until the iron reaches the depth of the tooth's cavity.
However, the use of fire for cauterization is to address the wound of a tooth or iron, and it should be performed gently in the heart of the wound without the heat reaching the patient's mouth.
Then shape the cautery as required, place it over the tooth and rest your hand on it until the cautery cools; do this several times as the pain may return either that day or the next.
And ensure that the patient opens their mouth wide with the aid of this cautery, holding it for an hour and then spitting it out; this is the form of the cautery.
And apply the cautery as you have seen it necessary to do.
And this is the form of the catheter:
Chapter XXII.
On cauterization of hernias.
When hernias are caused by a mixture of fluid and humors that are resistant to treatment by medicines, and you wish to reduce them slightly, apply the cautery along the shape of which this follows, having two sharp ends so that smoke comes from the cautery on one side, and you apply the glowing end over the affected area once, or as often as necessary, until it reaches the center of the hernia.
And if the hernia is small, apply the cautery according to its size, and then leave it for three days, applying a hot compress to the area around it until the burned tissue has healed.
And then apply that healing ointment and bandages until it is cured.
**Chapter XXIII**
On the cauterization of ulcers and the constriction of veins.
When humidity appears on the pleura of the lung, especially when it is chilled due to congestion, it is necessary to evacuate that illness at the beginning with purgative medicines, and then cauterize that place with a pointed instrument in the affected area.
And be careful not to damage the pleura with the cautery or inflame the patient's chest, but only a little.
And apply a hot iron or another cautery to the joint of the neck at the last vertebra of the spine. The hot iron, used in the previous manner, is also the method here.
And take care of that as mentioned, until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII
On the cauterization of lung ailments and cough.
When cough and lung ailments are caused by excessive humidity, and the patient has no fever or sputum, and the condition is chronic, apply two hot irons over the furcula in the areas where the lungs are weak and inflamed; another iron at the middle part of the foot between the two mamillos; follow the method described previously for applying the iron.
And if you wish, your puncturing cautery can be the pointed cautery called a 'punta', whose shape precedes the puncturing of ear pain.
And make incisions within these; and then carefully treat that with the remedies that are mentioned so that it heals.
And the cautery has three prongs for cauterization to that end: once you can make three cauteries according to this form:
Chapter 25.
On cauterization of the titillium, which is the head of the assistant.
When the head of the assistant is dislocated due to lubricating humidity and it does not stick in its return time, you should reduce its dislocation until it is as it was first, and then place the patient on their back or side; and lift the limb that was affected inside the titillium towards the top with your hand, if the joint is dislocated inward.
And then apply the cautery, which has two points; this is its shape:
And then cauterize the wound where it penetrates into another part; and the form of the cauterization will be when using three cautery points.
And in some cases, it is adjusted according to this rule, and these are the eight cauterizations.
And then place the entire cautery with salt on it, and make the patient lie in tranquility, and do not move the member for any time until it is healed.
And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and it persists, then this cauterization is made on the muscle with a hot iron cautery or with pointed metal cauteries, because the joint is confirmed and the humidity is broken and the pain is healed.
Chapter .xxvi.
On cauterization of the stomach.
When inflammation of the stomach occurs and moisture fills a space inside that is detached from its surroundings, and if treatment methods are continued without addressing it, one will see that the illness will rest on their back, spreading to their limbs and organs, and should be cauterized with three cauterizations: one leaving a mark on the foot the size of a finger as a cautery, and two others on either side of the back costae of the cautery, forming a triangular shape; widen those that are not properly aligned, which will cause putrefaction.
And if the depth of the cauterization is two-thirds of the thickness of the cord.
And the shape of the cautery should be according to this form. And if you wish, cauterize with a larger cautery in the middle area of the stomach, following this form; and this should be a circular cautery, as shown here.
And the stomach should be cauterized by puncturing it, as this cautery frightens some: you know how much puncture you want over the stomach and then cauterize that with cautery on the punctures; and then tend to that with care according to the treatment that precedes healing.
**Chapter XXVII.**
**On the Cauterization of Veins.**
When pain in the vein occurs due to coldness or moisture or violent wind, and the condition deviates from its normal course through excessive discharge, the illness is treated as we have said, and one should not apply binding, but rather ensure that the illness is lifted over its head, and then make three punctures according to this form and with this quantity on the vein beneath the hypochondria, which brings about the supine position of the patient.
And the space between each cautery should be according to its thickness, and the cautery itself should be according to the length of the body on the right side.
And do not be tempted by the sharpness of the cautery.
And if the quantity of what is adhered corresponds to the amount of the specificity of the cord, and it is not too tight; and if the malady stands on the patient's feet; or if it is not on their feet, then they should sit down, whose things have already been spread out, and raise their arms.
And with your skill and caution in the art, you can cauterize these cauteries with a cutting cautery.
And be careful not to burn too much during cauterization, and let the heat of the iron affect all parts of the body so that it penetrates within the intestines, because the tongue here is delicate; and you should know this.
Chapter 28.
On the incision of an abscess in the leg with cautery.
When the abscess on the leg needs to be incised and you want to know if the abscess is in the flesh of the leg or in the tunic covering it, if it is in the flesh, the disease causes great gravity and increases the intensity of the pain.
And if it is in the tunic of the leg, the pain is usually more intense and often exhausts the doctors with its treatment.
Therefore, position the patient so that their neck is towards you; then identify the site of the hernia; and apply the pointed cautery which resembles a rag, whose shape was previously described on the previous page. And cauterize with these cauterizing irons until all the wound is closed, so that it heals properly and doesn't open again.
And likewise, take care of that one for the healing of the other hernias until they are all cured.
And know that you should only use these cauterizing instruments as described in medical studies, and those which have proven effective for many ailments; however, through experience, they can be dangerous during this operation, but we must still adhere to them, and it is better.
Chapter .xxix. (Note: The exact translation would depend on the context provided, but keeping it as is per your request.)
On cauterization of pleurisy.
They say that the ancient cauterization of pleurisy according to this method is done by taking a long, thin blade from the school of surgery and cutting it to the desired length, corresponding to the thickness of the said part.
Then immerse that in oil and heat it, and cauterize the area between the continuation of the furcula and the collarbone with a cautery; place two small cauteries below, slightly declining from the point where the beard is left off, and two cauteries at an angle between the fifth rib and the cartilage, declining slightly towards the back parts; another cautery in the middle part of the foot; and another over the stomach, and three cauteries in the back parts; and one cautery in the area between the two shoulders, and two cauteries on both sides of the foot, leaving the cautery between the two shoulders.
And do not cover your hand with the cautery, but hold it over the affected area in use.
And they also speak of other ancient practices where certain men use hot iron cauteries that resemble rays and ignite them, placing them in the space between the ribs, aiming to alleviate this pain and heal it, as we have said regarding the pain in the foot.
In this procedure with cautery, there is no cause for concern, as it often happens in the affected area of the fistula where healing does not occur.
Chapter XXX.
On cauterization of the melza (or mucosa).
When treating the illness of the mucosa using what we have mentioned about treatment in division and do not apply your cure, then use cautery on it in three ways, all of which are correct: one is to make three or four incisions along the length of the mucosa according to the figure of the cautery burns on the foot, the shape of which has previously been described.
And the thickness of each cautery should be about the size of a finger or slightly less, and the method of the cautery is the same as we have described for the cautery of the leg.
And do not place your hand on the cautery, and the patient should be lying on their back.
And there is another method of cauterization: if you light the cautery with two directions, it causes a dislocation of the muscle as we have described in the chapter on the treatment of muscle slippage, raising the tie that is at the end of the sheet where the patient's left side lies.
And your elevation should be such that you raise the tie according to the length of the body, so that cauterization is done according to the extent of the affected area.
Then interlace the two rods, ignite them with fire, in that place where they penetrate the tie from the other side.
And then remove the cautery; and thus four cauteries are made.
And if you see, cauterize with a cautery having three parts.
And then you should care for the cauterized wounds so that they do not break open for too many days, as it is more comfortable than other causes preceding in the treatment.
Chapter XXXI.
On the cauterization of gout.
Cauterization does not catch gout but rather the inflammation itself properly speaking.
When treating gout, follow the treatment methods we have discussed in the previous section, but be aware that you should cauterize with four cauteries around the affected area and one cautery each on the stomach, the thigh, the chest, between the spine of the back, and directly below the foot, and another cautery on the stomach. And the depth of the cautery should be determined according to the sensitivity of the patient's skin.
Then apply the cautery gently so that it does not burn for too long.
And do not remove the hernia from treatment just yet, as the cautery should cover it to prevent two complications and it will be healed with the help of medical aid.
The shape of the cautery used to treat the stomach should be made in the form that corresponds to its previous state, and it is this one which has the olive-like shape used to treat the back, according to its previous form.
Chapter XXXII.
On the Cauterization of Feet and Other Parts.
When the feet are immersed in water and filled with yellowish water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the sole between the big toe and the little finger, and hold the cautery without twisting it; then raise your hand, but do not completely remove it, for the yellowish water will discharge.
The cautery should be done as follows: Then apply two cauteries to the two parts, and make a cut with the tip of the cautery on each part. And the cautery should be according to the length of the part: one should be placed on the inner side and the other on the outer side of the part; and two cauteries should be placed on each part.
And leave the wound open for a long time so that no water remains in it.
And then attend to those causes which we have mentioned.
**Capitol .xxxiii.**
On the cauterization of abdominal parts.
When abdominal parts are infected and filled with pus, it is due to the digestive and retentive humors located in the stomach and intestines, and it is treated using curative methods, sometimes exhibiting injuries from the application of heat. Here, a large cautery is applied over their stomach as previously mentioned in the treatment of the stomach (cauterization), with circular cauteries and four small ones around the subtle belly button; or alternatively, two cauteries can be used on the larger stones, or one on each of two stones.
If excessive humidity and the illness tolerate it, then apply a cautery to the anus and intestines, strongly securing two cauteries over the stomach and near the groin, as this is a perfect cure for a young person from which one does not stray.
Chapter .XXXIV. (This indicates the section or chapter number, not a translation.)
On the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
When they are in a natural state, old hemorrhoids, caused by thick humors or corrupted moisture, can be treated with the methods mentioned earlier, but if that does not provide relief, then cauterize them using three cauterization tools over the abscess at the small of the back, and another cautery on the navel for two days.
If it is observed that the patient's stomach has become chilled and their food is not digesting properly, and their face appears pale, then cauterize over the stomach using a large cautery as mentioned before; also apply one cautery on the bowels, and another cautery on the patient's chest with a clavicle cautery. Leave the cauteries open for some time to allow healing.
I am unable to provide a translation for this line as the context is missing and it does not appear to be part of the medical treatise. The previous sections were focused on treatments for specific conditions, while "Capitol .xxxv." does not contain any discernible medical content.
Of cautery for hernias, it is appropriate to remove them.
When you remove hernias, you use the cautery that resembles a ray of light. Next, insert that flame into the hernia you have removed and continue to hold your hand over it until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
Do this once or twice, for if the hernias are too numerous, cauterize each one as we have described, and then treat them with ointment until they heal.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on something, it is better to do so later in the healing process.
Chapter XXXVI.
On the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in the natural openings of the body.
When nature does not obey the treatment we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by that, then healing is achieved through cauterization.
Therefore, when one sees a fistula in nature that is old, with corrupted health and moisture, it is most worthy to attempt to heal it subtly, and then slowly apply the quantity according to the depth of the aforementioned attempt.
Near the cautery that resembles a ray. And then place that ignited cautery into this fistula, according to the quantity in which it intertwines with the attempt.
And apply the cautery repeatedly until those corrupt bodies are consumed once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
And be wary of the combustion of nerves and veins; if there is a fistula in the body of the bladder or in the hernia cavity, be careful of all these places; and do not attempt this unless the fistula is in fleshy tissue and you believe it is not penetrating.
And then take care of the area until it is healed.
And if the area is sealed and the materials that caused it are removed from it, and they remain like this for a long time, then you know that it has been completely cured.
And if the materials are not from within the body, then you know that it is penetrating or in the process of corrupting its place, or it falls victim to those causes of which there will be remembrance in that location.
Chapter .xxxvii.
On the cauterization of ulcers.
When ulcers cause pain due to cold or excessive heat, and the patient's condition worsens, it is necessary to cauterize them using a hot iron over each ulcer, especially those that require memory (or permanent marking) with a cautery clamp.
And we should strongly cauterize according to the second method, leaving a small mark, so that there will be three lines of cautery, and thus more healing later on.
Chapter .xxxviii.
On the cauterization of the bladder.
When the bladder is weakened and softened by friction and moisture such that the patient cannot retain urine, apply a cautery to the opening where the discharge occurs, beginning on the lower part of the bladder, and cauterize with a point on the right side, and another on the left side.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the depth of the pain; apply a cautery from the lower part of the back, or two cauteries if necessary.
And the cautery should be driven in according to the process.
Chapter XXXIX.
On cauterization of the liver.
When liver pain is caused by friction and moisture, which prevents conception, corrupts the menstruation, delays their flow, and causes severe pain during their discharge, then know that this location must be cauterized with three cauteries in a circle around the navel, as we have said regarding the bladder; or two cauteries at a lower point on the back, and drive them in firmly.
Chapter .XL.
On cauterization of the dislocated ankle.
When moist mucus infiltrates the joint of the ankle, causing it to dislocate, a sign of this is that one part appears longer than the other when compared between them. And the place of the dislocation is compressed in him quickly.
Then you should cauterize the patient over the dislocated ankle with a circular cautery, since you have already tried to straighten the joint by pulling on its circuit, and thus the dislocation falls back into place in the middle of the circle.
And the cautery mentioned above has the same form in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three large olive cauteries.
And make the cautery according to the amount of inflammation in all the vein; and be careful with that which is healed.
Chapter .xli. (Forty-first Chapter)
On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain appears in the region of the ankle, caused by cold, moisture, and inflammation, the condition is treated with the methods we have mentioned and should not be overlooked; furthermore, you must remove the affected part from thick humors using putrid pills or artificial ones similar to them, and then cauterize it.
And the manner of the cautery on that part follows two ways: either with cauterizing medicines that burn, or with fire.
According to two scientific methods, one of which is to cauterize that over the opening of the anus with three triangular cauterizes in this manner; and do so with good depth. And the spaces between each cauterize should be according to the thickness of the said part, and if the cauterizes are olive-sized or large.
Sometimes, four cauterizes may be placed on the middle part of the anus for better effect.
And if you wish, cauterize the circle that follows the shape in the cauterization of the hernia of the anus, which should be a complete circle and burn away all the openings of the intestines.
And this is the method of cauterization in cases where pain is attached to the anus and not spread throughout the thigh.
If it is stretched within the thigh, then cauterize that with two cauteries over the thigh at the place where you direct the pain; and apply a cautery to the shin for four days on the outer side.
And if the cautery is cutaneous, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the intensity of the pain.
And if the pain spreads to the place near the feet, then cauterize that area with a cautery at three points or four or more, as needed.
And if the patient feels pain when moving the thigh, then cauterize that area with a cutaneous cautery.
And be careful in all cauterization so that you do not injure nerves or cause great pain, and that by doing so to the patient, you do them no further harm or restrict their movement.
And you have already seen one of those which will be cauterized on the shin and finished in the cauterization process, and a heated bed with an inflated pillow until the swelling reaches the foot, and the fire pierced and corrupted the entire foot. And then I apply a strong acid solution of the abdomen, and this brings about death.
And if the pain is in two parts, simultaneously cauterize each according to this manner.
And the wise ones say about the cauterization of water cauteries, of which this is the manner: make it resemble a circle of iron whose circumference is the width of a palm; and its orifice should be according to the thickness of a date palm bone or almost a little more.
And within that circle, another one is drawn, which is one-third of the original; and the space between them should be the length of a night's rest; and these circles are divided into two parts; and the length of those sides should be a night or two nights, and this is the form of it:
Soon as it is heated over a fire until it glows and sparks, then place it gently on the wound, the patient lying on their side. And so, it is cauterized with three round cautery burns at once.
Then apply this for three days; cover the wound with a poultice and leave it open for several days; and take care to keep the area clean until it is healed.
Albucasis says: O, sons, we have seldom used this kind of cautery because of the fear surrounding it, and because few have found those that guard over it.
One should apply the best cautery to those who suffer from it, and find out the place of their pain.
Perhaps the text is describing a medical procedure for treating a hernia:
And if the space between certain parts of the body is such that it corresponds to the thickness of the mentioned part; they should be placed under and over it, and they should hold themselves together in this way:
Then place your hand over the part where the patient feels pain in their side, and take some cold water, pour it between two circles, and its quality should be small fire bit by bit, and hold it for an hour, and let the patient endure the bite and adhesion - because that burning bite is like fire - until the bite ceases.
Then raise your hand with the instrument and dry the cold water from all the water with warm water.
Then apply this for three days and place your hand on that border until the blackness of the adhesion disappears, and leave it for some more days, and it will heal; this is better in youth.
And then apply the proper treatment until it is healed.
If the pain is spread inside the thigh or leg, place him in a position that holds water according to what is done in the equalizing of the waters.
And this is the manner of the water caused, and you have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Prepare a solution of alkali and cause no extinzione of both parts, then tris them and place them in a new container from which the opening has been perforated, according to the quantity that goes into it.
And place the bottom of the other container with water into the solution of alkali and causes alive, then over that, two handfuls of the hot water from the vessel, and after you have compressed them well with your hand, leave the hot water to flow down from the vessel into the container with the cold water.
And then carefully adjust all that water, and pour it over another living cause and renew the alkali, because now it will become a strong remedy of great sharpness, which is administered in many medical operations and cauterization of other members, for operation uses fire.
And also among medicines are some that are cauterized widely, thus with greater intensity and more finely, causing a certain knowledge of their mixture.
A wise old man recounts an operation and cure by which he alleviates the pain of water (perhaps hydrocephalus or a related condition) and sciatica, and marvels greatly at its effectiveness, stating that it requires no other treatment, for once recomposed in bath and rest, the patient is completely healed.
Indeed, it is best to use fresh parsley from a garden, and if none is available, take a small figure; twist it in your hands and place it in the water where the pain resides, whether in the joint or limb or foot, and let it be.
And it should be left for a duration of three hours or for as long as the patient's condition allows for relaxation from the strain.
Then immerse him in water, and when the patient's body is heated, insert that into the sun, for the pain ceases and healing occurs.
And know that one should not use cautery with these medicines unless it is for the removal of fluids from the body.
You may already know that when the narrow vein of a goat is cauterized, it benefits the animal; and the cautery should be done in this manner: take wool and dip it in ancient oil, and place it between the foot's toes and between the bones.
Then take a dry goat's vein and inflame it over fire until it is charred, and place it on the wool and leave it until it hardens. And then repeat this process, and do not cease to do so until the sensation of the bite reaches the water and relieves the pain.
And this type of cautery is called a cow cautery.
Chapter LII.
On the cauterization of joint pain.
At times, pain in the back is caused by various factors, such as stiffness or bruising, or due to excessive strain or improper evacuation, and for similar reasons, through the infusion of irritating and moist matter.
And cauterization is not indicated for any other type but this specific one caused by the infusion of irritating matter.
Therefore, for the evacuation of the malady, use pills that resemble them, which are to be administered on each side where the pain is located in three lines according to its extent, making incisions on each line with cautery as much or little as tolerated by the patient and depending on their virtue.
And cauterization should be made with a pointed cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or four with medial claw cauteries according to this form:
Chapter .xliii.
On cauterization at the onset of jaundice.
These maladies often appear in young children; and the sign of their onset in children is that their small bodies become stiff due to evening heat, raising and limiting their movements.
And it examines the last vertebra of the spine and the joints that begin to protrude above the others.
And so when you see this and wish to inhibit it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery in this form: that takes the cautery across the entire span of the vertebra firmly.
And if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery in two or three lines. And the points should be appropriate among themselves.
Then properly tend the area until it is healed as we have said.
Be careful that a cautery is not applied to redness caused by nerve spasm.
Chapter XLIV.
On the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And thus, when gout is caused by cold and humid conditions, it is treated with heat and not forgotten the pain, then the application of a hot cautery follows.
And it is because you cauterize the proper drainage in the joint circuit of the foot with fire cautery.
And take a pointed cautery whose form is as follows:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. If the pain increases within the toes or other joints, and this persists, then cauterize that with three or four cauteries of this olive cautery from any direction.
And if you use these cauteries as needed, then cauterize that one and do not press too hard with the cautery against the skin, only touch its specific part.
And if the pain persists in both feet, then administer the cautery as we have said in our chapter.
And if the pain is only in the joints and it is called rheum, then make punctures along the course of the filaments as they twist, punctures on those two lines.
And if there are persistent pains in these joints, make punctures along the course of the filaments on each node and on the pinch of the hand.
And if the pains spread to other joints or muscles, apply cautery to parts all over the body.
And do not discharge the patient without proper care and receipt of medicines, for if good care is taken and the fever is discharged through this cautery, God will help.
Chapter .xlv. (This appears to be a section or chapter heading, not a translation.)
On cauterization of breaks.
When there is a rupture in the joints and hernia protrudes from the abdominal wall towards the birth canal, at this point, it is necessary to begin by ensuring that the patient abstains from strenuous activity for a period of time, allowing the tear to heal from within the body.
Then guide the patient to lie on their side with their leg raised, and instruct them to keep it in that position until the swelling or hernia goes down.
Then return the patient to their original position, and carefully attempt to reduce the rupture over the hip bone, identifying the end of it by its resemblance to a half-circle at the upper joint lines of the body.
Then apply the cautery in the shape that is appropriate for this case:
Within which a moist and warm cloth should be applied. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And then apply the cautery over that sign with your hand holding the cautery straight, and focus on the area where you manage to get near the bone of the toe within the middle of the foot; and repeat that another time if it doesn't work in the first attempt near the bone.
And observe carefully the movement of the hernia during the cauterization, so as not to dislocate the hernia and cause death or other serious complications on the patient.
And you should know that when you use a cautery, do not touch the bone, do not perform your operation.
And take care that the cautery of children should be delicate according to their size and measure.
And take care of the site of the cautery for three days, applying bandages until the fire scar is healed.
And take care of those with other burns until they are healed.
And the patient should lie on their back for 40 days until the site is sealed and the pain disappears.
And take care to fast the patient according to the duration of their healing, which strengthens their stomach, and prevent the intestine from protruding due to effort in recovery.
And when it is time to raise it, after approximately ten days, administer a suitable treatment and maintain it for another forty days.
And it should also be reduced in work and the intake of food and drinking, and from loud voices, for when one follows this regimen of healing entirely, they will be healed.
And now I will describe the treatment for hernias in other parts of the abdomen, which begins with a cauterization of the hernia using a red-hot iron, according to its size, and this should be done when it protrudes from the abdominal wall; then care should be taken with the treatment as described earlier, and it should not be compressed.
Some have also said that the hernia should be cauterized with a triangular iron in this manner, because it is easily detected and tried.
And it is a pause line that they have for the width in the skin above the rupture, and another line above it; then place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery is more light and better.
Chapter XLVI.
On cauterization of twists.
When pain ends in other members due to cold or impact persists and does not improve with medication, then you should cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And the type of cautery for each member should be according to its size and depth, and the nature and location of the twist and pain it suffers.
Therefore, if it is cured by the first cautery, good; otherwise, repeat the cautery on it; for usually those pains are punctures in members near to that member, so you should achieve these with cauteries until the illness is cured.
Chapter .xlvii.
About the cauterization of leprosy.
Leper patients sometimes require cauterization due to severe damage, especially if the type of leprosy is characterized by putrefaction of the flesh and melancholia.
And so if you wish to cauterize the patient, consider whether the leprosy is severe and whether it has responded to the treatment mentioned in the previous section, nor has it recurred, or spread, and be wary of the disease that could engulf the entire body and all its parts. Then cauterize the affected area on top of the head with a hot iron: first at the middle of the scalp, then at the second spot beneath it towards the back of the head, reaching the forehead at the end of the hair; and do so in two places forming horns, and also behind, upon the nape or neck.
And finally, with your hand hold the cautery a little within, pressing it against the bone creating a slight impression, and dislocating the tendons so that the expulsion of thick vapors is alleviated; cauterize over the compress as necessary.
And if leprosy has already spread over the body and appears manifestly, then you should cauterize with these cauteries that we have mentioned at the beginning; cauterize on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on each eye lid, and two cauteries on both shoulders, and six cauteries on the spine, and five cauteries on the back vertebrae, and one large cautery near the coccyx, and one on the hip bone, and two on each thigh, and one on each knee, and two on each arm, and two on the muscles, and two on each foot's tendons; cauterize over all the joints of the upper and lower limbs, and on every heel of their feet, and on the grooves of their hands.
And be careful of the nerves that are on the foot, do not irritate them.
And in some cases, cautery is performed with a hot iron on the bone of the thigh, and on another part of the stomach's opening, and yet another on the sigmoid colon.
And you should know that the more accurately you perform the cautery, the greater its effectiveness and the less painful it is for the patient; indeed, since the nerves are already numbed due to the previous procedures, the body is already stunned.
And take note that the size of the cautery should be great or small according to the members and joints, as previously mentioned concerning the types of instruments.
And then, prepare the cautery with fine flour mixed with honey and other remedies as necessary until it is healed.
Chapter .xlviii.
On cauterization of stupor.
When a member is stuck or numbed and treated with medicines, oils, and dressings, but remains unsanated, you should cauterize the affected member with a cautery as required by the size or smallness of that member.
And the hot cautery should enter the depth of the flesh slightly. And then care for that area with an ointment until it is healed.
And sometimes a stupor is cauterized that extends to the upper and lower limbs, the spine, and the eyes, which cause pain in those members, and it alleviates the stupor.
Do not attempt to treat this unless one is skilled in the anatomy of the body's members and the emergence of nerves throughout the whole body in motion.
**Chapter LXXIX**
**On the Cauterization of Hemorrhoids**
When hemorrhoids are old and do not respond to any of the common medical treatments, then you cauterize them with a pointed iron according to the amount of the specific kind of cloth needed until the white and color of it are reduced and its color changed.
And then prepare a mixture of flour from beans and lentils with olive oil and arugula leaves, or pigeon's blood or duck blood, each in equal parts, and apply it to the affected area until it is healed.
Capital .1.
On the cauterization of cracks.
When cancer begins to form and it is desired to remove that growth, cauterize it with a circular cautery along its edge as it is turned.
And the wise ones say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle location; however, I have not seen this, as I fear it may become ulcerated, and I have already seen this a few times.
It is more prudent to cauterize it along the edge of the growth with a circular cautery as we have said, or with multiple cauteries.
Final chapter.
On the cauterization of injuries.
When an injury takes too long to heal, it may be due to excessive moisture, the condition of the patient, being old and frail with little strength, or time; if you wish to hasten the healing of the injury, cauterize around it with small pointed cauteries; then apply a compress to aid in its maturation.
If you wish to make an incision with a cautery, then heat the cautery whose form is thus: and apply it to the middle of the injury until the needle penetrates.
And if the cautery is applied to that place which is most affected, in order that the body of the arm may be relieved; and then take care of it until it is healed.
Chapter II.
On the cauterization of corrosion.
Corrosion is a creeping corruption in the member which eats away just as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you encounter that corrosion in a place which requires cauterization with fire, then you should use hot iron needles, small and large as appropriate for that place where the corrosion is located.
And then cauterize it completely until you have eradicated all the corrosion and do not leave any cause for it to return.
And then bandage it for three days, and apply oil mixed with the ashes to the cauterized places until all the scars are completely eradicated and all corruption is gone.
And then care for it using hot compresses made from fresh meat.
If the flesh does not heal well in three days, free from corruption, then it is good; otherwise, repeat the cautery over what is broken in the corrupted places.
And it is treated with some sharp medicine several times, for that is half the effect of cautery. However, cautery with fire is sometimes more effective for removing impurities.
And you have already mentioned the cure for it with sharp medicine in the division, so take that when you see it coming on again.
**Chapter III**
On Cauterization of Joints and Similar Conditions
Motas visible in the parts of the foot affected by malady, which is called a claw, and it is a gross, penetrating condition that weakens the foot; cautery on these is done in two ways, either with hot cautery or with cold cautery.
Cautery with fire involves igniting the cautery tool, which is made of iron according to the size of the claw, and it should have subtle edges.
Then apply the ignited cautery to the claw and carefully rotate your hand with the cautery around the claw until it reaches the depth of the claw. And leave it for three days until it starts to heal. Then apply a plaster made from crushed wild mallows mixed with salt to the affected area and leave it for one night so that it eradicates the root cause.
And then treat the area with a wound healing ointment made from animal fat until it heals.
If it does not improve and ulcers appear on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then you must apply these cauterizes with hot water. Take a small piece of iron or a pen or a turning wheel, and place it over the joint; then dip the tip of the instrument into hot water, and with your hand compress it firmly against the affected area, constantly turning the edge of the instrument around the joint's root, until you see the water flow out. Wait for about an hour while the patient endures the biting sensation of the hot water, and then remove it; the joint will be rid of its inflammation.
And also, for those who have these issues, it is done to ensure that all of them are completely healed.
And then treat the abscesses that have been eliminated from the joint roots with ointments made from materials that promote healing of the flesh.
Chapter III.
On the cauterization of tremors.
When you encounter a tremor caused by friction or pressure on the nerves, or due to fever or any other similar cause, you should apply four cauterizations or two cautery irons over each spinal column; also cauterize the foot of the patient and the stomach with olive cautery irons.
And the tremor of the patient will cease and hasten the healing of the afflicted illness.
Chapter V.
On the cauterization of sudden accidents to the body.
When in the body white spots appear, and pustules are formed from coarse corrupt matter; therefore at the beginning when you see an appearance, cauterize it over all parts of the fistula with a subtle cautery or a reed torch, the tip of which is extended towards fire; or cut off with a long knife; or cauterize with a lenticular.
And in some cases, cauterization is also performed at the beginning of its expulsion according to this manner; they are not rigid, and the surplus matter is removed, doing those, and healing from those.
However, it may be necessary to cover that this should be done with evacuation through phlebotomy.
Chapter VI.
On cauterization of flux of gangrene through incision of the arc (or tendon).
Various observed phenomena must flow from archery, which cut through the wound to be healed, or from the beginning of abscesses or cauterization on a member, and then they appear similar, and it is difficult to maintain that.
Therefore, whenever this happens to anyone, you must use your hand over the wound from the impact of the archery, and place it as indicated to stop the flow of blood until the swelling has subsided.
And then apply hot olive oil cautery, both small and large in number, over these until they are covered with fire.
And then take from those a small or large one according to the location and wound in which the artery is broken, over that vein quickly pour the heated oil you have prepared, and cauterize it until it is incised and restricted that flow.
And if the blood is expelled from the orifices of the artery as you remove the cautery and extract it, take another cautery carefully from among those prepared over the fire, and do not cease to do this again until the bleeding is stopped.
And be careful not to injure the nerves here, which may lead to further harm to the patient.
And you should know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to constrict the bleeding, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of four methods: either with a cautery as we have said, or by extraction when it is not extracted, for when its extremities are cut off, the bleeding is restricted and the sanction is confined; or by binding it tightly with twine or ligament due to strong compression, or by applying medications of which the virtue is to constrict the blood; and these should be strengthened with a pillow or in a suitable manner.
He who administers a moderate restriction of it with bandages or by the position of burning causes and similar ones, does not bring relief but merely pain.
If this must be done for someone and neither the doctor nor medicine is present, then open the indicated site on the affected vein as we have said, and understand the great constriction of it within, so that the blood may be stopped from the sovereign outbreak of the plague, and above all, do not let the pain return; and afterward, sprinkle hot water with great frigidity within until the blood is congealed and thickened; and then consider what cautery or medicine is necessary.
Regarding incision and perforation, poultices and phlebotomy, wounds, and their likes.
In the first chapter, we have discussed all diseases in which fire cauterization is indicated, along with their causes and occasions, and the instruments necessary for the forms of cauterization. I have organized the chapters from head to foot.
And you will proceed in this chapter in such a way that it alleviates what the patient desires, whenever he has asked for it.
And before you begin, remember that this chapter is about the treatment of fear, which is discussed in detail in the first chapter on cauterization.
And because you must be extremely careful in the operation discussed in this chapter, which involves frequent catheters evacuation due to the presence of sand or foreign objects in which life is at risk, you must perform irrigation of the vein or incision over the abscess or inspection for discharge or purification of the wound or extraction of an arrow or incision of the pelvis and similar things. And among all of those, there are fear and trembling, and in most of their hearts, death.
And I warn you that this should not fall upon you, for sometimes you must be on your guard against the ways of men, as well as against the violent ways of illnesses. And it is from them that you must learn about their illness and how to ward off death, since you must consider the vehemence of what they find in their illness, and the duration of their illness, for the illness itself signifies death.
And it is from those that give to you hope and say, "Expect health," that their illness is destructive.
Therefore, do not agree with anyone who comes to you in this manner; let your caution be greater than their trust and their greed. Do not presume any cause regarding them, but rather, through certain knowledge that verifies it for you, and to which a praiseworthy succession is owed.
Use in the treatment of all your illnesses the diagnosis and indication of that which is turned to health, for it aids you in acquiring fame, memory, praise, and glory.
Oh, sons, may God inspire your understanding and not allow you to stray from His guidance and protection, for it is in His hands.
And you have ordered this distinguished chapter into sections according to what precedes in the chapter on cautery, from the treatment of the head down to the feet, so that it may be easier for you regarding whatever you inquire about and need from it.
First Chapter.
On the treatment of water contained in the head of children.
You know that this illness often presents itself in children during teething, and when the blackness touches the child's head, it is a sign of danger.
And some times it is necessary to probe gently because of a hidden cause that is not apparent.
This disease is often seen in children, and to all those whom I have seen die from it, I have observed this work done on them.
And you have seen that a child whose head was filled with water, and the head of him was always thus magnified so that he could not lay down on his side because of the size of his head, and more than that, the moisture increased until fire death.
And this moisture is either added between the spine and the bone, or it is added beneath the bones upon the head.
For the operation on that one if the moisture is between the spine and the bone and the abscess is small, then you must make an opening in the middle part of the head as a fissure in width, and the length of the fissure should be enough for the moisture to flow through, and this is the shape of the spatula:
And therefore, if the humidity is further increased and the abscess grows larger, there are two cracks according to this manner:
And if the humidity withdraws from the bone, a sign of it is that you see the commissures of the lips completely open and the water is squeezed when you press with your hand inside and it does not hurt you. Cut into the middle part of the head in three cracks according to this manner:
Then extract the incision completely to remove all humidity; then tighten the cracks with bands and compresses; then drill into it above with a needle and oil within five days, and loosen the stitches and treat the wound with attempts and ointments, and hold the head firmly equalized; and feed the patient dry bread with little humidity until the member is comforted and healed.
And there is another incision technique which considers the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of water, for sometimes it appears at the back of the head, or in front, or on the right, or on the left; therefore, pay attention to the incision where the abscess appears and the accumulation of water, and perform it as best as possible.
And observe that do not incise the artery, and strive to achieve flow of blood and stop the patient's suffering through the evacuation of humors.
**Chapter Second.**
When there is an emergency or sudden pain in the ears or feet, and it is ancient and does not respond to medical treatments, then the last remedy for this is the incision of those two arteries.
And thus you cover when you want to incise where the illness has raised its head, and then rub the place with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and afterwards tighten the collar of the illness with another cloth; and consider where the pulse of the vein is; and the places of each over the places which are appropriately the most delicate, and they remain hidden from some people.
Then pay attention to the artery with a probe, and incise each one with the scalpel at the point where the incision enters the bone, and do this according to the extent of the head.
If you wish, insert the scalpel into the artery and twist it to the incisions made above.
And the length of the incision should be such that when a vein is incised, the blood flow stops immediately, which would otherwise escape frequently.
If the arrow does not appear at the waist, then measure from the auricle the quantity of space equal to three fingers, and then carefully insert the probe into the bone.
And what you get from the wound is a quantity of one wine-unce, and it cannot be more or less, and all this depends on the extent of the patient's malady and the recoil of the arrow in them.
Then consider the plague, and if there remains any cause of infection on the bone, carefully cut it off to prevent gangrene.
Then strengthen the plague with poultices and bandages of linen cloth, and carefully care for it until it heals.
Chapter III.
From the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When ancient or sudden migranes occur due to a combination of humoral imbalance and the quality of the tears in the temples, or sudden old age that resembles these, and conventional medical treatments do not help, we have resorted to the extraction of arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those areas as we have shown.
And the method of performing the operation and extracting those is to address the pain that arises in the temples; understand the visible artery in the temple where it is shown by its pulsation, and it is concealed from most people due to its violence.
And if it is concealed, then tighten the pain's collar with some cloth; and apply friction to the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until you see the artery appear manifestly. And then you take the sponge which has this form: And then you cut the thread with your scissors as easily as possible to reach the arrowhead; and take it out of the wound and extract the piece with your fingers while removing the cloth that is left behind from every part.
If the artery is thin, you wrap it with your finger at its end, and then cut it in a single piece according to the amount by which its ends are extended and contracted, and if not cut, the blood will not flow completely.
Then empty the vessel of blood three times.
And if the arrowhead is large, you cover it with a bandage made of two strong threads of silk or cord, and do not allow it to putrefy before the wound heals and the blood flow starts.
And then incise the excess that is between two ligaments; do this at that time or another.
And if you wish, cauterize the wound with a hot iron within the bone, cauterizing the ends of it after they have been incised, and hold in place that part of the work.
And it is better work if the patient has fever or a cold and wet condition; for cauterization is one of the causes that help to end humidity, and therefore it is better in youth.
And then cover the extraction of the arteries that you have removed from their original position, and place them properly on it, and apply a suitable amount of dry medicines to promote healing and stop any bleeding within that they are sane.
And if while you are working another complication occurs in the form of bleeding from the artery, then immediately tighten that blood flow, either with a cauterization or by filling the space with something, and hold your hand over it until the bleeding stops. And if any cause of those is not present to you, then hold your tongue over the area until the swelling subsides, and apply water with a strong coldness to the place until its sensitivity ceases, and tie it tightly as appropriate.
And what is lighter to extract from the wound, because you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two edges, after you have cleaned both places with attempts, and ignite some, until it reaches the bone and cuts the vein in two places, so that what is between the ends of it can be elongated, since they are not strengthened by this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And the sensitivity of both edges is an example. However, if it has a sharper sensitivity than two edges, it is better, because if it is sharp with two edges close to each other, it does not cut the flesh too quickly.
Therefore, when there is any swelling, the heat of fire is retained in those areas and the flesh is slightly separated.
And this work is better than all other works and is most gentle.
And the space between the two bones should be considered regarding the thickness of that part.
Upper quarter.
On the treatment of acute and acidic eye sores.
When there are acidic eye sores, it is the veins on the surface of the head that are affected, and no medical cause for this condition can be identified; the patient's face appears discolored and they experience a sensation similar to walking on ants, their eyes are exhausted, moistened to the point where their eyelashes become uncomfortably sticky, and their eyelids are irritated by the intensity of the tears. Traditional remedies used in treating such conditions are ineffective.
And you command the patient to shave the hair on their forehead, and then make three cuts in the forehead equally spaced according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the cut is two digits: one cut should be equally spaced from the middle of the nose on the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the eyelids that are in the tear duct, and the third from the other side.
And be careful at the beginning of the jawbones, which are in two parts, and extend your hand along the continuation of both mandibles. And if the space of each cut is three digits, adjust it accordingly.
And if you have a piece of sponge or dry cloth at hand with which to absorb the blood.
And then insert the knife with its two sharp points, which is the shape of the incision for this one. What is removed from the temples during the second incision. Remove entirely the cord that is between the two incisions on the face of the bone, and then make this cut from the first incision into the second. And then take this knife and insert it into the first incision again, using another tool called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And hold the sharp edge against the flesh attached to the bone, cutting along the ligament between the bones, and sever all vessels that descend from the head to the feet.
It may be continued the incision to this appears from the spine, and then make it in the middle fissure between the other fissures.
And when the flow of blood stops, squeeze the locations of the frozen parts of the sanction.
And then place in each fissure a small piece of cloth soaked in wine and oil, and it is important that it does not develop gangrene cautely.
And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large infusion of cold water or tea, and then apply to it a mixture of basilicum, rose oil, and other herbs until the wounds are healed.
It appears that the text you've provided ends abruptly, making it challenging to discern its meaning or continue the translation. The term "Capitol" could refer to several things, including a place name or a technical term related to anatomy or medicine, without additional context. To provide a more accurate translation, a clearer passage would be required.
On the treatment of bleeding through cathartics and the descending pain from sources within the head.
When catarrh comes on suddenly and severely, and the patient's feet are exhausted and their skin is weakened, and the eyelids become ulcerated along with the hair of their scalp, and a sharp pain appears in the head leading to subsequent discharge, then be aware that these symptoms do not come from external sources but rather from veins within the head.
And the best treatment for these is this: order the patient to clean their forehead, and then cut a fissure at the middle of the forehead, slightly toward the left temple compared to the right one; make an incision within the bone; and with your hand, remove the clotted blood from the temples which are better drained after mastication.
Dry all the pus with a sponge or clean cloth and then gently press between the two lips of the fissure using a soft, clean bandage or cloth. And then sprinkle on them a powder moistened with wine and oil to prevent infection from occurring quickly.
And when you open it and see that the infection has already decreased, then rub the bone within it where the pain begins, and treat it with a dry regimen to make the flesh not swell, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colfa (a type of herb) and mix them together, creating a paste that is applied to these wounds from the native flesh.
Chapter VI.
On the treatment of what afflicts the auricles (or possibly the ears).
The entire cause that afflicts the auricles is one of four species, either it is a mineral or a similar cause to a mineral, such as iron and lead, or it is from plants like rye or beans, or it is a fluid cause like water and wine mixed with them, or any animal.
And so when catarrh appears in the ear or any other cause resembling those that do not adhere or inflame the ear, hold the ear to the sun, and if the catarrh is discharged, it distills into some cause of violet oil or myrrh, then administer the extraction from it, and make the nose blow in a condition suitable for the occurrence of sneezing. And then hold the external part of the ear to some pieces of cloth or wool, and stretch the ear towards the back, as warmth is often forgotten due to these causes.
And if warmth is not gained, then administer the extraction of it using an instrument called a gentle epichorionic, whose form is as follows:
And if it is forgotten using the gesture, then it is; otherwise, administer the extraction of it with a very thin instrument with double folding.
And therefore, if this is not forgotten, make a cannula of aram and insert the end of the cannula into the canal of the ear and close around the cannula with wax and softened oil so that only the cannula opens. And then extract the small wind with strong attraction, as we have seen with these examples.
If this is not forgotten in this manner, take a piece of hot coals or some old apparatus with which the tools are heated, place a small amount on the end of the instrument, and wrap it neatly around the limb. And then insert it into the ear canal with ease and remove the ear from the humidity.
And therefore, if all the causes we have seen are not forgotten, then you should cut off that which causes abscess or spasm.
And the method of amputation is that you begin by cauterizing the malady from the saphetic vein and extract the blood according to the virtue of it, then make an incision between your fingers and turn the edge towards the parts above, and make a small fissure at the base of the edge where the thickest part of the malady is pressed against. And if the fissure reaches the pear (toes), and the toe is discolored, stop it if you can with appropriate instruments; then quickly make the cut at that time, and treat the wound until it heals.
And if the cause of the pain in the toe is one of the swollen and inflated gratings (tissue), then administer treatment and extract it; but if you do not obey my advice, then take some gentle suction with a small tube according to this method: and administer the removal of that grating (tissue) which has fallen into the toe.
And do not attempt this when you think the affected area is already moistened by heat, place it on heavy weights, or extract it with incisions or delicate movements, or by incision as we have said, for this facilitates its extraction.
In water into which the ear has been immersed, there is a remedy for this condition at the beginning, and it fills the ear with some very thin straw or similar material, and then you should press on the ear in which the water is, and if it is thus expelled, it is good; otherwise, take some small stones and lions according to their length, warm them slightly in the fire, and the patient should insert one of these into the opening of his ear and jump on it with one foot, striking another stone against the one inside the ear. Therefore, continue this with the stone until all the water is expelled.
Therefore, continue this with the stone until all the water is expelled. And already the water has been drawn out thus: take paper or cloth and place one end of it in the ear and extend the other end towards the fire until the whole length is burned.
Then take another cloth and do this as many times as necessary until all the water is drawn out, and stretch that over the eardrum as they call it in the extractor from stone.
In the extraction of a foreign body from the ear, if it is small and resembles one of those already mentioned, treat it as we have said in the previous division; but if it is a large object that causes an obstruction to the sense of hearing, then perform the extraction with forceps and scissors, and the cause should be removed as lightly as possible from all other causes that affect the ear.
But in the extraction of worms that have formed in the ear, when you treat it with water as we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations and do not follow up your care, then be aware to protect the ear from sunlight.
And so if any cause of the worms appears here, then extract them with your fingers or some subtle tools, but if no cause appears, take a narrow cannula and make it wide on both ends, the shape of which is like this: Then insert the subtle end of the instrument into the ear according to the amount of pain the patient suffers; and with a strong suction, suck it out, making movements until all the worms are removed.
If you do not obey these instructions, then fold and close the end of the cannula with wax as we have said; administer distilled liquids that have already been prepared in ancient remedies for worm treatments, which you will find in the treatise on distills.
And let your flow be the one that pours medical oils into the ear using this instrument, whose shape is as follows: And make that of silver or brass, leave it straight, in which there is a small hole, and flatten it on top.
And thus it is with the use of what is in the cavity of the container that this procedure becomes necessary. And if you want, take the ray and wrap it at the decent end, then pour oil into the cavity of the hearing aid, or juice from some herb, or any substance from these medicines in the canula — it is in the ear —, and then insert the ray into the coil above and press with your hand to create compression, so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of the hearing aid and the patient feels the oil inside.
And what is inserted into the ear should already be scorched with a small flame. And be careful that the cause which you distil in the ear is not too harsh, for the ear medicines do not tolerate this.
Chapter .VII.
On the treatment of ear infections.
Sometimes, children's bellies can become infected without any apparent reason, and this also happens in some adults, an ear infection due to a plague or flesh damage in that area; and this infection can sometimes occur at the base of the ear lobe, which is not always felt, or it can be external.
And those that occur at the base, which do not understand the cause, are in the most difficult situations to heal.
And in those where you can see the cause, take the patient's ear to the sun and examine it. And so if there appears an increase in volume, open that thin blade of which this is the shape:
If the end of the blade where the width is reduced is pointed on one side and not on the other, and the blade has two sharp edges so as not to hurt the ear.
And therefore if the swelling is due to flesh grown in the ear or in the blade itself, then use those delicate scissors and cut with a sharp ease until all the flesh is removed.
And if the swelling is in the base of the ear, take a thin needle, heat it slightly with fire, and then insert that into the flesh of the ear.
And therefore if you feel a swelling that the patient perceives as easy to drain, because of urgency, apply pressure to the swelling to facilitate drainage; and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear.
And then place the appropriate bandage on the wound, covering it with a clean cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are certain of the healing of the sore; or soak some and apply it to the affected area, using it every third day; if the sore has already formed pus, be careful not to spill it and replace it with other clean cloth soaked in oil, as long as the pustule gradually subsides; and tend to that until it is healed.
If a flux of blood occurs, immerse a cloth or drape in warm water and apply it to the wound; use another method of treatment that stops the flow of blood, as described in the distillation treatise.
**Capitol VIII.**
On the treatment of atrophy affecting the eyelids.
Dry the eyelids of the eyes with some humidity at times, sometimes they are dry.
So you should have those tenacled or hooked instruments, and cut off the spikes from their roots, and then place your hand over the sites marked with three incisions.
If the pain flows with warm blood, then cauterize those points with a fine, sharp cautery.
And the best cautery is to make incisions and return them when there is no cause for their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Treatment for a serious condition that comes to the eyelids of the eyes.
Clouds seen on the eyelids of the eyes have some cause that is assembled into great strength and hardness, and therefore it is called great.
And there is addition of a thick humidity on the lower and upper eyelids.
Therefore, the operation on them is that you consider when the great swelling appears in the part coming from the eyelid and is increased throughout; and the cause of it is slight.
Therefore, open that small fissure by its width, and remove it from everywhere with ease as you evacuate it; and then suspend that one from above and cut off that one.
And if the wound is large, you will adjust it with stitches; and treat it until it heals.
And if it is small, you will not suffer much because the pain of the wound restores and incarnates itself.
And if the swelling is decreasing within the eyelid, you must delve into its depth, then lift the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a bandage, except as necessary at the beginning, and press it from all sides; and if due to some cause the eyelid becomes elongated, do not notice it for any reason.
Then make the incision, wash the wound with salted water; and treat it with incarnated water until it heals.
Chapter X.
Regarding the treatment of the eye's eyelid.
Axcirnath is an inflammation of the eyelid, which is usually caused in childhood and can affect the eyes of adults, leading to their clouding and causing tears to form; and because of this, they cannot see the clarity of the sun due to the tears.
And so you must perform these actions over their faces all the time, and over their faces while they sleep; and so the eyelids of their eyes remain constantly moist, which has already caused inflammation, and the imminent occurrence of acute pain is apparent in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel acute pain within them.
And certain procedures are performed in which the patient's head is placed on a pillow, and a cloth is laid over them, and cold applications are made, according to the amount of pus from the entire operation, and then that is placed over one area, and by pressing with your fingers all around it, more pus is collected in the middle of the circle, and then the application ends in the middle of that area, humidifying the wound with a spatula incidentally on the fissures, so that the fissure does not become larger than the one made in phlebotomy.
Place in the hollow of your hand that you cut open the cord completely until you reach the cavity, for in the most delicate positions, treatment is done through an opening according to the shape of the white ganglion.
Therefore, remove those clothes that you have wrapped around the affected parts outside and twist them with your right and left hand until they are completely separated.
And be careful not to press on the fissure so that the spatula does not reach the wound and dislocate it.
If it does not appear to your assistant at the beginning of the fissure, then you adjust the fissure with a little ease until treatment begins; and then remove those clothes as we have said; and take cloths from them in water, mix vinegar and apply them over the area, and cover these with dry powders.
And so, some who tremble take salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure to draw out that which is moist from it.
And then cure that which is inside so it becomes healthy.
If an accident occurs at the infected site while using cautery, then treat it with dressings until it heals.
Chapter XI.
On the subject of manual manipulation.
When the eyelids of the eyes become inflamed due to the pressing of foreign bodies, and this condition persists, the result is a painful eye and causes frequent tears, swelling of the eyelids, and discomfort in moving the eyes—a condition known as conjunctivitis. It is treated in four ways: either with a hot cautery; or with acute medicine as previously described in the chapter on cautery; or by incision and suture; or with canes (as will be explained).
And so take care that you place the head of the patient in a suitable position; then turn the eyelid with your left hand, and if it is turned, it is good; but if not, insert a needle into the part where the eyelid meets the skin, and let the needle penetrate through the skin toward the edge of the eyelid where there are no hairs, and pull the thread from its place against the eyelid, and turn it to the side.
Then, in the space between the eyelid and the skin, carefully trim the hairs with a scissor-like instrument; then extract the thread and place it beneath the eyelid using small pincers or cloth, and press down on the eyelid with your finger, shaping it like a mirthful smile.
However, it is important to note that the shape should be adjusted according to the amount of inflammation in the eyelid, as it varies among individuals; for those with significant inflammation, a larger incision may be necessary to soften the eyelid.
And then cut open the splint along both lines that you have marked, beginning from the lacrimal duct major to the lacrimal duct minor. And if your fracture is near the natural hairline, it should also be as thick as the king's.
And then place the claw in one of the two corners of the wound, scrape it thoroughly, and adjust the suture at both edges with silk or fine wool thread, clean the pus, and make any excess from the medications adhere to the two eyebrows for some reasons entwined, if you wish to do so; otherwise, do not treat it.
And then change the suture of the wound every three or four days, and take care of it.
And if you wish, leave the wound open without suture, and treat it with something that dries and tightens, as the eyelid should be lifted after the sealing of the wound and the addition of medications; but a tighter suture is better. Thus, I have told you the ancient practices of taxanir.
However, be careful in attending to the patient, as it is a delicate operation, and there is no need to fear.
And there is another way to treat it, where one sees a figure like a grain of mulberry on the eyelid, and then raises the eyelid with three precise incisions, separating and bringing it together in this form:
If this is not possible, having the incisions, and it is not similar to what has been described, then take an agule with a thread and insert that into the middle of the figure, and then insert the other two threads close to the lacrimal canals, the first closer to the larger canal, and the second closer to the smaller one, and adjust between them so that the threads are equal in length, and then with your hand at the same elevation as before, lift the entire eyelid as we have recomposed.
And then adjust the two edges of the wound with stitches, and heal that which is clean.
If an abscess occurs after your incision or fistula, treat it with wax and similar materials, and apply heat to it.
And in some cases, it is necessary to treat the eyelid when its hair turns, so use what we have mentioned regarding incision; however, stitching can be more artificial in some instances.
Inserting needles is done in this manner: and it is that you turn the eyelid and divide the figure within as I have mentioned; then, with art, insert two needles or two thin threads whose length corresponds to the length of the eyelid and the width of their passage should be proportional to the width of the space. And you have already made incisions at the ends of each piece where you have the threads.
Nearby, add some subtleties beneath what exceeds from the upper eyelid, constrict the canals of any broken parts with strong tightness, and leave it for a few days, because the cord will die due to the tightness and will be deprived; it will then fall by itself when it has weakened.
If it is delayed, then break open the abscesses, and treat the infection until it is healed.
Therefore, when it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the hair does not hurt.
And this is the way to make two canals according to this form: and it should have the quantity of length and breadth neither more nor less.
Chapter .xii.
On the removal of sharp hairs from the body, especially when the hair is hard.
When the hairs are not natural, hard, and sharp in the flesh, then the operation on them requires that you use a fine needle, rest it on that delicate scale of silk and lion's fur, and adjust the extremities of the device very gently. And the length of the silk threads should be about the size of a palm.
And then you compose another very fine thread beneath it shortly, and adjust the ends of that if you wish.
Then place the patient's head in a small position near the sun so that your work can be seen, as it is a delicate and precise operation.
And then insert the needle into the root of the hair, adjusting it as needed, and make it penetrate the eyelid swiftly until you extract it from its natural hair.
Then pull the hair out from its roots and insert it into the oil, taking care that one or two or three hairs are enough and not more.
Then gently pull your hand away, allowing the hair to be extracted from the oil into the eyelid, along with the natural hair.
If the oil is not extracted with the hair but remains on the eyelid, reapply the oil to the areas you have treated until it is completely removed from the wound above.
And then examine the wound, since you will remove the oil and the faithful (bandage) and clean any debris or dirt in the wound, and leave the bandage for two or three days, until the hair sticks to its place and a new layer of skin forms over it.
And if the hair is very short, you adjust a longer natural hair, raised to that point where it should be elongated, and then you raise that one.
**Capitol XIII.**
**Of the treatment of a condition that appears on the eyelid above.**
**When you notice a condition on the eyelid, which is characterized by its contraction when the eyelid is closed, to the right or left side, due to poor healing of a wound or section or cauterization, and it is called lepra, this condition is either natural or accidental, caused by the healing of wounds or sections or cauterization, or similar to them.**
**The method of operation on it is that you open up that consolidation and separate the lips, placing them in a position where there is space between them, like a pocket of cloth, and then bind them together until they heal.**
And be aware that you must not treat it from the causes that dry out; for if you do so, you will only make it worse, and in no time at all, there will be even more trouble.
Use one of those causes that softens as well, such as fenugreek, and boil it in water in which the seeds have been ground finely or mix with oil, apply a compress to that area, and treat it thusly.
And the treasure of your cure is that you pierce through all means that are not solidified according to the form in which it began.
And this operation that we have spoken of is nothing but a correction of the imbalance that does not return to the form of the place as it was before.
Chapter XIII.
Regarding the treatment of a hematoma on the eyelid.
This hematoma, which is formed on the eyelid and is often referred to as a black eye, is not properly called a hematoma; it can be either of natural origin or accidental.
An accidental hematoma can be caused by a blow, a cut, a burn, or other similar events.
And the method of operation is that you take a needle with double thread and insert it into the flesh, passing from the left tear duct to the right one, so that the thread goes through both ends of the flesh.
Then stretch the flesh apart from its sides using the needle and cut with a scalpel when you have freed it with the needle, making sure to use a wide blade. And so return the lid of the eyelid to its proper position if it is closed; otherwise, take a pin and press it into the split, then turn the eyelid over and make both slits in the edge of the eyelid.
And the ends of both slits should be at two angles of the incision you have made, where they meet, and by making their angle there, the figure of them becomes complete.
And this figure resembles the Greek letter lambda.
And then press the flesh with your thumb as much as is needed to close the eyelid, which is what we call the palpebra.
And then adjust the separated parts with the thread; and next, apply the treatments we have mentioned for softening medications and cold compresses to ensure healing.
And if you need to increase the opening with a cut, suture or cautery, be careful to make a flat cut on the skin of the eyelid as mentioned before. Then separate the mucous membrane between two lips as we have said.
In the entire discourse on incision when it is above or below, allowing it to flow during the operation, according to how it is prepared in terms of incision, and that is in a variety of forms.
And the skilled artisan always prepares tricks in every possible way so that within he can return the figure to its natural form, or close to it, and treat that malady according to what suits him for the operation and tools in the best dispositions.
Chapter .XV.
From the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this adhesion occurs in most people, the eyelid seems to be solidified on the white part of the eye, preventing the ease of movement and its natural functions; therefore, it is necessary to insert your finger between the eyelid and the sclera, and elevate the eyelid towards the upper part or extend it with pressure.
And then you insert a thin spatula to separate the adhesion, not using sharp incisions, but rather blunting it slightly so that the patient feels no discomfort during the operation, and remove the spatula without damaging the eye's sensitivity.
And your incision should carefully remove that adhesion, facilitating the return of the eyelid to its natural position, and healing all the adhesion.
And then you put in the affected area salt water with which you wash; or distill sun-heated oil dissolved in water into it.
Then you separate the eyelid from the eye with warm water, and place over the eye a woolen compress infused with egg white, and on the third day use consolidating causes while it heals.
**Chapter XVI.**
**On the Knowledge of Clouding and Protrusion of the Membranes of the Eyes.**
Know that clouding is in two manners: either it is nervous, resembling a delicate hard shell, or non-nervous, resembling white frozen moisture, which when pricked forces itself out, and the point does not remain in it.
And both spices do not begin until the major tear duct, as it gradually covers the sight, prohibiting light and movement of the eye.
The manner of working in the incision of the eye is that the patient fixes their gaze downward, and the doctor opens the eyelids with his hand, raises the upper eyelid with his thumb, and carefully extends it over the lower eyelid. And then take a needle and, using a horsehair or a similar thin material, carefully pass the needle through the center of the eyelid, extending it towards the edge, piercing the eyelid with the needle, and binding it with the thread; stretch that to the sides, and excise the hair at the edge of the eyelid which is obstructing the pupil. And so you continue to remove the hair within the eyelid's fold.
And then carefully cut the lint in the root of the tear duct with a thin spatula or small scissors, and expose the tissue of the natural tear duct so that by cutting of that one does not cause continuous flow of tears.
And some also apply the ointment to the inflamed area as it is extended or hardened, as we have said, and then carefully scrape off the excess with a sharp spatula, which is the form of this one.
And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal tunic and cause it to rupture, and that the pupil is not perforated.
After the incision, place a little salt or a fine cloth over it and leave it for another day; then carefully tend to it until it is healed.
And if the inflammation is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it fixed in that place, then look for this special type of inflammation to be cured with medicines, and so it is healed as you see fit and cut off at the division.
And if you wish to incise it, open the wound of the patient and take a thin piece of sharp iron according to this form: with subtlety If, however, it becomes hardened and is resistant to the incision, then distill from your time in the wound with a sharp tool of pure vinegar or strong alcohol or salt water, and keep the wound closed for another day.
And repeat the operation on that part until everything that is foreign is removed, otherwise a foul wound will form in the wound, for if you leave it, the infection will spread until it heals.
And repeat your operation on that part until it heals.
The importance of the lacrimal gland, if noticed in the eye due to great damage, should be suspended immediately; and incise it from one side, without finishing the incision so as not to interrupt the flow of tears.
And then distill the main lacrimal gland carefully and make incisions until it is healed.
**Chapter XVII**
On the incision of abscesses and on what is born from attached flesh in the eye.
In some cases, in the eyes of certain individuals, there is born infected flesh, which presses over the pupil or draws near to it on the eyelids, and strongly pulls the eyelids apart, as if by a harness.
The surgical procedure involves the patient holding their thigh with one hand while another assistant holds their leg, and yet another assists on their chest, thus immobilizing them; open the wound, collect all the infected tissue using scissors suitable for this purpose, either with forceps or a basket; cut the flesh from the beginning until everything is finished with the scalpel, and be careful of the wound, lest you damage it during your operation.
And your incision should be the one that incises these or excises the pus we have extracted during the operation on the finger, or small forceps collected with great care according to the shape of it, as this chapter will explain.
So, once your incision is complete and all that infected flesh has been removed, fill the wound with salt or sprinkle it with a powder made from herbs similar to corrosives used in medicine, then apply a clean bandage over it, ensuring there's no risk of post-operative abscess.
And if there is any cause of inflammation from a foreign body and it is accompanied by severe pain, then you should examine the wound and treat that ulcer with something that will heal that ulcer, and continue with that treatment until the ulcer is healed, and do as seems best for the attached flesh that has occurred in this specific case.
Although it may seem that all treatment of this severe wound must be done through natural or accidental means, using a knife, do not place your hand on any of these operations until you see that the member has endured that operation sufficiently.
**Chapter XVIII**
**On the Collection of Knowledge in Wounds**
Knowledge comes in various forms, some of which are hard and resistant to treatment, preventing any attempt at their extraction, and these wounds heal slowly over many days.
Therefore, at the beginning, it is necessary that you consider whether the pain in which you know it is strong and in which there is no other illness known to you, then you will collect that knowledge.
And command the patient to hold their breath while you compress the veins, one or two at a time, according to your discretion. And make that compression subtle and in this manner:
or make two compressions gradually on the body in this manner:
And once the veins are compressed with subtle force, and at the right moment, while you watch for the pain to disappear and see that the veins are filled with blood and are pulsating.
And be careful not to cause pain in the joints of the foot; and if your operation is in the morning before the sun rises, be very firm in your operation, piercing only the veins.
And when you have finished, then distil the best verdigris or rust onto what has been removed from the wound.
If it is not possible to gather all of that at that moment, then apply a poultice to it, which relieves the pain, and leave it for a few days until the pain subsides and the risk of abscess is averted.
And repeat the process according to the nature of the disease until it is healed.
This is the method for forcels:
Chapter XIX
On the reduction of enlarged nostrils.
When you rise from rest using cautery or sharp medicine according to the description of the condition and it is not cured, then there is no improvement in it unless you make incisions over the affected area after evaluating its maturity, and extract all the moisture within it until the bone is exposed.
And so when the bone is exposed and there is corruption or blackening in it, then use a tool whose shape is as follows:
It is called a sharp cap, and it should be made of iron, and the head should be rounded so that it can be punctured with a lime or alkaline substance through subtle punctures (as shown in the following shape).
And place that over the corrupted part of the bone, and then turn it between your fingers, and press your small hand slowly until you know that corruption is removed.
And in this case, some times are made, and then the area is restored to its causes using drying and astringent agents.
Therefore, if the area is consolidated and there is good flesh in it, and it is separated from the healthy and sound body for forty days, and it is not renewed or aggravated, and no further accidents occur to it, then you know that it is healed.
And if this is not the case, then it is not in the bone but rather to reduce the fissure to its original shape, and according to this manner: you must expose the bone either by surgery or acute medicine, and when the bone is exposed, you take hold according to this form:
The tip of the instrument should be triangular, and the shaft of the instrument should first be extended within the extremity to the same extent.
And then place your hand over it, specifically on the bone near the lacrimal; extend your hand a little way towards the thigh, and rotate your hand within so that it penetrates entirely through the bone, and feel the pain as the air escapes from where your hand is.
Therefore, restore the area with astringent medicines that dry out as it has been taught to you.
Therefore, when the flesh around the area has hardened, the matter that was discharged from the parts outside returns to the nose, thus this is considered lighter regarding the illness.
Chapter XX.
On the reduction of the bulge in the thigh.
When the bulge in the thigh appears to its full extent and does not occur due to an abnormal protuberance or reduction, you must understand that you are dealing with a serious illness. Then return (the patient) to their bed, and continue to follow this course, and also ensure that there are no air bubbles in the scarification and suction for good drainage; then apply over the bulge a liniment made from catnip and aloe and fennel seeds and sarsaparilla, and tighten the bandage over it with motes (powders).
And the method of powders is to take sheets of lion's fur, and each sheet is folded in half then into quarters; make these from the fur.
Then place them one on top of the other according to the quantity needed for the treatment. Then tighten them with a strong, stiff cloth; repeat the suction for bleeding and scarification; remove the ventoses and leave the bandage tight during the day and night.
If, meanwhile, the ligament becomes relaxed, be sure it is made very tight.
And leave the ligament as we have said, both during the day and night.
And if the swelling has already been reduced, well; otherwise, repeat the application of powders, binding, and suction until it is healed.
**Capitol .xxi.**
On the incision of the prominence of the uvular tunic.
When an incision is to be made in the uvular tunic, and it becomes prominent, you should proceed with the eyelids as if they were a cover, and form them in the shape of a man, and wish to make an incision here, then the operation on him is as follows: you insert the needle at the edge of the uvula from below, and then another needle through which there is a double thread from the lacrimal part, and let this penetrate and leave the first needle according to its position; then make an incision in the place of the double thread and lift that piece of the uvula along with the needle, and tighten it.
And then remove the needle, placing it over the humid wool soaked in honey, and wait until the thread drops off the uvula.
And then treat the wound with something comfortable until the plague is healed.
And in some cases, a large amount of fluid is collected from all parts around the swollen joint's prominent edge, and then it is punctured with a thin needle that reaches the center of the swelling, and the albumin liquid flows out, and the swelling decreases and subsides.
And then tighten it so that it heals.
**Chapter XXII**
**On the Healing of Alconati**
This condition known as alconati is not truly a sickness but a healthy swelling that resembles water flowing from the joint, and it is not [what we] think it to be.
The method of treating it is to stop the swelling on the affected joint and right side, then place your hand over its head from both sides, and press where you see the fluid coming from in the spaces between the thighs, and prevent it from discharging, and hold it there, and the swelling will disappear.
And if it does not come down below, you will know that it is water.
If the descent is not prepared as we have said, then make the patient stop between your hands and take a delicate knife and cut through that which is surrounding the hernia just below the continuation of the conjunctiva in the tunica (at the desired location), so that the hernia can be removed.
Once it is removed, pour the warm water into which you have mixed honey or water in which fenugreek has been boiled with honey.
And then treat it for other causes as well, until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of water descending from the knee.
We have discussed the properties of water in its parts and what is suitable to pierce with the needle, according to health.
Now you must cut the patient between your thighs over a cloth and tie their limbs tightly.
And then place your left hand near the patient's eyelid, if the water-bearing limb is the left; or your right hand, if it is the right.
And then take hold with your right hand, if the limb is on the left side; or your left hand, if it is on the right side.
Then hold the end of the cloth near the edge of the eyelid, according to the thickness of the tear in the corner of the eye, and then pull the cloth with your hand in a gentle and revolving motion.
And then penetrate into the wound's flesh and feel that the healing has already been achieved due to sight.
And it is necessary that the measurement of the path of healing to the point be the same as the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the blackness, which is the edge of the wound; for you will see that pupil through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
Then place the healing within the area where there is water, and throw it down once, then lift it up again; thus, when the water descends, you will see the malady upon which the patient's sight was focused at first, and healing in their wound.
Then rest for a little while; so if the water has descended, you will rest again before the healing is completely cast.
And when it is stuck and will not descend, you extract the Almagest with ease, turn your hand a little at a time, and dissolve a small amount of pure salt gem in water and wash the affected area; then take out the bandage or stop or wool soaked in rose oil and egg albumen and apply this to the sore.
But it is not those of our time who still use this as treatment with egg albumen.
And if you do not follow your Almagest in the treatment of the sore due to its hardness—which is one of the reasons why the sore is difficult for many men to bear because of its severity—, then know that you must take the sponge which is called "alberid" whose form is as follows:
And therefore perforate the affected area without ending your hand on the tract, and do not stop until you have made a subtle opening according to the Almagest.
And then I insert the maggots as we have said.
And you must prepare the patient's bed properly so that they sleep on their back in a dark room, and all movements are prohibited.
And consider the nature of this condition so that its natural course is not disturbed, and do not force their head to the right or left at any time.
And dress the wound according to its position on the third day.
And then I place them in that dark room and banish the bright light, observing their condition, and return to dress the wound on the seventh day.
And do not cover this when performing treatments or, if necessary, the infusion. As you have mentioned that this text is written in a language similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, the translation would be: "You have observed that they apply it for this reason because water can leave gently and violently from view due to its great and intense attention.
When an abscess occurs cautiously, you will notice that the swelling subsides after the seventh day, and correct any residual abscess with water.
Then you free the sight of it and place your attention on the oral aspect from which it is governed, leaving it for several days, existing in the greatest darkness.
And gradually reduce that darkness, gently conversing about its causes.
And know that in surgery one should not excuse the lack of vision at times, and then you must be bold about the operation.
And we have already reached those who are in the art of surgery, and one of them says that fire should be made in the magdaam air (lung) through which water is sucked out.
However, you may not have seen this done perfectly in our land, nor is it written about in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the species of lung so that it is about those who ignore those:
And they are made of iron or steel precisely, and their ends have this subtile triangular shape, the pointed end similarly so, which is the form.
Chapter XXIV.
Regarding the treatment of flesh wounds in the nose.
When there are diverse types of flesh hidden in the nose, some caused by a growth of many small feet or polyps on the sides, this illness is called polyps because it resembles those feet depicted. And it is flesh that is cancerous, lean, and of pale color; and it is this kind of flesh that has the appearance of lion flesh, not of a pale color.
Therefore, in the case of this lion flesh that is neither fraudulent nor cancerous, you must immediately sever the illness between your fingers and place it in the sun, dry up its nose, and prick the little bumps on those meats. Then remove that from the parts outside, and separate what you have understood from that subtle action of one part within, knowing that all the flesh is held together; if there is any cause remaining for the amputation, then use this as a tool with subtlety and facilitate its removal without any difficulty. If there is an acute or chronic abscess, then you should drain it; but if it is a malignant abscess, then you should incise and cauterize the wound where the pus has formed and ensure all cavities are clean.
Then, with great care, perform the incision in the nose using a sharp instrument and apply salt water or vinegar. If the nose is blocked and there is fluid buildup inside the sinus cavities, then you know it has healed when you detect no more moisture in the palate.
If the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that inside there is still flesh filled with pus surrounding the bones of the nose to which the incision has not reached.
So, you should carefully insert the instrument into where there is any obstruction, and gently turn it in all directions, and between each bone, apply the right or less amount of pressure, and open up the patient and insert one end of the instrument into the nose either by breaking or for another reason that is possible.
And after this is done, it releases its aromatic essence so that it reaches the nasal canals and stays on the throat, as the sight of these actions makes children in schools curious, and it is a light cause for anyone who wants to do so.
Then grasp both ends of the thread, one end emerging from the nose and the other piercing through the nostril, and apply gentle pressure to the flesh with the threads, doing this until you know that the flesh is attached to the threads of the nostril.
Then extract the thread and insert it into the nostril, applying suction with a calulus until the ointment corrupts everything that is broken in the flesh, doing this for three days or more.
Finally, at the end of the treatment, insert a platinum cannula into the nose for several days until it is healed.
If the cure ends, use that method.
And this is the design of an instrument for purging, which distills oils and medicines from herbs:
And make it of silver or bronze, which is similar to a small lamp with a tiny opening, and insert the material that resembles a small mass.
And if you wish, make a tube closed with a plug, just like a cane, and the cannula of the purging instrument should be flat, open; it should have a handle at the end, which you hold when you suck in oils or water from the patient's humors and causes to be sucked out.
Chapter 25.
They grow from the ends of the nose.
The growths, which are like a nail in the ends of the nose, increase and become more noticeable over several days, until the condition is recognized.
And for this, you must pay attention to the beginning of the appearance of it, and treat it completely. And then apply over the area a cautery or medicinal fire, which is located in that place.
If its inspection is delayed and it becomes enlarged, consider if it is smooth, hard, of dark color, and has little sensation. Do not touch it with a sharp instrument, for growths that appear in these apostemes carry great evil to the one they affect.
And if the abscess is a serious infection and not of a dark color, in which case incision is possible in all parts of it, then evacuate the evil and cut into that with caution, and treat the place with something that drains and constricts until it heals.
**Chapter XXVI**
On the sewing of the nose, lips, and ear when continuity is broken due to a wound or similar.
Know that when there is an accident causing the loss of continuity in one of these cartilages, little benefit does this operation confer in some people.
Therefore, when you encounter any of these conditions due to a fresh wound or infection, recognize that the two edges of the wound should be brought together with stitches, and then treat it until it heals.
And if the lips of the wound separating completely and each one is made healthy, then you must cut each part from its adjacent tissue until it does not protrude further. Then adjust both lips with sutures and strengthen them, and sprinkle dragon's blood on them and cover them with a thin layer of fine plaster or some other consolidative dressing, leave it for two or three days, then remove that dressing and replace it with another, until the wound is completely healed.
The technique for the suture is that you add the solution to restore continuity either with needles as we have recommended in the suture of the abdomen, or by adding the solution of continuity with thread as you know how to do.
**Chapter XXVII**
To extract those causes that come in both cheeks inside.
These growths are often seen in many people inside their cheeks; some are hard like dried fat from burns, and others are larger and some are smaller.
Therefore, he removes the lips and openings of all those hard growths, and then fills the space with a thread-like absorption until the wound is healed, and then cleanses it with vinegar and treats the area with water that has been cooled, until it is cured.
**Chapter XXVIII**
On the removal of tissue attached to the gums.
For the removal of growths on the gums that are firmly attached, which were once called albulus, therefore, he suspends them with hooks or holds them with forceps and carefully cuts them out, allowing the healthy blood to flow and the wound to heal.
And then apply your hand over the area, using sage or other astringent and purgative powders.
And if that flesh returns, then cut it secondly and cauterize it, for the cautery will not return.
**Chapter 29.**
On the cause of toothache.
When on the surface of the teeth within and without, as well as between the gums, there are sharp cuts, bruises, and some dark spots, which turn black and cause inflammation to the gums, and the teeth become loose.
And therefore you must open the space between your hands and place the head of the patient in a comfortable position, and pull out the teeth in which these sharp cuts and similar causes appear, without any pain, and this is done for their blackness, citrus color, and other conditions until they are cleansed.
Therefore, if there is something left from the beginning of the reasoning, proceed with that; otherwise, repeat the reasoning about those points on other days and in sequence until you reach the final statement regarding what you want.
And you should know that teeth often require various types and shapes of cuts according to how they are prepared for your operation. And for this reason, the scalpel with which the tooth is extracted from its socket is different from the one used to cut between teeth according to other forms. These forms of scalpels should be prepared as you will see shortly:
Chapter .xxx.
Eradication of teeth.
Understand that you cure the tooth of its pain with all diligence and time in its complete eradication, as there is no reason to delay its removal once eradicated, for it is a sublime substance that justifies the effort in the eradication of it.
When the disease is compelled to extract a tooth that causes pain, you must be certain which tooth is painful; for sometimes the pain appears to come from the diseased tooth itself and seems to be in a healthy tooth, but you extract the one that is diseased and the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth has been extracted, as we have seen this happen through barbers' operations.
Therefore, when you must be certain which tooth is painful, and you know it well, you will see that you sacrifice in the region of the tooth with a spatula in which there is some virtue, until it is completely dissolved from the gum of the tooth, and then carefully cut away little by little with your fingers or small forgings until the extraction is complete.
And then use pliers with strong jaws for good speech or firm sucking, and place the patient's head between your hands that do not hurt it, and carefully pull out the tooth in a straight manner so as not to break it or cause greater pain to the patient.
And therefore, if it is not forgotten, take one of those instruments, place it there in every way with ease and effort remove it as it was done at the beginning.
If the tooth is broken or corroded, then you should cover it completely with cloth and stretch that thread at the end of a fine needle so that it does not unravel in the hour of your constriction over those teeth as you hold them.
And be sure to perform the scarification precisely in the gums on all sides and pay close attention so as not to break or tear that wound, and return to the patient for further treatment if the malice is greater than the first pain of it.
And beware that you do not perform what some ignorant barbers do in their hasty and reckless efforts to extract teeth, for they do not administer what we have recommended; often, they cause great pain to men, which is much more difficult to endure than a simple extraction, and leave the roots of their teeth completely damaged or extracted, or some of them, as we have witnessed on many occasions.
And then proceed with the eradication of it, wash your mouth with vinegar or add salt to it.
And if there are wounds that do not heal, or they become red and swollen, then cut off some amount of cloth and wash over the wound, and if this cloth does not help, use cautery.
The design of the forceps and pliers should be delicate, with which a tooth is extracted from the beginning, having a short handle and a thick grip, so that they do not bend when used for such purposes.
And they should also be of varying sizes, so that when you begin to use them, those with thicker handles are not bent, but rather shorter ones have thinner ends.
And they are made of Indian iron, with straight ends, and the ends of these have teeth that interlock with each other and tighten firmly, and sometimes the ends of these forceps take the form of a bird's beak, which is curved, and are very strong.
Chapter .xxxi.
On the eradication of teeth and the extraction of broken bones from the jaw.
When it is necessary to eradicate a tooth that is firmly embedded due to any cause, you should place your fingers over the area and apply pressure for one or two days until the location becomes softer; then insert pliers or tongs whose ends are shaped like the beak of a bird called a ciconia or guanta.
Their ends should be sharpened with a chisel or file.
And if you do not obey the instructions regarding these pliers or tongs, then you should lie down and expose all the flesh and insert the instrument called a small lever, whose shape is as follows:
And take a thin but sharp knife, small in size, and do not cover it so that it can cut effectively.
If the incision for this is forgotten, then do so; otherwise, help me with these other instruments, of which these are the shapes: the shape of the first instrument has an extreme end that is triangular and of some thickness.
The shape of the second instrument is triangular with a very thin end.
And with these instruments, having two slopes, the appropriate one for this is as follows: and other instruments which are used for shaving teeth; because the work is easily done with this instrument which resembles a large claw, and its shape is:
From the rounded or pointed end of the tendon, which may be of any thickness, but is not enmeshed, so that it is not strained.
And you should know that the tools of the moving teeth are similar in appearance to other tools.
The skilled and subtle artisans, in their art, find by themselves the means to cope with various operations and ailments, for which the ancients neither gave nor paused any specific tools, due to the diversity of forms.
If the bone of the jaw or any other bone in the mouth is strained, then apply gentle pressure to it in its proper place using the tools and forceps we have mentioned for removing tooth roots, and assist with the maneuver whose form this illustration demonstrates.
And if there is any slight swelling or tightness in the mouth, so that it does not burst or escape, until all bones are completely healed, then restore the area with suitable medicine.
If there is a small hole in the bone, clean it thoroughly of that debris and from its blackness, and treat it until it heals.
**Capitol XXXII**
On the care of teeth that stand out among others.
When teeth protrude abnormally from their natural position, especially in women and particularly young, delicate ones, it is necessary to consider: if it is not possible to extract or clean the tooth, then extract it; but if it should not be attached to another tooth, you should cut it off with this instrument which resembles a pig's tusk, made of sharp Indian steel.
And your incision should be made over the tooth in many days due to the hardness of the tooth, and it should not touch any other teeth.
And if the prominent tooth is exposed to the point of erosion, then file it with this iron lime file whose shape is as follows:
And all of this should be from Indian iron and the margin precisely; and it should have small, sharp points as with a lime, whose teeth are gradually filed in many days with ease, so that there is no other tooth like it that cuts and injures. Then carefully cut that at the end, and sharpen it with other razors as well.
And if it is the tooth from which a piece has come off and affects the tongue, then you must file until the roughness of that fraction is smoothed out, and apply pressure so that the tongue does not hurt nor does speech become corrupted.
**Chapter .XXXIII.** (Note: XXXIII represents the Roman numeral 33)
On the restoration of lost teeth with gold or silver wire.
When teeth are affected by impact and removal due to percussion or extraction, and the patient cannot strain what they eat, having already treated it with astringent medicines without success, then consider using those that are strengthened with gold wire rather than silver, as silver tarnishes and can no longer be used after a few days, but gold remains unchanged forever.
And the wire should be of such subtlety and thickness according to the amount that can fit between the teeth; and the form of the restoration is that you take the wire and hold it double between two healthy teeth, and then curve it in a serpentine shape between the two damaged teeth, or if only one or two, so long as the mesh reaches the healthy tooth of the other side. And then repeat the stitching within the space from which you began, strengthening your hand with ease and skill so that it is not damaged.
And your suture, which tightens the thread, must grasp the roots of the teeth so that it does not escape.
Then, with pincers or pliers, you cut off the excess thread and insert it in one place or another with a gesture, and you hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged one, so that they do not harm the tongue. And then, with a firm grip, tie it just as tightly as a Roman knot.
But if it becomes loose or broken, tighten it or those with another thread in the same way for as long as necessary.
And this is the method for teeth and the shape of the correction of two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, just as you perform these ligatures:
And when it is done that a tooth or two are returned to their proper place in their locations and they are healed as we have recomposed them, and that they heal.
And this can only be done by skilled craftsmen and wise ones.
Sometimes, it is appropriate to use the bones of a cow, shaped like a tooth, placed in the location where the tooth is missing, tightened as we have said, and remaining and serving as that for a long time.
Chapter .xxxiv.
On the knowledge of the ligament which is found in the tongue and prevents speech.
This ligament which is found in the tongue, sometimes it is natural to which human does not have, or accidental and occurs due to a disease which is already consolidated.
And the operation on them is to open the mouth of the hernia, removing its existence in the testis; and lift up their tongue, and then incise that nerve ligament according to its width until the tongue is freed from its attachment.
If there is any stiffness or resistance, and this is due to the consolidation of the plague, then you apply oil and incise it according to its width until you have incised the ligament and the knot is dissolved.
And be careful not to cause a fracture in the flesh, and incise here behind the armpit, and let the pus flow out.
Then wash the dressing of the incision with hot water or vinegar or with frothy water; and place your hand over the tongue to keep it moist; it is necessary that the patient keeps the tongue in a certain position at night so that it does not become solidified again.
If a flux of blood occurs, stop it with a vetriole (a caustic substance); if the blood flows, cauterize the area with a latiginous cautery suitable for this. And then apply that cure for the other causes as well, so that it is healed.
Chapter XXXV.
For the extraction of a ranula (a type of cyst), use a tongue (likely a surgical instrument).
Sometimes, a condition occurs where the tongue becomes atrophied, resembling a small, stiffened object that prevents it from performing its normal functions; and when severely inflamed, it is greatly swollen within the mouth.
And the procedure for it is that you open the patient's mouth wide, facing them towards the sun, and consider the atrophied tongue.
And if you see a thin, dark, hard object which the disease cannot affect, then do not touch that part as it is brittle.
And if it turns white, indicating moisture, then insert your finger into it, scrape off the thin layer, and cut it completely; and if there is a strong wind during your operation, then place a cloth over it to prevent air from entering, using vinegar as needed to constrict the opening.
Then return to your work once you have completed it to the satisfaction of the patient, having washed the wound with vinegar and salt; and tend to the other treatment for this until it is healed.
**Chapter .xxxvi.** (Note: The number xxxvi represents the chapter number, not a part of the text itself.)
On the extraction of the apothema (a term likely referring to a growth or abnormality) from two auricles and from that which is nothing in the gullet, and from other apothemas.
When inflammation occurs in the throat, there are glands that are gathered together and protrude outside, and they are called tonsils, which, when you treat them with what we have said in the previous division and it does not heal, consider if the abscess is hard, of a dark color, with little feeling, then do not touch it with iron.
And if the abscess is of a red color and the base is thick, do not touch it with iron for the sake of the pus; instead, let it mature within itself, and either it will be drained by itself or it will burst open on its own.
And if it is of a white color, hard, and the base is thin, then that one needs to be incised.
And the operation on it is that you consider, in view of your operation, if the abscess has rested completely or if it has been reduced to some extent; and then stop the malady in front of the sun, with the head of the patient facing downwards, opening his mouth, and another servant taking hold of the tongue between his fingers, using a delicate instrument that has this shape.
And it should be made of silver or iron, and be subtle with a blade.
So when you press upon that place and observe its peculiarity, take a hot knife and insert it into the abscess, and draw it out as far as possible outside. Another thing that removes some cause from the tunic, and then cut with an instrument whose form is this...
Another thing that removes some cause from the tunic, and then cut with an instrument whose form is this... and it is assembled like forceps, however the ends of it are curved, so that the dangerousness of each of those is in the right of the other, very sharp, which is made of iron then covered.
If this instrument is not available to you, then cut with a spatula whose form is like this: sharp on one side, blunt on the other side.
And having made one incision, make the other in the same manner of cutting, and then close the incision of the malady with clean water.
If there is a flow of blood, treat it with decoction of the peel of an orange or leaves of myrtle and similar things as long as the flow of blood remains restricted, and take care that it heals properly.
And in some cases, other openings appear in the gullet, or perhaps those two incisions mentioned earlier, and they should be cut according to what has been said about making two incisions equally.
You have already treated a woman suffering from an abscess in her throat, which was of a dark color, with little sensation, had closed the throat, and the woman was breathing heavily, had been denied food and water, and would have died if treatment had not been begun within a day or two.
And the abscess had already stretched so much that it created two openings through which pus will flow.
So you will listen to them first and then place yourself in a position where you can see their neck, pull it slightly, and throw it to one side, releasing a large amount of pus. Then, identify the opening from which you understand the other infection is coming, and press on it. Also, hold their tongue, and place the finger in that abscess.
And then you will make a large cut, and instead of pus flowing, only a little blood comes out. Therefore, it is the treatment for that woman: soon after, they will start drinking water and eating food. Thus, you should not continue to incise those abscesses frequently; instead, let them heal on their own, and another one may form in place of the previous one, which will prolong its healing process.
Therefore, you should prepare and apply a hot iron to the affected area, and then at once; and afterward, walk about and do not be unclean, for God has given me this remedy.
It appears that the text you provided is a fragment of a medieval medical treatise, but it lacks context and continuity. The sentence "Capitol .xxxvii." suggests that it might be referring to a specific chapter or section in a book, but without the full text or surrounding information, a precise translation is difficult to determine.
Of the incision of the knee when it is localized.
When catarrh occurs in the knee, and it is localized and long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is at the side, thick and round, then it is called a bubo.
In the treatment of what we have discussed in the previous section, and if your treatment does not agree with this, and indeed, the apposition of cautery has already been applied but it is subtle, then you must incise the one that is round; and if it is of considerable length, and it bleeds, of dark red or black color, and it does not give off a bad odor, then you must be cautious with the incision, for there is fear regarding the patient's condition.
And when you observe it according to the method I have described regarding its whiteness and length, you must immediately remove the malady and press the tongue of it with an instrument that shapes its form, and then return it to its original position, and incise it with one of two instruments known as the 'inscision of two cuts'.
And be sure not to insert anything other than what is suitable regarding the natural condition of its addition, for if you insert more of it, you will harm its function.
Then make the incision, use what we have recommended for the incision of two wounds, and treat it so that it heals well.
If the patient was afraid of the incision, use cunning in the cauterization process to calm their fear, and the method of the cautery on them is simply sharp, and it's important that you place the patient's head on the table, and then press their tongue with the instrument we've mentioned, and take water as we've said in the chapter on cauterization, and apply this gently, and don't make it too thick or too thin, and fill the indentation of the instrument whose shape is like this:
The end of the instrument that holds the medicine should be concave like a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine on the wound, and have the patient lie on their side so that saliva or mucus from their mouth does not fall from the intrinsic medicine, to prevent any harm to their throat and to protect them.
And then apply your hand to the medicine, extract it from the wound, continuing until the space is filled and the medicine is weakened and calmed by its bite.
And if you wish, take care and wrap that around the end of the ray, submerge the bandage in the medicine, insert the ray into the bandage in a tube from above until the bandage adheres to that tube, and do this as many times as you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the wound, then let it dry so that it falls off after three or four days.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, do so, then using a cauterization tool with a bandage soaked in the medicine, absorb it into the wound's circuit, purify that which is in the circuit of its medicine with water and soap, and cure it from the outside with embrocation, and internally with remedies until it is healed.
And this specific type of treatment is more effective than incision and free from fear.
Sometimes the ulcer is cured with something more subtle than cautery or incision, and this is done through fumigation in this manner: take calament, hyssop, origan, rue, Arabic cloves, chamomile, brodye, and similar herbs, and combine all those causes, or some of them, into a single mixture, and submerge them in wine; the mixture should be boiled; and there should be a hole in the middle of the mixture, over which a convex instrument made of silver or bronze is placed.
And the instrument should be inserted into the patient's throat until the vapor rises to the ulcer, and the ulcer becomes heavily clouded.
And then repeat this process with those spots that have dried, but be careful not to perform this treatment during the onset of abscesses, as you would apply too much pressure to the abscess, and it is important for you to first diagnose the abscess by cauterization.
If you do not have this instrument at hand, take a cane and create a point at the end of it with a hot stone, so that the mouth of the hernia is closed, as the point of the hot stone prevents the gas from escaping through the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On extraction of spines and other substances adhering to the skin, and from other causes.
You may observe substances adhering to the skin or spines from legs or any other cause.
So then, after you have extracted what is apparent from these [substances], which you observe with your eye, since you press the tongue against the instrument in front of the light, it will allow you to be certain about what is in the mouth.
And what appears to be hidden in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, for the strong cause annexed to the throat will be forgotten through vomiting; or let the patient swallow a piece of nap or chopped lettuce or a bite of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sea sponge, tie it firmly with thread, and make the patient swallow it, for when it reaches the place where there are spines and it is extracted, then it will be forgotten. You can also take an eel and mix it with vinegar, put it in a pot and extract it carefully; or take a fig and carefully cut it open and extract its contents.
If these causes are not forgotten, use a lead instrument in this manner:
It should be a thick but sharp small point, and at the end of it there is a concave part which you insert into the patient's mouth with ease.
And raise the patient's head in their bed, and be careful of handling their neck bone, so that they might catch hold of whatever pushes the bone or the spine, or what the doctor places his hand on.
However, if the patient's condition is more severe, it is better, due to their knowledge of the location of the cause and its attachment, to push it down and apply the instrument with their hand on it, according to the quantity prepared for them, without delay.
**Chapter .XXXIX.**
On the extraction of blood from the throat.
When treating pharyngitis as mentioned earlier with medicinal herbs and not surgical intervention, consider the patient's throat under the sun, because you should inspect their tongue with the instrument you have recommended.
Therefore, if you examine the blood flow, extract that tiny or subtly moving clot appropriately.
If it is not possible to extract the clot, then take a concave needle and insert it into the wound of the patient, and then place a heated iron in the concave part of the needle, and do this several times (as long as the blood flow stops and drains from the wound) and apply cold compresses to the wound throughout the day.
Then take a vessel filled with water, apply its mouth to the wound, and wash the wound with it; do not spill any of that water and repeat this process with fresh water every hour or so, as the blood will begin to absorb the water soon.
If we have not forgotten what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient's throat or use the instruments we have selected for the suffocation of the uvula.
Do this, so it falls in the right place.
And another way of operating in suffocation of that is that you take a cloth in which there are hot coals and the cloth is covered with a cover, in the middle of which is an opening, and the instrument's end is placed in that opening; then apply the subfumigation from above; and have the patient place his mouth at the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that the subfumigation is not expelled until you know that the subfumigation has reached the bloodstream, because the blood will eventually fall.
And if he does not eat, you repeat the subfumigation many times, keep the patient from drinking, and give him salty food and alcohol, and do not let him drink water, and so it is necessary that this regimen be forgotten.
And this is the form of the instrument used to extract blood from the veins when seen; it is similar to tweezers as well, with one significant difference: it has no curve. Which is placed on the tongue, and its end resembles a swan's beak, which is smooth with lime, for this reason, when we buy some cause, it does not leave.
Chapter XL.
In which is the summary of the discourse on the consideration of apostemes and their section.
The apostemes are special marks, of various kinds, according to the recollection of their memory, each one in this book.
And they are diverse in their piercing and sectioning by two methods: one is for the specific type of apostemas themselves; and for what we understand about humidity.
And the second method is specifically the locations in which bodily accidents occur, where the apostema accident in the head is different from the apostema accident in the foot; and the apostema in the fleshy part of the body is different from the apostema in the joint; and each one of them has its own treatment by operation.
And some wounds are such that they must not be probed, but rather allow the healing of the tissues in those areas.
Other wounds are such that they must be probed when they cross over joints, and do not heal according to their size, as with wounds that are near joints, when a wound is close to a joint, the condition of it prolongs until you find something in the course of the flow [of blood], and often corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that member; or it is a wound near a principal member, and if you delay perforating it while it has not yet matured, it will affect the principal member; or it is near the anus, so do not perforate when it is not mature; and do not pierce it cruely, without completing digestion, but rather that which is near the anus, so as not to allow the pus to escape and extend inside, and create a fistula, or be made in the term of it, which will not heal. But know that you must know the time for piercing the wound, and this is when it has matured.
And you will know that it is cured when the pain ceases and the fever abates, and there is a reduction in the redness and pulse, and the sharpness of the sore's head, and other signs.
And furthermore, know how to recognize the drainage location beneath the sore, and also any subsequent draining that occurs as a result of the treatment of the prominence.
The drainage should always be through the flesh or the body, if the abscesses are in the thighs or feet, and in places of the tendons, nerves' cords, or arteries; and finally, in all other places equally, where there is no reflection; for in those that reflect, use drainage according to the affected member.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, then it is better to wait until the drainage has been confirmed according to its progress, as we have said; for if you drain it too soon before the process is complete, you prolong the course of the disease and increase its severity, and harden the walls of the abscess and deepen its depth.
You may make some incisions in certain places through the thickness of the flesh or body parts according to need, or depending on what the affected member requires.
And be aware that you must make small incisions, and in large abscesses, deep and wide cuts or sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
And other types of abscesses where it is necessary to empty the cavity and clean it, when done in this way, it acts like bread and is made in such a term as it already was, similarly to what happens in cases of gangrene and bubo.
And regarding those that are incised in a section with three angles; and of those where the incision is made similarly to the shape of a myrtle leaf, as with the abscesses of the elbow joints.
And regarding those where a round section and a semicircular section is administered, and similar to those.
May he who has no such issue as when leeks are superficially attached, be sure to make a shallow or flat perforation only.
And if the attachment (apostema) is thick and has already collected much pus, do not make a deep incision at once; instead, extract a portion of it, then return the apostema to its place within a day, and extract a larger portion next time, gradually increasing the size of the opening until it is completely drained.
And especially if the patient is very frail, a pregnant woman, a small child, or an elderly person, because the vital spirit (animal spirit) quickly resolves itself towards the exit of the pus, and often the disease kills them, so you must operate on them.
Take great care with this chapter, and be sure to clean the wound you make when puncturing these apostemas; consider whether the infection of the apostema is slight or a deep section, then administer the appropriate treatments; and if the apostema is large and the openings from the puncture are wide, apply pressure in several places until they close together.
And if a portion of the tendon or ligament is severed in the abscess, then you should close it tightly with strong thread or cloth, just as when you bind wounds or cuts, keeping them moist; and apply heat to it on the third day, and treat and cure it with poultices until it heals.
If bleeding occurs during your operation, then administer clean water and vinegar, adding a cloth to it, and place that over the area of the bleeding, applying pressure as needed.
If the bleeding persists, then you should administer regimens and remedies, and apply powders recommended at various locations of this our work and division.
If it is during winter, and the abscess is in a location with many nerves, then you should apply poultices in vinegar and oil, and place them over the affected areas.
And if it is summer, and the parts are fleshy, then cover that you place powders soaked in water and oil or wine and oil, and all of this should be rubbed until it becomes dry, as we have said, and then make sure you loosen the crust and clean it and apply what is appropriate for its healing until it is cured.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of apostemas universally, more so according to the method of distinction that I have already mentioned regarding each type of apostema and its particular way of treatment.
Chapter .XLI.
Regarding the section on the treatment of apostemas that occur in the nape of the neck.
In the nape of the neck, there are small apostemas, which are of various types with layers that are characteristic of their nature; and each type has its own distinctive qualities.
And from their veins come drops, and those contain moisture similar to lime. And those that contain moisture similar to dew, and resemble them; and those that are rocky, hard.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, for the incision of those does not cause angry swelling.
And the operation in cutting those is that you expect those to be cut with an instrument of the form that you know it contains.
If what it contains is moisture, then you cut those according to length by cutting through the surface in this form:
And it begins in the section of the line from B to G. Once the moisture is evacuated, you remove that which contains that moisture, and do not leave anything from that, for if any cause returns, it will be seen again.
And then dip a cotton ball in Egyptian vinegar, if present, or in water and salt; fill the affected area with this and leave it until the next day, as it corrodes everything that breaks through that skin.
And then repeat the application of Egyptian vinegar to that area according to need, as long as you are confident that there is no other cause for that skin break; cure the wound with vinegar until it is healed.
And if there is an abscess due to fat nodes, then incise it according to this form: make a cut in the shape of a cross, and open it between the two lips of the section, then remove that part entirely, and use your virtue to extract the tunic containing it.
If it causes you any discomfort, then do what I have told you at first.
And it seems to be done in the case of an abscess by cutting and curing as we have told you; the incision over the abscessed area is lighter because it is of little severity and has little humidity.
And sometimes there are these abscesses which are in the head on some men and women of old age, drying up the abscess as it were with a hard, sharp, white stone that cannot be crushed, and if anyone were to touch it, he would be infected by it.
But in other abscesses that occur on the head, not like these, also appearing on the heads of children and requiring the removal of hair roots, but the incision for all of them is a superficial one.
And stop the piercing of those in the lower part because it should be away from the health issue in the deeper parts.
And then apply remedies that are appropriate for that which is suitable for healing.
**Chapter XLII**
On the section regarding scrofula that occurs in the collar area.
These knots often occur in the collar, armpits, and angles (or sides), but sometimes they can appear in other parts of the body.
And so those that occur in the collar, these are knots that are generated among themselves, and all scrofula of these has its own thin covering, just as with the nodes and bumps on the head, similarly when we have treated them.
The types of these scrofula are knots; some are hard like stones, others contain moisture, and the malignant ones do not respond to treatment.
Therefore, when you perceive a good disposition in the touch, of which the color is manifestly similar to that of a bruise, and it is painful at all points, not attached to any nerve, vein, or tendon, and not swollen, understand that you should incise it along the dry superficial line from its origin on the skin (G) to its termination beyond the body (B), and scrape it entirely, extending the edges of the bruise as far as necessary, either with a single cut or multiple cuts, as required, just as we have said regarding the apothems of the head, and extract that part little by little.
And take greater care that the vein or nerve is not incised.
And be careful that the knife is not too sharp, or does not fit in your hand for incision, or causes unease to the patient, and you do not cut what is not necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or tendon, it would hinder your operation, and then you would have to resort to drugs such as vitriol or other powders that stop the flow of pus, and open up the abscess, and leave it until the acute phase of the apothems has passed and the abscess is softened and begins to putrefy. When the wound is incised.
Therefore, return to your operation until the aid is complete.
And then investigate the aforementioned indicated spots to see if there is any cause among the other small ulcers; hence, incise and clean those.
And if it is in the root of the large ulcer, you must be careful not to incise that ulcer from its root. First, be sure that the aforementioned thread is tightly folded and then gently pull it out without applying excessive force.
Then fill the wound with warm Egyptian ointment that you have already applied, and tend to it.
And if you cut into that ulcer completely, you will see that you must close the two edges of the wound and apply poultices as soon as possible to prevent any excess exudation.
If it happens that there is excessive exudation due to the severity of the ulcer, you must understand how to incise the base of it, drain it, and then administer a suture and what is said.
And for the scrofulas that contain humidity, pierce them with a superficial incision at the place where you see the formation of pus, and apply perforation to what is beneath the body's surface, as we have said.
And then administer the incision, using an agent like vinegar and similar substances to corrode what is damaged by corruption. And when you see the wound already cleaned, then you must care for it with a generative flesh-healing agent until it is healed.
Chapter .xliii.
On the section of the pill (or soft tissue) around the abscess, make an incision.
The ancients used to make this section in the abscess, and I have not seen anyone in our land who does that.
And this is the inscription of the speech of those.
One should be careful in men who have calcification, ensuring that the extraction of the abscess is avoided, for by doing so, all the veins and major structures of the malady are here.
In those who have abscesses in the mouth or throat or both ears, when the malady is not in the tooth, be careful to avoid the section of the abscess to prevent the loss which is caused by perforation.
Therefore, when we want to treat this, we incise the epilhot between three circles of the epilhot rings, or four with a small section according to the distance between two circles for quantity, making the cut in the bone, not in the cartilage, and this location is suitable for cutting because it is devoid of flesh and the channels of blood are open.
And if the doctor is cautious, he should extend the thread of the ligature onto the glandular node, and then open the ligature until it reaches the channel, but avoid the blood vessels if they are affected by any cause.
Then he should make incisions in the bone as we have recommended; and it signifies regarding the section of the channel for the inflammation which is situated here, as if it were from something that is corrupt and by the removal of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Therefore, when the time is passed in which piercing is feared, add two lips from the edge of the wound, and with that single one is the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that promote the healing of the flesh until it is cured.
And we have recited the entire discourse that we have compiled, its essence is that some of these doctors have already incised the bowels of the patient, and the illness has spread to death, and the air of life has been cut off, and others are about to incise the epiglot so that the illness may breathe in the wound through some respiration, and be saved from death.
And for this reason, the wound should remain open until the malignancy of the illness is consumed; and the malignancy lasts for three days. And therefore, at that time, you should command the wound to be thus treated, and cure it until it is healed.
And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant holds a blade and cuts into the throat of the patient and makes an incision in a part of the lung, and I was called to treat it, and I stopped the bleeding as if it were the cry of the dying, and uncovered the infection and located the abscess which had originated from the infection.
Therefore, you confessed that you had not cut any veins or guided the flow of blood, and the air from the infection was escaping, and you treated it with fire until it was completely healed.
And do not scold the servant unless it is necessary in your voice, and after a few days, return for the improvement of their conditions.
And now I say that there is no fear in the section of the epilot.
Chapter .XLIV.
Regarding the incision of an abscess that occurs in the gullet outside, it is called a hernia of the gullet.
This abscess, called a hernia of the gullet, is a large abscess according to the body's color and it appears more in women.
And it is according to two manners: either it is natural or accidental.
In the natural, it is not engendered to heal.
And the accidental is according to two manners: one is similar to fat nodules, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that is caused by the compression of an artery, and in that case, there is fear. And one should not make a diagnosis with certainty except for the patient who seeks help. And then you examine it and investigate it with your hands, if you find it similar to a thick knot, not suspended from any vein, then cut into it as you would a node, and extract what causes the pain in the flesh and bursae; otherwise, carefully scrutinize its entire being and treat the area with care until it is healed.
Chapter .XLV.
On the section regarding the types of nodes.
Of the various types of nodes, there are many species, and I have already described all their kinds in detail.
And it is important that I explain the difference between a node and an excrescence with careful consideration.
Therefore, you say that an excrescence is a hot, feverish condition with violent pain, until the inflammation of excess is calmed; and it is putrefaction that stops the fever, pain, and heat.
There is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it counts as a lion in the heart that is in the blood.
And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a cease and is made likewise with void, either greater or lesser, and they are according to two species, whether they are fat or contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are spots, as you have said in the division.
Therefore, when you reach the treatment of no (a condition), you must expel it and inquire about the beginning of the storm that is called intromes, according to how its form comes in the chapter that is most appropriate to this.
This is the manner of investigating abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this storm and entrome that into the place that is most humid which you find in the abscess, and you will turn your threads about that little by little until you know that this storm has already penetrated the wall.
And then finalize your hand according to the size of the wound, extract the foreign body, and examine what has remained in the track of it.
If the current humidity is forgotten, of any color, then you insert a knife into the superficial section as I have said in the other wounds.
And if there is no humidity from the track of the foreign body, then you know that it is fat.
And dry it with a knife without forming a cross according to this form: Thus taught, lift it up with the pincers, carefully remove all threads from every part, and check the skin or sack, if possible, over that area, and extract the foreign body from its root.
If it ruptures during the operation, it is not possible to extract that health, and you should make several attempts at this, and then extract it carefully until it does not rupture for any reason.
If it does not rupture for any reason, whether little or much, the knot returns according to the best method.
And if you notice that the rupture is from a small part, then complete the problem with some corrosive powders sharp and strong, strengthen the problem, and place a cautery over the one that will be the abscess, and treat the other with the other cure until it heals.
And if it is not large, then you cut both lips of it and treat that with this that has embedded itself.
If a pulsating vein is against it, or not pulsating, then you cut and press the place of the trigging heat that is vitriol and leave that straits for two days or three until the plague subsides and the swelling of the sanc ceases; and then return to incise what is broken from the node.
Chapter .xlvi.
On the forms of tools necessary for incision and perforation.
Of those are the forms of the instruments, and they are of three kinds, one of which is larger, and another is middle-sized, and another is smaller.
The form of the large instrument is this:
The form of the small instrument is this:
They are made of iron, aluminum, and have sharp edges, in order to insert the instrument into the incisions with precision.
And these are the methods of those experienced, and they are called herbalists, and one of them is known as a herbalist.
And there are three parts of this spice, one part is very strong, another is milder, and the last is very weak.
The shape of the experienced one, the form of him:
The shape of the experienced milder one, the form of him:
The shape of the experienced very weak one, the form of him:
So, these are intended for those with apoplexia, exhaustion, fistulas, and buboes, so that between these conditions, there is something affecting the bones and other causes as well.
And so you make rounds, using large needles sewn with threads, made of iron, or of steel, or of silver, and the best ones are those made of iron.
And these are the experienced ones with black feathers, who recall that through them, fistulas in the cavities of which reflections are seen, are opened, and these reflections are reflected back to their source on those same reflections.
And they are of three kinds, some being long, and others medium-length, and others short, according to the size of the fistula and the tightness of the cavity.
Shape of the experienced black feather:
Shape of the medium-experienced black feather:
The form of the experienced one seeks lead:
The shapes of the incisions are of special interest, as they are made from simple curves, and there are three types: large, small, and medium.
And regarding the depth of their incisions, there are also three types: shallow, medium, and deep.
And these incisions have two curves as well, with three types of depth.
And they have three curves as well, with three types of depth.
And all these are necessary in their place.
The shape of a simple ungual (finger or toe) fracture, its form:
A complex ungual fracture with two curvatures: A moderate ungual fracture with two curvatures: A minimally displaced ungual fracture with two curvatures:
The form of a great hook has three curves:
The form of a smaller hook has three curves:
And these are the forms of scalpels which are used to cut and incise nodules and abscesses, and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small.
Form of the large scalpel:
Form of the medium scalpel:
Form of the small scalpel:
The extremities of those to whom this is done have sharp cuts, while other extremities are not sharp but cut in such a way that it is done with freshness in the removal of nodes, avoiding incision of veins or nerves, and for these it heals the disease and brings about tranquil rest a little due to the adjustment which finds the excorination of the ulcer.
And these are the forms of arrows, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you can see.
They are made of iron and look like a ray in which alcohol is also made.
And it is on the outer side of the joint that the pointed instrument is hidden and follows the flow inside and outside, as you wish, so too with the others.
The forms of the instruments, which are hidden among these times during the piercing of the apertures and do not affect the patients, are of three sizes: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of the vents through which the flow of blood is stopped, and there are three types: large, medium, and small; the forms of the plug:
They are made of thin, round, smooth metal, and are very small.
And these are the various types of vents, large and small and medium, so that by means of them the flow of blood can be stopped at the right speed, as needed, and when it is not necessary for treatment in the first instance.
Yet, do not use those to cut or ablate the san in every part of the body, but only in fleshy places, such as on the wounds of the legs and thighs, and on the wounds of the arms, breasts, abdomen, and groin, similar to their appearance in moist flesh wounds.
And in some cases, these instruments, small like scissors, are used to cut according to this form; the san is abscinded when it is made by phlebotomy, or the incision of a vein or arteryle.
And some times, they are cut in circles according to this form:
Chapter XLVII.
On the care of the breasts of men, which are similar to those of women.
Some times the breasts of certain men are inflamed due to lying down during sleep and they become swollen, and similarly the breasts of women also become inflamed and stay that way.
And for those who wish to treat this, they should incise those parts in the lunar section according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G, and then excise the entire roughness, and fill the wound with incarnate medication, and adjust both lips of the wound with stitching, and cure whatever is inside so that it heals.
But if the breast declines to separate and becomes softened due to its magnitude, as is often the case with women, then it should be cut into two parts, resembling a crescent moon, of which each one contains the other at their ends, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form from the line of B to the line of G. And then excise the cord between the two lips of the wound, stop the discharge, and apply what has been said about sutures and powders for healing until it is cured.
If you do not perform the incision correctly due to the patient's restlessness and the flow of pus, then fill the infected area with a corrosive ointment and leave it until it corrodes the hard tissue, and then treat the area that is healed.
Chapter .xlviii.
On the perforation of abscesses that form under the skin.
These abscesses that form under the skin due to scrofula, a hard condition, contain a pus that needs to be drained.
And for those that contain fluid, they should be incised at the lunar section as per this figure: from the line marked 'G' to the line marked 'B'. Once all the pus has been drained from the abscess, you should close it with a bandage and inspect it again the next day.
And then apply the bandage and treat it with a suitable ointment until it is healed.
If there is an abscess of lymphatic nodes and scrofula, then you should drain it as we have said in the section about scrofula generally.
If the infection has spread so that gangrene sets in, then apply a cautery to it as we have said before.
**Chapter XLIX** (49) - though without the specific content, this heading suggests a continuation of the medical treatise.
From the section about abscesses that occur through arrow wounds or veins.
When an arrow breaks through the skin and the vein beneath is injured, then abscesses often occur due to the inflammation and infection caused by either an artery or a vein: for when an abscess is caused by an arrow, it is a deep wound in the body; and you can tell that an abscess is formed if there is any hissing felt within it.
And that which is through veins is returned to the manifest of the body.
If this incision on this apostema (suppurating wound) is incorrect, especially in places where the armpits (axilla), angles (angle of the body, perhaps referring to the knee or elbow), and collarbone are involved, and it is large, then it is very important that its treatment with iron (perhaps a metal used for cauterization) be avoided, and if it is on the extremities or head, it should also be avoided.
Concerning him who suffers from the pain caused by the arrows of the bow, cut a longitudinal section in the thigh; then open the section with scissors and release the arrow from the quiver, and remove the clothing so that it is exposed.
And place a needle on it and make it penetrate into the other side, and tighten (or remove) the arrow with a string at two places—which causes you to extract from both arrows that are in the temples.
And then apply pressure to the area between the two ligaments, spreading them apart until the whole bone is exposed and the abscess is dissolved.
Then apply treatment to the area where pus has formed until the ligaments heal; and take care to clean it with suitable poultices until it is cured.
And if it is an abscess caused by the rupture of a vein, you must hold your hand over it as much as possible near the abscess with your thumb, and then insert the needle into the place where you have held your hand, and penetrate it; and keep pulling on that thread in two parts until you extract the foreign body from both sides, and then tie off the abscess with a suitable ligament according to what I have said regarding the ligament of grapes from both sides at the two extremities of the thread.
If you are afraid of pulling out the thread, insert a second needle into the whole abscess after making the first incision, and tighten your threads in four places.
Nearby dry the ulcer in its middle location until, when this is done, you incise the excess of the wound, and leave what is attached to it.
And then place a poultice on it that you have soaked in vinegar and oil, and apply the treatment that is done for such things until it is healed.
On the surface of the ulcer that occurs due to nerve damage.
Thus occur ulcers in the rear and in the veins, and ulcers seem to occur on the nerves when they are struck or caused by excessive labor, and similarly.
And the treatment is applied in the areas of the aids or the foot, or in any place where the joints are damaged.
And it is a grave ulcer, similar in appearance to the other body, and its greatest dispositions are from their own and when it is tightly held with violence, pain in it causes a sensation of stupor.
And it is not an ulcer added to the surface of the body, and for this reason, it is left open, and it is painful throughout and does not spread forward or backward.
Therefore, regarding those who have it in the joints, it does not cover that it be invaded by iron, because their powerful contractions will prevent it.
One can make the incision for those on the head or forehead with a knife. If the ulcer is small, one can use scissors and cut out that part of the skin.
And if it is great, you suspend it with a bandage, remove that, and then close it with a plaster; treat the wound with sutures and cure it until it heals.
It appears that you have provided only the initial letter 'C' and the word 'Capitol', without any context or additional text for translation. To provide an accurate response, I would need the complete sentence or phrase related to 'Capitol'. If you have more text, please share it so I can assist you further.
On the section of the abscess that occurs from the wound that occurs in the abdomen.
Even some people are moved by sight in the abdomens of these individuals and in other parts of their bodies, which are called fungal-like due to similarity to fungi, of which the roots are subtle and the heads of those are large; and the lips of these are turned inward, and it is from these that a request is made, and it is of these that a great praise is given.
And you have already seen one, and in their belly were two parts that served similar functions, and there was no difference between those whites, of small size.
And the lips of those [parts] were everted and split open, and moisture flowed from them all the time.
Therefore, you should incise those and then tighten the one on the foot with a thickness of 18 parts and the other with a thickness of 6 parts.
And the operation in the incision of them is that you consider when the illness is humid, and the color of the swelling is white, moist, of fine size; then you cut them with a broad spatula, and they should be cauterized over an open fire, for you must drive out the hot blood, and if it bleeds, cauterize that part.
And if the patient is afraid and trembles, beware of sudden cutting with a knife; instead, take a recent fresh plaster, tighten it on that limb in the manner we have said, and leave it for two days.
Then adjust the tightness of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease to tighten the large lead after it has been incised and falls off by itself through its work.
If that part is of thick consistency, there is no cause for fear or trembling in its incision, especially in that which is in the belly.
It is possible that you incise the main part of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then care for it until the plague is healed.
And be careful not to attempt to cut what is of a dark color, with little sensation and regular movement, for that is absolutely cancerous.
And now let us recall some further remedies for this.
Chapter II.
On the cure for hernia (or "eminence" of the navel).
The hernia (eminence) of the navel is caused by various reasons; either from fissures in the abdominal wall, from which the intestine or hernia protrudes, or from a sac that flows from a vein or artery as described above, or from excess gas accumulated within it.
If it is due to abdominal wall fissures and the protruding sac, then the color of the hernia is similar to that of the body; it is very painful, and appears in various positions. And if it is for the exit of the intestine, consider the situation of that mass we have described, with greater diversity, and when you press it, saying that it is obstructed, then return; for it is very hot in its place, and a great effort is required for the bath to enter and vigorous work.
If it is due to moisture, you will feel a warmth and not obstruction when pressing with your hand, nor is it constrained or pierced.
And if it is due to infection, then these symptoms will show an abscess appearing black and declining in color.
If it is not due to flesh, then the abscess is severe, thick, and hard, and its size depends on the amount.
If it is due to wind, then the touch of it is hot.
And the operation on it is that you consider when the prominence of the navel is due to a hernia, or vein, or from gas; then you must be prohibited from treating it, for there is fear and danger as taught in the chapter where I have spoken about hernias by arteria and veins.
If the prominence of the navel is due to an intestine or hernia, then you must instruct the patient to take a deep breath and remain extended; then make several attempts around the entire navel, and command them to lie with their back between your hands over their abdomen, and encircle the area with a wide spatula around the navel where you have felt the attempt; and extend the boundaries of the hernia above and below using hooks or tape in a proper manner.
Then you should break the wall of the hernia over the ligament and insert your finger into that opening to explore the intestine; if you have tightened or held it by the ligament, then extract it gently and push the intestine back inside the abdomen.
If you have found the fabric, then take some oil; and cut away its excess.
If it is contrary to your practice or vein, then go around that area and return to your operation; take two needles and insert them into those two strong threads and pass two needles through the circuit you made around the abscess in a crosswise manner, which will cause penetration; and then tighten the abscess in four directions over the needles.
And if you wish, leave the needles and allow the area to heal until the flesh has extended and fallen on its own; or cut away that portion when it has softened and separated, and then treat that with something that cleanses the infections until it heals.
And if the protrusion of the navel is due to flesh or moisture, then cover as we have said and remove the pus or moisture that you find in it, and then treat it with something that covers and strengthens the area.
Chapter .liii.
On the treatment of cracks.
We have discussed, in our division, the types of cracks and how treatment is approached using medicine, avoiding curettage where it can lead to ulceration. We have also spoken about the causes of cracks and precautions in their treatment.
And the ancient ones said that sometimes cracks can be in places where it is possible to eradicate them, such as crack in the breasts or in the thighs and similar areas of the body, especially when they are just beginning and small.
But when it is old and deep, it may not respond to treatment, for I have never seen it heal on its own nor been cured through other means.
And the operation on him is when he is arranged as we have said, you should proceed and leave the patient and purge black cholera several times, then bleed him if a manifest swelling is found.
Then prepare the patient for the operation with a preparation in which the incision is made; and be careful with the cut, covering it well for good healing without causing any damage to the roots of the wound. Then let the blood flow, do not interrupt it abruptly, press the areas, and clean the thick blood with your hand or an instrument suitable from among the available tools.
If it seems difficult to make an incision of a thick vein or artery, cauterize it until the flow of blood stops, and then take care of the other injuries with proper treatment so that they heal.
Chapter .liv.
On the treatment of hydrophobia.
We have already discussed in detail the types of hydrophobia and their symptoms, as well as the remedies for each type using medicine.
And that which is cured with iron is only the species of altitis alone, and it is not approached with iron to the species of tympanistris or the species of yposarcha, for that is fatal.
And when you have already medicated this species of hydrophobia tympanistre with medicines and do not confirm your treatment, consider this, for if the illness has already been weakened in the patient or it is another type of malady, similar to these others like those in the throat or abdomen, be careful not to treat them with iron, for there is great fear about that.
If you examine the disease of an excess of virtue, and it is nothing but hydropic, neither young nor old, then the manner of operating on it is that you raise the malady between your fingers, and apply yours hand to press it from the belly, squeezing out the water at the opening left by the foreskin, and take a spiny spatula according to this form:
it should be of two long, pointed parts, with a sharp extremity just as with a spatula; however, make it neither too short nor too long, so that in operating on that, it does not enter the cavity, and you can handle it.
And consider whether the generation of hydrops is from the cavities, for you will see that by sectioning near the navel, about three finger-widths on either side, you will find openings left in the right place over the foreskin.
If the generation of hydrops is due to a disease of the vascular system, then your section should be left of the navel by three finger-widths.
And if the generation of it is from the flesh, then your section should be on the right side.
And ensure that your section is on the side where the malady wishes to go, so that excess fluid does not flow to that place painfully.
Then thoroughly pierce the entire chord with your instrument, and insert into that section, and place your hand between the chord and the spine, and extract it; and if it is the size of a fingernail or similar.
And then pierce the spine until the space is reached that the hand wishes to go to, and it is the place of water. Then extract that, and insert an instrument whose form is as follows: It resembles a thin silver tube; it is made of silver or brass or iron, and in its upper part there is a small opening, and on its sides there are three openings: two from one side and one from the other; and its end is cut out according to the shape of a plume, thus:
And at the end of it there is a ring, for when the instrument reaches the water, this will cause the water to flow out of the instrument, therefore evacuating a certain amount at a time; for if you evacuate more than necessary in one go, the patient's condition may worsen due to the resolution of their animal spirit, or they might suffer from a heart attack that brings them close to death.
You should evacuate according to the quantity that the instrument allows, and in accordance with what your understanding of the patient's condition dictates, based on the strength of their pulse and the goodness of their disposition.
And then remove the instrument, and catch the water whose cause is due to the string that catches the tract above the head from which it is extracted, and you are advised to pierce it according to this manner.
And repeat the use of the instrument on other days if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small amount of water from it, and do this for several days in turn, with caution not to break the water seal unless absolutely necessary.
If you are concerned about the illness, and extract a large amount of water, then treat it with burial in sand, and immerse it in a bath, and wait for a long time under the sun; and apply drying medicines to it until it is cured.
And apply a cautery to the stomach, and the intestines, and extract the water as previously described in what I have recounted above.
Chapter .lv.
On the treatment of children who have not yet developed urinary control.
Sometimes, some of the children are born from their mother's belly with their head in a peculiar position (either too tight or not in the right place).
Therefore, it is necessary to carefully consider the perforation of the child as soon as they are born with a delicate motion according to this form:
Then, place a fine iron claw in the neck and tie it; do this for three days or seven times.
And when the child wants to urinate, let them do so; then return them (to their previous position).
And if you do not stop the flow, it is possible that the urine which flows over the area, will not heal this closure.
As for those whose condition is severe, they should be treated with lead clavicles, as we have said, for too many days until it is amplified.
For those in whom the condition is not in its place, it is said that this causes those who are born with it to have difficulty urinating within parties, until they raise the phlegm with their hand above the parts; and it is not due to generation, so that the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a motley illness.
And the manner of the operation on him is that the illness is turned over his back, and then extend the head of the phlegm from him with your left hand vigorously, and cut the head of the phlegm at the place of the urethra with a sharp instrument, so that the middle part of it comes out in the proper place as if it were the head of the phlegm, and the discharge falls in its proper place.
And be wary in your operation to drain the pus, for accidents may occur; stop it from draining the pus, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Chapter LVI.
Of the albater (scar tissue) that occurs in the prepuce at the head of the penis due to corrosion and blackening and adhesions of the prepuce at the head of the penis.
Various accidents occur with this albater on the penis, and it becomes prominent with the loss of flesh.
And some are malignant and others are not.
Not malignant, know that you suspend it with a subtle hook and cut off that which remains; then place your hand over the corner subtilly using Egyptian ointment; and after that, treat it with refined ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess is malignant, of a dark color, then you must administer cauterization near the incision and its drainage.
If the abscess is on the foreskin of an uncircumcised man, and one part of the abscess is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you must drain the abscess that is inside at the beginning before it consolidates; and once you have treated the external part, be careful not to tear the foreskin when treating the internal part.
And they also occur in the genitals and foreskin, dark and swollen, so you must remove everything that is already discolored and deteriorating or corrupted; and then apply a line of ointment to it made from crushed millet flour mixed with dried roses and cloves.
And treat it with the other remedies until it is healed.
If it is necessary for blood to flow, then administer cauterization monthly according to this form:
Cauterization is beneficial for two purposes, either to stop blood flow or to treat an infected wound.
If the head of the foreskin is corroded and completely destroyed, then insert a tube made of lead into the inner part of the foreskin to allow the discharge of the infection.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion only occurs in those with a foreskin, and no circumcision is required), when adhesion forms due to an infection or abscess, then use a blunt spatula to carefully separate them until the adhesive tissue is dissolved and the head of the penis is freed from all attachment.
And if it is difficult to separate them gently, then use a spatula to carefully lift the foreskin from the head of the penis, and this is because when the foreskin is thin, its delicate nature allows it to be easily torn during separation.
And then gently separate the prepuce from the head of the penis using a subtle knife, which has already been lubricated with water so that it does not adhere again.
And then apply a compress with astringent properties to ensure that the wound is healed and consolidated.
Chapter XVII.
On the purification of children and the treatment of what happens to those of circumcision.
Circumcision is not a solution for continuity as with other ailments; however, when it is of our own doing and done by our own will, and performed specifically on children, it is necessary that we approach this better operation and method with greater care to prevent further harm and contribute to their health.
Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not practice circumcision in any of their free lands, since they do not write it in their laws, and only do so because we have acquired this by experience, which is why I have found most of the craftsmen and barbers to use circumcision and purification with a new knife and pincers; they use lint and an ungloved cut.
And having tried all these methods and not finding better relief than with scissors, pliers or thread in the operation, remember that when you cut through the skin of the foreskin, which has two layers, the deeper layer (the tunica) remains below, and it is often forced to another incision, causing more pain and danger. And the operation using heat, which is done by cauterization, and is digital, where the surgeon uses a hot iron, does not guarantee the incision at the end of the male member, as it can cause deep damage to the tissue inside.
But in the operation with heat, if you use too much force, it can deform and spoil your surgical work. And the foreskin of a child is naturally short, and in many cases it does not require operation, and I have seen this myself.
On the preparation that is made with scissors and linen tied with silk, my experience has discovered the goodness, for the scissors are of a proportional incision, so that the sharpness that is above is equal to the sharpness below; and therefore when you apply your hand with both sharp points, make an incision according to a comparison in time; and it makes compression of the silk in the form containing the knot of the whip from all sides, from which no error arises.
And the first manner of the operation is that you must ensure the child remains mostly still if it is one of those who gets restless, do not do anything but tie the silk to its whip and let it heal within a day.
And then do everything possible to please him in all ways that he may understand and accept your care. And it is appropriate to be prepared with all the tools at your disposal and not to cause any fear; hide the scissors in your hand or place a cloth over the foot so that the child does not see them or any other instruments.
And then insert your hand into the patient's anus and blow into the rectum, pull it until the tip of the instrument reaches the end, and clean that which has been added to it by filth.
The form of the forceps for cleaning, this is the form:
The extremities are of two kinds; some not quite straight and others straight, so that the shaft of the bone is not bent, and the length of both [bones] is equal to the length of two hand spans.
But the mistake in purification is that the strong reading escapes the intrinsic code, or part of it, and you must make an incision.
So consider that you extend the one from your hand to your finger in front of the place of incision and make an incision according to this equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your finger, take a hook and make an incision with that.
If it has passed three days, and they say that it is swollen there where the scalded ulcer is located, then leave it until the ulcer becomes soft, and carefully remove that, making an incision as you have prepared.
And observe the head of the hernia, for it will not allow itself to be treated.
And therefore treat the area affected by this plague that solidifies from the powders we have described in the treatise on powders.
And if it is incised from the cord on the right measure and follows the sections of its roots, this will not notice it.
And apply treatment to that which we have said should be healed.
Chapter .LVIII.
On the treatment of urine retention in the bladder.
Urine retention in the bladder is caused by an increase in pressure from the kidney or stone, or from relaxation or congestion, and is similar to those we have described regarding treatment methods in the chapter.
And if it does not dissolve as mentioned above, then the cause of the illness should be treated with a syringe, which is called "siringua". Its form is like a lion's jaw, thin and long, similar to a palm and a half, with a thin cane at its tip.
And the method of urination through that is to take the urethra folded and tied at the end of a string or wick for good binding; and insert the ends of the urethra into the meatus beyond the foreskin, and cut it with scissors if any cause from the string is superfluous, but insert it forcefully into the catheter and then widen the meatus with a edge and albumen of urine.
And apply herbs to the wound on the skin, and extract the vesica and the pus with oils mixed, with olive oil and water.
And then insert the catheter with ease until it reaches the root of the pus; and bend the pus upward at the opening of the wound; and push the catheter from that side; and push it until it reaches the vesica, and that cent to have the wound healed to its cause, and it is not done according to this order, but the meat in which there is curvature.
And then slowly extend the urethra at the tip, as the urine dries the tissue.
Then extract that one for the treatment of urine, using a catheter, do not cease to do so until the bladder is emptied and the patient's discomfort relieved.
**Chapter LIX.**
On the quality of bladder clisterization with clamps and similar instruments suitable for this purpose.
When bladder ulcers or abscesses occur, or there is constricted perforation, and you wish to drain water and medicines from it, use an instrument called a clamp, and this is the way to do it:
so that at the end of it is sealed, completely closed. And in that moment, there are three actions: two from one side, thus as often.
In the beginning, there occurs a congestion, in which is that which is urged forward, and according to its quantity, it piles up; when some cause throws off the humidities, they are thrown out, and when these are expelled, something else is thrown to fill the void, as if a clamp were struck where naphtha is ignited in naval battles.
Therefore, if you wish to prevent humors in the bladder, insert the tip of the clamp into the humor and throw it towards the parts below, for the humor is thrown out into the cavity of the clamp.
And then insert the tip of the clamp into the urethra as we have recommended in the circula; and push the humor towards what you are pushing, for that humor soon reaches the bladder, and the disease increases through it.
The shape of the delicate crystal through which the bladder is cristallized, and that shape is:
Whether it is made of silver or lead, which makes the head look like a small feather, and leave the cane within the ligament.
Then take the bladder and move it, and place in that moisture which you wish to cristallize in the bladder, and then tie it between two strong ligatures with double thread, and heat that moisture over fire.
And then insert the tip of the cristallizer into the urethra.
And then place your hand over the bladder, stretching the moisture gently until the patient feels that that moisture has completely entered the bladder.
If you do not have a bladder at hand, then take a piece of cloth and make a circle from it; drill that circle through its entirety; then insert the thread strongly into those channels, twisting it; and add the cloth to the circle so as to create an enclosure, since you pause in that which you want of the moisture, smells, and waters.
And then you tie him up with the bandage and make it so that the moisture reaches the bladder.
**Capitol LX**
From extraction of stone.
We have already discussed the division of stone types and their treatment with medicines, as well as the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, and the signs of each.
And we have spoken of stone that requires surgical intervention with the hand, and sectioning.
And the stone formed in the bladder proper is the one that is located in the bladder.
And they speak of that as an explicit exposition and concise summary.
Therefore, it is said that stones formed in the bladder most often affect children; and among its signs, the urine expelled from the bladder is similar to water in its clarity, appearing in that sand; and the illness burns its skin, sometimes causing pain, and it often presents itself; and thus, the cause of these is found in those things.
And healing is easier for children under twelve years old, while it is a difficult cure for the elderly. The cure for the elderly is more difficult due to what exists between those [parts].
And concerning him whose stone is larger and whose cure is more difficult, the treatment is contrary to that of one with a smaller stone.
Therefore, to arrive at the cure for this condition, we must begin by modifying the malady with a knife that extracts all the fissures present in their intestines, as these fissures sometimes prevent the stone's passage during examination.
Then, with the malady taken from their feet and properly positioned, it should be gently encouraged for the stone to descend into the bladder or, if necessary, to move to another location.
And then make that cut between your hands, prepared, and leave the patient's things as they are, so that the bladder is completely emptied towards the openings left.
And then remove all those foreign bodies completely.
So if you feel the stone in the space, then cut into it at once.
And if you cannot remove the stone from below entirely, then apply oil to the small finger of your left hand, whether the patient is a child or an adult, and insert that into their rectum. And when the stone is inside, make sure it stays there with the help of your small finger. And gradually convert that point into the neck of the bladder.
And then apply pressure to that place as I have said, and expel it from the parts outside, from the site where you cut it.
Command the assistant to press the vesicle with his hand; and command another assistant to extend the legs with his right hand above them, and with his other hand to hold the cord that is left on the legs, from the site where the incision is made.
And then insert a knife into the space, following this form: And it cuts into what is between the buttocks and the legs, not in the middle, starting on the left side; and the incision should be on that bone, following the natural direction, and a transverse cut is made, so that the external cut is wide and the internal narrow according to the amount that can be extracted from the stone, without excess, for it understands the importance of the place where the stone resides, and the error can cause its disfunction.
And you should know that there is a stone in the kidney that has angles and margins, making it difficult to urinate due to it.
And from there it resembles a gland, round, and has a difficult urination emission.
Therefore, if it is the one with angles and margins, insert it into the fissure.
And if it is not thus removed, cover your hands over it or tie it up properly, the extremity of which should be as sharp as a lime, which you tighten over the kidney, without causing it to escape; or insert a subtle tool with a curved extremity between them.
If you cannot do that, then enlarge the opening a little, and if you see blood flow, cut off strongly with the vitriol knife.
If the stone is larger than one, at the beginning, you push your hand into the bladder's opening and insert a knife; then you gently press it inside; and seemingly, it breaks into two or more pieces.
And if the stone is very large, it is advisable not to cut it into pieces but to ignore it, as this causes two issues for the patient: either it remains there or it leads to the continuous discharge of urine, which is why the affected area is not entirely consolidated.
You may administer the expulsion of the stone from within, or use a tool with scissors to break it and extract the pieces through the patient's urine.
So, having completed your procedure, you should fill the wound with aloe and dragon's blood, and then bandage it tightly. And place your hand on that cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in warm oil and water, to ensure the heat is carefully released.
Then gently turn the patient over onto their back, and do not disturb the dressing for three days.
When the dressing is removed, wash the area with water and oil, and then apply a mixture of aloe vera and myrrh until it heals.
If in the case of this plague, an abscess forms, puncture and drain it, and from that moment on apply similar treatments as if the urine was frozen in the bladder (and this is known as the prohibition of urination), thus inserting what is called the 'tying string' into the plague and extracting that pus, for otherwise it can cause corruption and putrefaction of the bladder.
And then rinse the wound with wine, water, and salt, and oppose it to all kinds of things that are helpful for its cure until it is healed.
And during all the stages of healing, be sure to cover and adjust things as you find necessary over the affected area.
And if the stone is small and located in the deep part of the kidney, and its passage through urine is blocked, treatment should be done to avoid obstruction, for stones treated in this way are often associated with blockage; already having extracted it, it is important to take care, as you should seek a steel needle, whose shape is as follows:
triangular in shape at the tip, sharp, located in wood.
Then take some fiber and tie it to the kidney around the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the fire, piercing it easily until the tip reaches the stone. Then turn the drill in your hand on that stone little by little, and continue to drill until you have made an opening from the other side; for then the urine will begin to flow.
Then press your hand over what is broken off from the stone outside of the fire, for it is crumbled and opened up by the urine, and the disease is cured.
If this cure is not appropriate for any reason, then leave a thread attached to the stone, and another thread on top of the stone. Then tie the stone to the fire between two pieces of wood. And then extract it. And then carefully loosen the ligament and clean the infected wound, which is formed in the ulcer.
And it is not necessary to use a strong ligature on the kidney, only to prevent its return to the bladder, and another ligature above, because when the stone is loosened from the kidney, the urinary tract returns to its place and the pain subsides.
And this is necessary when you remove the stone from above, that you elevate the urinary tract to its proper position, or it may return to its original state, and the pain will recur as we have said.
Chapter LXI.
On the extraction of kidney stones in women.
In women, stones in the kidneys are rarely formed.
If you see a stone in any of those areas, its treatment is difficult and is prohibited by numerous methods.
One of their secrets is that women with strong willpower can overcome it.
And the second is that you should not find a woman more intelligent than herself; if she reveals her knowledge to a doctor when she is pregnant, or she is from a family of married women.
The third is that you should not find a woman more knowledgeable about this art, especially regarding surgery with her hands.
And the fourth is that the location of the incision for kidney stones in women is far from the location of the stone, so a skilled surgeon is needed, and there is fear involved.
If it is necessary to do so, you should seek help from a skilled female doctor, who can be hard to find.
If you are unable to find such a doctor, seek out a skilled and knowledgeable midwife, or a woman well-versed in the arts of healing for women.
Therefore, instruct the present midwife to do everything you command, from examining the patient's condition to determining if the woman is a virgin. Ensure she records her findings regarding the woman's sexual status and carefully handles the examination.
If the midwife finds her useful, she should take notes of her observations and later instruct her to inscribe these findings.
If she is not a virgin, instruct the midwife to carefully insert her finger into the patient's vagina and examine the urethra. She should also place her left hand on the bladder, paying close attention to any issues.
Therefore, if you find it, gradually massage that one from the openings of the bladder to the parts left in addition to the strength of its virtue so that it reaches that part at the root of the thigh.
And then insert into that position of the cone at the root of the thigh, stop some part from any side and focus on that part, and do not remove the stone from the patient.
And the section should be small at the beginning; then insert the saw over that section, and if you feel the stone, adjust the section according to the amount, knowing how much stone will be removed from that.
And you should know that the types of stones are as follows: some are small and hard, others are large and sharp, and some are elongated and round, and they have spikes.
Therefore, you know how many parts there are in it according to what you intend to do regarding that which you wish.
And if you wish to stop the flow of blood, apply vitriol in a triangle shape and let it act for an hour until the clot is dissolved, then return to your operation until the stone is removed.
And prepare for yourself the tools mentioned in the removal of stones in men, so that you are aided by them in your operation.
And if you wish to stop the flow of blood, and know that the expulsion of the stone is from the passage that is narrow, then apply powder over the area and use your hands to gently press and open it, but do not repeat this; leave the stone and do not attempt to extract it, for thus the illness will worsen. And then treat the wound.
Therefore, once the intensity of the wound has decreased after some days and the place is healed, then you return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
**Capitol LXII**
On section concerning hernia treatment.
A hernia occurs when there is an accumulation of moisture in the white chest cavity, which leaves the genitals of the individual exposed, and it is thus called the chest.
And in some cases, it is within the natural pouch that prepares itself for the passage of the hou, as if it were another hou; and it is the closure of the genitals between the white chest cavity that we have mentioned, and it is not a true closure.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the genitals, so that this material is discharged to them, and sometimes it happens due to a blow made on the genitals.
And this moisture does not have any distinct color; for its color may be citron or bloody, or red, or dark and foul-smelling, or clear white, and it is the latter that is most dangerous.
And the signs by which one knows this addition of water are as follows: for if it is in the white bone that we have spoken of, then the abscess inclines downward a little along its length, taking on a shape like a bow, and the swelling appears, because the moisture gathers from all parts.
And if the moisture is in the own fat, then the abscess turns round and away from the bone, and so one thinks it is another bone.
And if the moisture is between the joints of the genitals and the white bone, then suddenly the feeling goes away.
And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then you expect the color of the moisture in the abscess from the touch of which its form is preceded; and according to what is left in the trace of the touch, judge what is within it.
Therefore, when we come to the treatment of the leg pain, it is necessary to command that the patient be put to bed if possible, and make him lie down in a comfortable position.
And then, if for any reason the patient needs to lie on their back for a short while, provide them with clean sheets.
And then place yourself on the patient's left side, and instruct the helper to follow on their right side, extending their hands from two fingers to the knee of the genitals and to the navel area of the belly.
Then take a long, sharp spatula and split the genitals from their midline by inserting it between them.
And make the incision according to the direction of the hair growth, at a distance from the line where you need to cut off the genitals, until you reach the white muscle below.
And excise him, observe, and guard yourself so that you do not insert anything; and your incision, which you excise in a particular manner, should be suspended from the greater and smaller blood vessels, and examine the incision according to the amount possible.
Then, with a wide perforation, pierce the bladder full of water, and extract all the water.
Then, separate between the two lips of the section with incisions, extend the bladder to its parts above; and do not touch the cords as they are understood by nature, and insert the bladder in that manner as is possible for you. And make incisions on him in their entirety or in parts, especially along their thin edges, for if you do not scrutinize the incision of him carefully, it is certain that the water will return.
If, during the course of your procedure, you find that the hernia has returned to its original position before completing the incision, then return it inside, and properly adjust both lips of the hernia from the genitals with sutures, and treat it just like any other wound until it heals.
And if you find that the hernia has been corrupted by another illness, then cut the vessels that are above the suspender, extract the hernia, and treat it as we have said.
But if two waters are added in separate instances, you will know that both are hernias; then incise the one according to what you have done with the other; and if it appears to be a suitable operation for you, then perform it.
Then wash the wound, and immerse the sections in oil or rose oil; bring out another cloth that you have immersed in wine and oil, and spread it over both genitals and the miracle of the belly; place this on top of folded and clean sheets, and bind them with a bandage according to this form:
And then, take two pieces of cloth and stuff them with wool yarn in this manner; fasten the ends with dry twine or wool, and add them to the tightness in the crotch of the breeches, taking one end from the buttocks between the two, and the second at the opening of the thigh, and two other ends on each side over two joints, and all tightness is adjusted in the crotch of the breeches.
And in some cases, this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of cutting; so you take a thin cut-wound cautery and incise at the root of the hernial ring, and ignite it according to what we have recommended until the white scar tissue containing the fluid becomes exposed, and then you take the cautery as follows: and it is assembled like Greek letters.
And then, perforate that scar tissue, and ignite it until all moisture is expelled.
And then extend the limb with cuts, and cut away with cuts, and burn with a delicate, ignited cautery; incise according as you can until you eliminate all; and be careful that the fire does not touch it.
And you know that this operation is less dangerous and less likely to cause infection, and better than an amputation.
If it causes you opposition to apply a post-embolism cautery at the time of amputation or cauterization, or an infection flow, then take care that you cure what is opposing you, as treatment fitting for it according to what is said.
But if the disease is severe, and there is no hope for a second operation because of its horror, then apply perforation as I have recommended; and it is at this point that you must, based on what we have said about the meanings, certify that this hernia is hydrous.
Now, let's translate the given sentence line by line:
And it should be a wide opening so that all the water flows through.
Then place your hand over the area, press it tightly, and release it to allow the flow of water. Then take care of it until the plague is healed.
But if any contrary condition exists at the time you drain the water, it is not done except where the white panniculi in the orifices of the plague cause difficulty and prevent the outflow of water—in this case, insert a pen or instrument designed to extract water from the hydropic (swelling) parts; or apply a small amount of pressure to the plague.
And you should know that the water returns and accumulates again after some months or environ those; and when it is accumulated, pierce it in the same manner as before, for thus the illness will also pass its days.
Capitol .lxiii.
On section concerning fleshy hernias and their treatment.
You know that in the section concerning this hernia, there is great fear of its becoming perilous to vital functions; for it seems to me that its removal and being saved is the better course.
And you should remember the operation on that one as well as the spices of the incisions.
Therefore, it is said that the incisions (or 'apostemas') appear in the bodies of those whose genera are composed of these parts, and they are made for several causes: either because of an acute and excessive inflammation that spills over into the genera, or through percussion.
And the appearance of the incision (or 'apostema') is according to the color of the body, and it does not cause pain in itself, but a grave (or serious) incision.
And it is very rare that a black, hard ulcer appears, of which there is no pain.
And in some cases, it is caused by the compression of the arteries or the inflammation of those areas where the pain is already felt, or by the inflammation of veins.
This can be understood as: "It is known that the inflammation of arteries causes the ulcer to break open when you press on them, and one should not touch it.
The one caused by vein inflammation does not break open due to any cause except compression on those areas.
And it is also possible that in this case, a section is made only on this specific part and not on the other muscles; and this is done by incising the skin of the genius, then opening the compartments of their parts, extracting the white-colored lymph, loosening the suspenders of the vessels, tying them, and incising the suspender that you loosen from all parts of the genius.
Therefore, if the bone is already consolidated in that flesh, then you must extract it and incise that one.
And if there is adhesion for any cause in the joint, or between what is between the bones, then you must dissolve all of that adhesion and incise it with a round incision.
If there is a growth of flesh in the location of the adhesion, which is behind, then you must incise everything that belongs to it, and extract the bone as we have said.
Therefore, after your operation is complete, fill the wound with warm oil and wool; and then take care of it with other remedies until it heals.
Chapter .LXIV. (46)
On the treatment of hernias that are internal.
It is an appendicitis wrapped up by some kind of inflammation similar to a lump and softening of the testicles, making it difficult to move and walk for the patient.
And in the treatment of this illness, one must be wary of what preceded it, for that is where remembrance comes into play.
However, it is important to note that I mentioned operation according to what I did first.
And it is said that you should stop the patient's pain on a raised bed; then pull the suspender of the testicles towards each other; and take hold of the chain of the genitals with your hands, as they are tested on the scale; and have those other assistants help you, and extend them to their full extent with urgency.
And then cut with a sharp knife, along a longitudinal section, through the vessels while they are exposed.
And then excise from any remaining part, as we have discussed in the extraction of arrows, which are in the temples.
And then take a needle with a double thread, and pass it through the first part where the problem occurs, and then the other thread through the last part. And then cut into the middle part at a right angle following the length of the body, and extract what is added from the foul humidity and corruption.
And then treat the wound with a cure for other wounds in which you wish to prevent any further complications, so that vessels, which may cause either pain or bleeding, do not continue to do so.
If a wound occurs in all the veins, then you must know if the testicles are extracted or if they are compressed by the veins, so that they are deprived of all nutrition due to the incision of the veins, and become atrophied, or compressed in such a way that they do not function properly.
It appears that the text you've provided is missing or incomplete, as there is no clear content to translate from the given context. The capital or title "Capitol .lxv." alone does not contain any comprehensible information for translation. Please provide a complete sentence or section from the medical treatise for accurate translation.
# On the Care of Intestinal Hernia
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a tear in the abdominal wall extending over the stomach from the openings of the intestinal organs, allowing the intestines to protrude through the gap.
And this rupture can be either of the abdominal wall or of the hernia itself, and it occurs due to various causes: blows, sharp objects, sudden movements, the lifting of heavy objects, or similar factors.
The sign of this, when it is due to an extension of the abdominal wall, is that it occurs gradually over time and not suddenly, and it forms a bulge on one side within the abdomen as the abdominal cavity is pressed upon by the hernia.
And the sign of it being due to a tear in the abdominal wall is that it causes a sudden and intense pain; it appears as a distinct bulge on either side of the abdomen near the affected area, due to the protrusion of the intestines outside the abdominal cavity.
And in some cases, the intestine's sac is forgotten, and this condition is called intestinal hernial protrusion.
And in some cases, it is caused by wind, and in others, it occurs due to a rupture in the intestinal cavity, where it becomes trapped, causing significant harm to the patient, and sometimes it leads to severe and intense pain, especially when pressed.
In the treatment of this illness with herbs, one must be cautious, as it is important to avoid the wrong ingredients and their potential harmful effects.
The surgical procedure for this condition involves reducing the hernia back into its cavity using the patient's hand, placing it on top of their chest between your fingers, and then raising their legs.
Then, tighten the cord that secures the testes, cutting it entirely through; and fix it in two folds of the incised section as needed to open the section.
And if the sectioning is according to the quantity that it is possible for you to remove from that part without causing harm.
Then carefully extract those bodies that are left in the scrotum of the testicles, as long as the white hard mass of each part is discovered.
Then insert your finger into that which is between the testicle, where the white mass is, which is left in the scrotum of the testis, and between the second mass, and free that adhesion which is behind the testis.
Then with your hand, grip the scrotum of the testicles outside, and extend the white mass on your left hand, and raise the testis to the part of the section; and command the assistant to spread the testis out on it, and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with a complete solution.
And seek out the threads that say there is no cause for the intestine enclosed in the hard white ciphe (scrotum). If you find no cause of the intestinal condition, then press down on the abdomen below.
Then make an incision in the scrotum area, from which blood and pus will flow, as we have recommended in what we have said above.
Then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound, and place a poultice; use the bandage we recommended (and sometimes white wax is cauterized on the incision due to fear of pus flow, as these have been seen to cause issues), and leave the bandage until it falls off by itself.
If the case is prolonged, then apply a water compress and place it on the area until it falls off as we have said above.
And then apply the cure for the plague with other remedies for internal ailments until it is healed.
**Chapter LXVI**
**On Ventous Hernia**
In this hernia, nothing has been seen that indicates a successful treatment for it other than by force.
And the first approach is to do as we have recommended for hernia, which is to reduce the openings with a section close to the affected area; and then dry the middle part around the abscess with something that will promote healing, until the vessels fall off.
And treat the plague as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter .lxvii.
On the dislocation that is suffered in the ankles.
Sometimes, dislocations in the ankles break and protrude as we have said, so they must be attended to immediately.
And do not hesitate to consider any cause of hernias at birth; and if there is one, it is rare; and return to it at all times.
If the time is prolonged, the fissure in the bone must be adjusted while the hernia is still within the bone; this happens due to the extension of the bone in the ankle as we have said, which causes it to become stretched, and consequently softened, and the area becomes inflamed.
And the treatment of it is done by cautery in this way, as it is preceded by the narration of the condition.
And in some cases, it is treated with iron according to this method: the disease lies on both sides between the thighs, and then the site of the rupture of the prominent apertures is dried with a section according to the extent, depending on the quantity of three parts.
And then tighten the white rope that is below the spine until it is discovered.
And then take the stick and place it over the prominent location of the rope, and press that against the abdomen.
And then make the two prominent locations on the end of the rope's stick fit together and adjust the suture from one to the other.
And then carefully extract the end of the intestine, without piercing its entire thickness, nor extending it or causing any other damage; this is something you must know in the treatment of intestinal hernias.
And then carefully tend to the treatment of wounds, and when you cut away the pus, cleanse it and restore the wound until it is solidified; for the tissue is contracted and the protrusion of rupture is not yet healed.
A cautery is better at this site, for it is closer to health.
Chapter LXVIII.
On the softening of the cord of the testicles.
In some men, the cord of the testicles becomes softened due to the softening of the tissues between them; for this requires careful attention.
Then it is necessary for the one who is asked to cure them that they make the malady lie according to their own will, and raise all the edges that are softened over the natural edge; and then adjust two lips to the suture.
And if you want, at the beginning, because of the superfluity of the softened edge, make three stitches or four and a firm suture.
And then cut between the sutures; and then take care for the healing of the other plagues within that they are saned and the dregs fall.
Chapter LXIX.
On castration.
You know that castration is forbidden in our law, but for the sake of this book, I will remind you of it; and its remembrance is only necessary in two ways, of which one is so that when asked about it by a doctor who knows the cure for such cases, he may understand; and the other way is that we sometimes need to castrate other animals for our young, just as with horses, donkeys, pigs, and similar creatures.
And therefore it is said that castration is performed in two ways: either by compression or by a sectional incision.
In the case of castration by compression, the surgical procedure involves cutting off the testicles while they are still soft and flexible, allowing them to hang down. Then take those with your hand, resolving them so that they do not appear after the touch.
For castration by sectional incision, take the animal and with your left hand press the cord of the testicles.
Then attach the suspensory and cut into each testicle with a sectioning tool.
And then cut away that pus which has been extracted. And do not leave any cause on those of the head, but the subtle head which is above the vessels.
And this method of castration is better which is done by ligature, for strong ligature leaves no cause for the testicles so that the beast does not desire copulation.
And then cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter LXX.
On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men is according to two manners: one where there appears a space in the scrotum where ovaries should be, in which case it resembles a woman's anatomy with hair.
And in some cases, it is a flow of urine that comes from the back of the testicles.
In females, there is a peculiarity: the clitoris of a woman resembles two testes of a man, slightly smaller at the external opening, just like the prepuce of a man has two testes.
And the treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one for women. It is because you must understand how to tighten those meats within that escape the emission of that (body fluid), and then cure it with a remedy for other illnesses as well.
In the second type of men, for whom urine comes from the back of the testicles, neither cure nor operation is applicable to them.
Chapter .xxi.
Of springtime and flesh swelling due to causes related to women.
The swelling of the legs is closely related to natural causes, as it is affected and becomes noticeable through observation; in some cases, it is aggravated in certain women to such an extent that it spreads like in men and may occur during coitus.
So then, if you have an excess of swelling in your legs with your hand or thumb, and it is deep, probe.
And do not stop probing until the point of the probe is reached, so as not to cause bleeding.
And take care of that as part of the cure for the plague, until it is healed.
When flesh is born that has no place in the horror of the mother's womb, it becomes hard and detached from the inside outwardly, according to appearance (and for this reason they sometimes call it "tailborn malady"); therefore we must cut it thus as we cut a limb, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter LXXII.
**On the Cure for Arterial Disease**
Arterial disease is when the container (conch) of the female's body is not properly closed or a rupture occurs. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to disease that has preceded it, or caused by flesh not properly adjusted, or a subtle and thickening buildup.
And it is made in the region of the heart, or in the ribs, or in the upper part of the lungs, or in the lower part of them, and it prevents from coughing and sneezing and childbirth, and strongly prevents menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is gained by observing the meter, if the swelling is visible, it is treated immediately; but if it is not visible, you should seek it with your hands or by feeling the region.
If the swelling is subtle and affects both lips, then you should bite and break it off.
And it is placed over both soft lips, and then your fingers indicate the depth of both at the same time.
And the woman should lie on her back, her limbs extended, and then force both lips open until that subtle swelling is broken and the obstruction is removed.
And then take wool and wrap it in oil and place it over the area, and keep applying heat to the site so that the incision does not heal.
If the mass is large and hard, then cut into it with a sharp knife or a chisel of myrtle wood.
If the swelling is due to fluid accumulation, then suspend it using a hook and cut into it.
And these are the medicines that stop the flow of blood from bites, as well as pain and dragon's blood, and other herbs, adjusted to an albumen of egg.
And then administer a wide platinum cannula so that the infection does not solidify prematurely.
And hold it for several days, and administer water from the source.
And then it is treated as another cure of consolidation while it is healed.
And sometimes it happens in the natural origin of other meats, and then you must incise according to this manner. This is also for gangrene, for the gangrene which is in the extremities should not be opposed with iron in any way.
Chapter .LXXIII.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids, and pain in the tail and red swelling that occurs in the rectum of women.
Hemorrhoids appear from the openings of small veins, rather than from those of larger ones; and as they become old, they dry up and form scabs.
And already have I spoken of the divisions of those species and the signs of those species, and to say thus of those that receive treatment and those that do not receive treatment.
Therefore it is said that hemorrhoids and piles are when they are in the lower part of the body and do not appear in sensation, then in those cases treatment with iron is not effective.
Those that are in the upper part of the body, over which sensation is felt, are those that receive treatment.
And take care that you put the woman in a warm bath, and extend her limbs with forks or rough cloth, and cut those with razor blades.
And then sprinkle over those parts the flows of sacred ointment from a powdery mortar, thus as with cassia and similar to those.
And then gently stretch their feet for an hour, and place them in cold water.
If the flow of pus persists, then make a incision in decoction with scissors and drain away the puss and bruises and similar things.
Then take flour of wheat and mix it with honey and wine, apply the paste to the patient's back.
If the abscess has drained, it is good; otherwise, adhere two bandages to the affected area and perform scarification on the nipples.
Then take wool and dip it in vinegar or in the juice of nettle or in the juice of willow, mix with wine and apply to the area; and then treat the place with a poultice until it heals.
And take care of that which must be healed.
It seems like you're referring to a specific chapter or section, "Capitol .lxxiv." Without additional context or the full text, it's challenging to provide a direct translation. However, in Latin numeration, ".lxxiv" translates to 74. This could be the caption or heading of a chapter in a medieval medical treatise.
On the perforation of the eye's socket during an accident.
There are various special cases of abscesses occurring in the eye, including inflammation, abscesses, ulcers, inflammation of the eyelids, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and other types of abscesses. And you have already described these maladies and their types, the signs of those conditions, and the treatments for them in detail.
And take heed what I say in this treatise about gangrene, which you see in the worst cases when it comes to healing, and if you want to know how the operation is performed on it with fire.
So then consider whether the pain of gangrene in its beginning is sharp, with percussion and fever, and sometimes that swelling, and if heat is felt over it, do not immediately perforate it, but cure it by something that aids maturation until the acuity of the accidents ceases.
And then know that you must cease the flow of blood with a clamp that has two clamps; recline him on his back and align his feet at the lower part beneath the belly, and spread his thighs, and rest his arms below his shoulders, and tie some to this appropriately.
Then the midwife should stand at the right side and administer the instrument with which the opening of the womb is opened, the form of which will appear in those cases that are to be done properly.
And when you wish to use this instrument, hold the point of the scalpel against the skin of the woman's thigh, and whatever part of the instrument enters into the woman should not be larger than the point of the scalpel and it should ease the pain. If the instrument is larger than the point of the scalpel, then you should apply poultices over the skin of the thigh to prevent any further entry of instruments into the thigh.
And you should ensure that the blade of the instrument is facing downwards and that the assistant holds the instrument, opening the orifice of the woman while rotating the blade until it is completely open.
When the incision is made and it bleeds, you should immediately clean the area with a hot cloth to stop the bleeding.
And when the sanity is evacuated, you must place a cloth soaked in warm or cold oil on the affected area to reduce inflammation; and apply pressure in the section near the anus at the base of the colon.
Then remove the cloth from the anus and place a clean, moistened cloth with aloe on the penis.
And the cure is completed within two days, applying whatever is appropriate to it until it heals.
In some cases, the anus and the affected area are washed with a mixture of water and honey, and then treated with water enriched with extracts from nettle or long-rooted aristology, and finally, the application is renewed.
If the infection is deep in the anus, you must abstain from treating it with fire, but rather focus on the treatment we have mentioned above.
Chapter .lxxv.
To teach midwives in what manner the living embryos should be treated when they present in an unnatural position.
A midwife must recognize the onset of labor by observing signs from nature, for when she sees a woman straining at the contractions and desires to breathe deeply, and is distracted by the pressure of the child on her body, and hastens the delivery of the infant, then know that this birth is according to nature's figure. The head of the child comes out first, or perhaps it is suspended or hanging from the umbilical cord.
Therefore, when you observe those signs, know that her belly is compressed so that the infant gently descends as it shifts from its head position, and the second stage begins, and she is freed from those superfluities with good cleansing.
Healing those who are different in this part is neither natural nor commendable, for when the disease is concentrated on their feet and their body is positioned with their head below their feet and one hand at their foot or their head above it, or their head and hand at their stomach, they twist greatly upon their spine and resemble figures that are not to be praised.
For all these reasons, it is necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in all such matters, and guard against mistakes and disappointments.
And showing all the signs of these, and what cunning is in them so that it may be understood by them and stand upon it.
When the birth is positioned over their head due to natural difficulty, and that causes great pain in the woman, and often her virtue is already weakened, then she should be helped, or what women have, and vaporizes the pain of him with fennel seed and moist odors.
And then carefully insert the instrument between their cracked and split skin and make a second cut or, rather, use your finger to ensure that what is inside becomes moist. And press the woman's belly as the baby descends.
If it does not descend, then cover the woman with a mixture of poppy seeds and fenugreek, crushed together.
Then command the woman, take away the heat, which should be removed and made to cough; and close her mouth and nose for an hour, so that the baby is expelled shortly afterwards.
And if both feet of the baby have not been expelled at the beginning, then you must reduce them with ease, little by little. If you do not obey the treatment, then place the woman on a cushion and raise her feet up, and then carefully place the cushion on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall due to the impact.
And if the pain persists and the fetus dies, then incise them and extract the remains of the fetus or tie the body to the mother's hand with a cloth and remove it carefully, for that will be forgotten.
When the embryo is on the feet, then you must gently push them up, and gradually turn the small body, and slowly take one of its legs and stretch those little ones out.
If it is situated within the bones, then command the patient to exhale, and make them cough up the condition, for if God wills, it will be forgotten.
And if what we have recommended is forgotten, then return the dislocation little by little until it takes on its second natural form, for that will be when the lighter aspect is forgotten.
And if it is prohibited to do what we have recommended, then take some alum and dissolved gum, and grind them well in a mortar for a good percussion, and return the cone of the femur, the pus from the bottom of the patient's belly. Then make that incision in distilled water, until the hypoconidia are reached.
And when the wounds have healed and become clean, then make him inhale smoke from myrrh and rest him. And after the smoke treatment for an hour, then make him lie down on a bed, and make him sneeze and open his mouth, and take away from him, and press the lower part of his belly with a lighter compression, for the dislocation will soon be forgotten.
The state of the patient's condition hangs suspiciously from one of his limbs. Use ingenuity in reducing the patient's hand, but if you cannot do that, raise the woman and try that way.
If the above method fails, lie the patient down, and by violently compressing their body parts, attempt to reduce them. Near the affected area, apply medications that you have prepared or recommended before.
If labor has begun, then perform the procedure on the head, and carefully study the reduction of the hand, enveloping the fetus in its natural form and commanding the woman to breathe deeply until the baby is delivered.
The fetus is positioned with its limbs extended, the fascia around it expanding to twice its normal size. The midwife should have her hand on the child and gradually turn it this way and that, so as to facilitate the delivery.
And as it is heated and soaked, then apply to the hernia what we have recommended of oil and bandages.
Then command the patient to move their legs little by little, and when you have done this, make a cut here, and command them to lean on their right side, then command them to change position, and have them sneeze in this position. Prepare the exit of the fetus on the side.
When you see signs of distress in the mother according to this method, consider and then insert the second instrument into your hand, within which it will be emptied of humidity.
And if the object is suspended over the face and neck of the patient, then you will cut through that with an instrument, so that it is not retained and causes death.
Then, with your hand, push the object apart until it stops in the space that it covers, and instruct the woman to take some breaths, and then slowly extract it, if God wishes.
The outcome of twins or many fetuses. You should know that twin births can be seen, and sometimes three or four, which is strange and difficult to explain; however, their causes may lie in nature, not life.
And regarding those cases, even if they are multiplied, a second time, and separated by calculation, distinguish those that enter the ligament in each person's navel, and some births may be lost as if it were a single fetus, and some births may remain as if they were uncountable, due to their fragility.
And if some of them are difficult to deliver through natural means and you reach the point we mentioned about non-natural figures, then treat them as we have described.
And if the midwife is skilled and does what facilitates and makes it subtle, and delays it, and is ingenious according to every figure as she prepares them with the means leading to health.
Reminder that it forms in the womb from embryos and is aborted.
Sometimes they are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even more, and it is necessary to have verified that a woman who has aborted does not get pregnant again, and another who is completely formed causes great worry due to the measurement of the wise doctors.
And all this should be in the science of midwifery that she pays close attention to that young woman who seems similar to this, and therefore should be very careful about it.
Chapter .LXXVI.
Regarding the extraction of what is dead.
When you treat the dead matter as we have discussed in the division of medicine and it has not been expelled externally, and you are forced to use manual operations, then consider whether the woman is of sound health and free from any conditions that might lead to her loss.
Now consider that the woman should be placed face-up on her back, and her head inclined down, and her legs raised.
And the practitioner should hold both parts or be placed on the woman's back to prevent her body from moving during the extraction of the fetus.
And then moisten the mouth of the patient with scents of humid oils and mucilage of aloe and fenugreek and the seeds thereof.
Then the midwife places her hand with those oils and mucilage, gently enters her hand into the mother, and carefully seeks the place where the cuts are made in the child.
And in this regard: then consider if the child is ready to be delivered onto its head, and carefully place the cuts in the heels of him, or on his neck, or in his mouth, or on his palate, or leave the beard, or on the fork of him, or in the places proper to the ribs, or leave the hip bones.
If the delivery is over the feet of him, then in the pubic area, or in the middle of the ribs.
And take care that he holds the finger with his right hand, and positions the curve of it in the place between the fingers of his left hand, and inserts his thumb with ease, holding the finger in one of those places we have mentioned, until he reaches the source of the pain.
Then place and hold another finger, or the third if necessary, in the same position as the first, ensuring an equal attraction, and do not extend it excessively according to its natural state.
And it is advisable to do this at all times, so that the removal of it is facilitated as much as possible, just as is done when pulling a tooth for its eradication.
And pay attention to what is between them, so that the extension is softened; and if any part of it remains stuck, then the midwife should apply some of her remedies with oil and insert those skillfully and turn those stuck parts over into the liquid.
Therefore, if the location of the stone is forgotten, then incisions should be made in that place where the stone is, until it is removed entirely.
But if the hand is twisted and cannot be reduced by compression, then a bandage should be wrapped around it; and once everything is removed, cut through the joint of the hand or the knee.
And the same should be done for the other hand and both feet.
But if the head of the stone is large, or it becomes entangled during extraction, or it's at the top of contracted fluid, then insert between the sharp edges and split the head and extract the fluid, or use an instrument called "alundat", which resembles other instruments described in the chapters close to this one.
And seemingly, the making of this is of great importance by nature: and now you will see that it inserts that ligament, or takes up that swelling as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is solidified and constricted, then its fork must be cut open so that the moisture in the foot can be released.
If it is not complicated and does not go against common sense, then you should cut off the head as soon as possible.
And if the discharge from the abdomen is an apoplexy or it is water-like, then you must perforate that place through which the moisture in it flows.
If the procedure is on their feet, then the attraction of it should be light and the direction of it towards the mother's opening should also be light.
If the belly and foot are compressed, then you must remove that cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and open the belly and foot until what is inside comes out.
If the other limbs are held still and the head is turned, then the left hand should be inserted; if the opening of the mother (womb) is blocked, then insert the hand into the opening of the womb, seek for that cap (possibly a fetus), and draw it out with those digits into the mouth of the mother, and then insert one, or two fingers, and pull it out.
And if the mouth of the mother is blocked by an abscess that occurs in the womb, then be careful not to make it worse; instead, carefully administer an infusion of wet, greasy causes. And apply poultices, and continue the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
And if the issue is on their side, try to do an incision if possible; and administer what we have said regarding the living flesh.
And if that is not possible, then make an incision in the leg and extract it.
And be sure not to leave any cause within the second incision.
And when you have completed all your operation, administer what we have said about the treatment for the wounds that may occur from the procedure.
And if there is bleeding from an opening, rinse with sterile water and administer the other treatment.
And you have already seen a woman whose womb was filled with dead children, and then once more she became pregnant, and another time she gave birth to dead offspring. It has happened that, after a long time, an abscess opens up in his skin; and fire erupts within it, and he begins to shiver with cold.
And you have been frequently called to treat them, and medicated for a long time, but the disease is not healed.
Then you should stop treating them from certain causes with strong attraction, and extract one bone from them, and after a few days, another bone; and be amazed that there is no bone left in their belly.
And then you will realize that they were the bones of a dead fetus.
So you will pursue the disease, extracting from them many bones, the woman existing in their proper arrangements, and already have been living in such a manner for a long time, curing them with a small amount of strength.
And do not be afraid that it seems strange, for in this there is knowledge and help to the patient, which the doctor with his art uses his hand for the sake of healing.
On the forms of instruments necessary to extract the hernia.
The form of the instrument used to open the hernia:
This is the form of a strapper in which the edges are aligned, whose alignment has two sharp points at the two ends of two feet. However, this strap should be made to be neither too tight nor too loose, and it can be made of leather or linen thread.
And the width of each linen should be such that two threads meet at a point, and the margin of both sides of each thread is one finger's breadth, and in the middle part of two threads, there are two fastenings of this same thread, whose length is less than a palm by a little, and the width of each thread is two fingers or slightly less.
And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it is open to receive those which you turn to the prescribed virtues.
Another form similar to that subtle and light pus:
It is made of wood or bone, according to the appearance of tongs. However, in the extremity of it, two additional pieces can also be added, and the length of these additions is about a palm, and the width of each is approximately two fingers.
And when you want to open the mother, you lay the woman on her side over the legs, opening what is between her thighs. Then open your hand over the instrument with the cutting pliers according to the amount you want from the appreciation of the mother's mouth, as long as the meter indicates that you desire.
The way of vertigo which the ancients speak of:
The method of pushing which drives the process:
The method of healing as contained in the great head:
And it is constructed like forceps with teeth at the end, so when it is used, and sometimes it is made long according to this form, like forceps again, with teeth also like a saw tooth with which it cuts and holds. Method of healing little:
Method of unwinding without a thorn:
Method of unwinding without two thorns:
A spatula with two extremities, by which the head is separated.
A form of two spatulas wide.
All those instruments should be exercised, and when the number of their parts is increased, or they are prepared in a more complex way, it becomes lighter for the practitioner to use them and more useful for people due to their quantity.
And do not neglect those instruments that are already available to you, for the need for others cannot be excused.
From the extraction of the second (tooth, part, etc.)
When the second stage of labor is reached, you must command the patient to hold their breath, then make them sneeze in this condition, and place your hand over their mouth and nose, and if they exhale, it is good.
And if that happens, take a blade and make a hole in the cover, then place those herbs that open the mouth of the mother: calament, rudas, anaet, camomille, scicados, aromatic wood cassia, and holy hay. All these herbs, or some of them, should be submerged in water in the vessel, and then placed over the fire.
Then place a canvas tube in the mother's mouth, and keep it there until the vapor returns to the concave part of the mother's body.
And then perform that sneezing as we have said, and the second one is expelled quickly.
If this treatment does not work and is not sufficient, then command the midwife to immerse her left hand in warm oil or an infusion of elder, and then insert that hand into the patient's anus and search for the second one. Once found, take it out slowly, bit by bit, according to what has been recommended so that the mother does not feel a strong attraction. Once it is determined that the pain is in the right or left side, facilitate the process accordingly.
And if the mother's mouth is constricted, we have already recommended treatment with sneezing and medication with various herbs.
If all the causes we have mentioned are not forgotten, then be careful not to do anything in the course of abstraction, but nonetheless know that what has been extracted from him and goes into the mother's mouth lies in the matter of the woman, and therefore anoint it with a mixture of herbs and four drugs; for this will soon putrefy, dissolve, and be forgotten.
When it is observed that there is a high fever in the head and stomach, which causes pain to the patient, then know that fumigates and appropriate remedies should be administered.
Some of the ancients already used fumigation with fennel and dried figs.
The form of the instrument used to fumigate a woman for the retention of menstruation and post-childbirth bleeding:
It is necessary to examine or feel.
And the fine tip of the instrument should be placed within the ring and the wider end over the flame, and the subtle smoke extraction should be done over the arms of the flame.
And hold that until the smoke extraction is consumed, then repeat another.
On the treatment of the unpierced navel of an infant.
Many infants have this, and the navels of babies who have not yet been pierced are delicate and swollen. Then instruct the midwife to pierce it as she has said, and if not, pierce it with a sharp tool, and be careful not to touch the wound.
And then apply pressure over that cloth soaked in wine and oil; and tend to that wound until it is healed.
If there is a risk of obstruction, apply pressure on the trap for several days, and stop when the child wants to defecate.
And it also happens that oppression in the anus occurs due to a lump or abscess; then, once that consolidation is incised, it should be treated with water and lead, as we have said regarding treatment and plaster.
On the treatment of fistulas that tend to form.
Fistulas that form in the perineum contain a large amount of pus, are tender and swollen, often protruding from near the anus or in the space between the buttocks.
And it is a fistula or a mass.
And when that nodule is ancient and corrupt from damp white pus or subtle decay, sometimes these are the result of such fistulas penetrating.
And those penetrating are guided by the fluid that has accumulated from them through the opening and due to congestion; and sometimes the patient experiences difficulty in passing, and often there is strong pain from these worms.
And from these fistulas, some are found in the spaces penetrating into the bladder, and into the flesh of the penis; and others penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the notch of the knee.
And where the fistula is guided and does not penetrate, you should insert a thin thread into the anus, and try to gently pull or push on the fistula when it is not painful.
If there is stiffness in that area, insert a thin rod or horsehair into it until you feel the tension or hair on the exact spot.
And if you do not feel any tension at all or there is no cause for evacuation such as parasites or flatulence, as we have said, you should know that it is non-penetrable, and then proceed to treatment.
And when the fistula is penetrable into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then the significance of it is the emission of urine from that area and prohibition of any further discharge until that location is securely cured by medicine.
If it is penetrable into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the surrounding area, then its sign is that tension pervades here if there is no stiffness within the bone, and pain in the circuit of the blood; and it will cause pustules forever; and it does not respond to any treatment, nor is it cured by ointments.
And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is no complete cure, and the cure for those is hard work and patience of skilled doctors who are firm in their art.
But for those that are not penetrating or recent, healing with iron is hoped for as per what you have been advised and what has already been proven.
And indeed, the disease moves between the patient's thighs over their hips, raising their legs inside, with their thighs inclined towards their belly, and then it inserts a probe of lead, or iron if it is in a narrow fistula, into the place where you know the probe will enter.
And if that feels like the disease is around the heart, then you must insert the pointed instrument directly into the chest.
And if you feel the probe already made its way through and discovered to penetrate, or if you feel something between the chest wall and that flesh, then you will certainly know that it is penetrating; and therefore do not work on that, for there is no healing in that, as we have said.
However, some say this is a cure for certain men's pain.
And for the treatment by which one hopes for recovery in them, make subtle cauterizations according to the size of the fistula, as mentioned above, and insert that hot brand into the fistula until it reaches around the inside; then repeat this process two or three times until you know that all those flesh parts that are adjusted and fistulated, which seem like a quill of goose down, have healed.
Then wrap those with calgues (bandages) around until all those parts that are adjusted become healed, and treat those wounds with medicinal herbs that generate and consolidate healing, and if it is healed, it is good; otherwise, in no time will it be healed by any other treatment.
And if the attempt enters and does not penetrate into the inside, as it is said that which is in the anus, and between that and the attempt that is somewhat of flesh or fiber, then dry the fistula so that it reaches the surface of the anus; then let the anus dry from the beginning of the fistula, and when the attempt dries too, and indeed the fistula is dried until the end of the attempt, and by the attempt it is freed and cured.
And then carefully clean those infected flesh that are assembled like a tube of pen ink and not ruptured from any cause.
If there is a flow of pus from the wound between you and your operation when you inspect those flesh, then take care that it is healthy and use a clean instrument to cauterize with fire or acute medicine, for fire cautery adjusts both habits: it adjusts those flesh attached and cuts off the pus by drying out humidity.
And then carefully tend to those wrapped in cold or caused by a tight bandage within the affected area, and take care of the infection with hot applications to hard, infected flesh causing pain and solidifying.
And these remedies involve cleansing and extraction; when the pain is relieved, it is healed and you need not fear recurrence.
If the fistula has already penetrated into the rectum and extends from the surface of the body, then insert the finger into the anus and explore it carefully.
And therefore, if you detect a tumor that is clearly visible and between you and it there is no significant thickness of tissue or flesh, and it is likely to penetrate, then it is not surgery on it but rather through a trusted and hopeful way.
The treatment for this condition can be administered in three ways: first, by cauterizing it as we have mentioned; second, by drying it out to return it to its cavity so that you can insert whatever is necessary and provide the cure; do not use excessive incision because it may not drain the abscess containing it, and it might cause more harm than good, following the patient's wishes; and take care of it as we have said, since it will be a strong treatment. Or, second, elongate that membrane and drain the pus that has dried within it near the anus, as we have mentioned, or using a probe or another instrument of extreme sharpness, and then clean those fistulated meats that are in the section where you can pass through by incision and cauterization; and strive to restore the entire wound through incision, and if the orifice above it does not heal and the fistula remains open at the anus, it will be lighter for the patient. And in some cases, the fistula is ended in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, it is in the thigh near the surface of the body and along the margin of the buttock, then take the pointed end to perforate, which is thus with a needle prepared according to this form:
and insert into that fistula wrapped in gauze or surrounding it; then insert the probe into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
If it penetrates along the margin of the buttock very deeply, then extract the fistula from there as you have inserted the probe into the anus; remove the end of the fistula and join both ends, and leave it thus for one or two days, and when you again insert the fistula into the flesh, open it until those parts of the flesh that are between the two ends of the fistula are opened, which fit together.
And then treat the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
If the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in some way as you are prepared, either with heat or pressure, because it is not appropriate for you to do this so as not to cause further injury; and then treat it until it is healed.
The shape of the spine with which the fistula is divided: its curvature is sharply curved and the other part is not sharp, so as not to puncture what is unnecessary, thus carefully.
Regarding the stitching of hemorrhoids where pus runs from the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids exist in two ways: either they are between the anus and seem like coal, or those are with the fat of inflammation. And they are small and large, and the heat flows from them at that time and is one, and it is numerous, and it comes out of the anus, and in the extremities of it.
However, those that are only from the anus, according to a few moistures, of which citrus water or a little hot blood flows continuously, and they are according to the color of the body.
And the treatment for that which is within the anus is that you command the patient to sit and press until the anus is open and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you take care and gently press with your fingers or what you have at hand, and close the anus by pressing its edges.
If the presses are not held in those because of their moisture and softening, then take a coarse cloth or a napkin or woolen thread, and extract them with your fingers, and then cut them and sprinkle some powdered substances over them after the incision, so that they adhere to the place instead of cauterization, or cauterize them as mentioned in the chapter on cauterization. And then attend to those and other remedies until they are healed.
If the hernia does not yield to pressure, then crisp the malady with a small incision, wash it with water that is in the cavity and prevents the hernia from coming out more gently when the malady is squeezed.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, their cause is trivial, and it is because you take those with your finger, or take those with a unguent, and cut them off, and then attend to them as we have said until they are healed.
And he who makes the incision should administer the suture according to this manner: take a thread wrapped in wool and with an needle, remove the hemorrhoids from their positions above, and make the needle penetrate into the root of the other part, and wrap both ends of the thread on the side below the needle, stretch the hemorrhoid by strong tension, tie the thread and extract the needle.
And do it thoroughly, leaving none untouched, so that the excess of cold blood flows from it.
Then place a warm compress soaked in olive oil or wax over the affected area, and press it against the pain while instructing the patient to rest. Then remove that compress and, when the pain subsides, apply either ointment or other remedies until it is healed.
And when they are old and no longer respond to those remedies, you must clean the punctures made with a spatula or your finger, ensuring they remain moist and draining the pus that forms, which prevents scarring; and then treat them until they are healed and consolidated.
Now hold those with a strong reason, as the first enters that you see most inflamed and wounded; then take care of those within so they heal.
You know that hernia is crucial, and it appears as a bulge in the body resembling a bone head, and it occurs throughout the body but mainly in the groin area and sides, and you should address it due to the pain it causes.
And so it is incised where it is in the circumference of the hernia, and held with forceps or a hook, and eradicated from its place; and then care should be taken of that.
And if you wish, cauterize according to what is preceded in its chapter.
A verruca is a small, rough, round ulcer raised on the surface of the body, often seen in children.
And the treatment for it is to extend and incise that, or open it again with a sharp tool within the wound. And if you wish, cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine, as we have said.
A mosca (or fly) is a small, wrinkled or fistulated protuberance on the skin's surface, often accompanied by itching, and when its bite is felt, it resembles that of a mosquito, and it can be found anywhere on the body.
And the treatment for it is to take a sharp needle of goose or falcon feather, make it strong, and press it onto the swelling until it contains the circle of the needle; then turn your hand with the needle inside until you cut into what is in the circle of the swelling, and press it into the flesh, and eradicate the swelling from its root.
And if you prefer, make this as a needle of iron or bronze in this shape:
The opening at the top of the needle should be subtle, not sharp (non-perforating), wrapped around itself so that when it is pressed upon the swelling, its appearance is improved and the revolution of that [needle] is facilitated.
And if you wish to cauterize the swelling, as described above in the chapter on cautery.
In the form of instruments that are administered to give heat.
Sometimes heat is applied with silver or bronze or melted earth, and sometimes with small or large instruments according to those used for treating small children, and of those whose backs are bent or painful, the heat from those should be small.
The form of large and few heat applications:
The end of the bag's tube above which the sac is tied should be wide according to this manner; and at its distinction, where the sac is tied, thus it should be with times.
And the lower end of it, which is inserted into the anus, should be blunt (not pointed), made with caution; and on one side of the length of it there are two openings, and on the other side one opening, and the width of the opening should be according to the thickness of the rays, and a little smaller.
And let the bag be filled with medicines made from the bladder of a beast or from sheep's skin, and its size be about a palm.
And it should be perforated with many such things as are turned; and if the space between the parts is too narrow, use a larger one.
Then insert into those parts strong vinegar of crushed walnut, or surround them; and adjust the bag; and when the bag is placed on it, tighten it at the base of the patient's genitalia between two distinct points with a firm constriction, and then bind each part: The quality of binding that part is to fill the bag with medicine that is warm according to the amount of the patient's tolerance, and be careful not to make it too strong or too weak.
Then place the patient on their back, raise their legs up and rest them on another body or a pillow; and apply the tip of the cautery with oil or with egg album or with mucilage of fenugreek or similar; and insert it into the anus with ease, and then have the assistant remove the bag and squeeze it twice, and gently press until everything in the genitalia is evacuated; and then remove the cautery and have the patient raise their legs to the wall.
And if the medicine forces him to vomit, hold him until he can; and if he sleeps through the whole night, it is more beneficial for recovery.
If you believe that applying heat to the pain of intestinal solutions and vomiting helps him, then you apply cautery until he is healed.
And if there are hemorrhoids or ulcers in the anus that cause pain, then use a gentle and subtle cautery, of which children should be taught.
**Curation of Plagues**
You have already stated in the division of the cure for plague what is suitable for each case, and you have thus given the cure for those with great pain and according to the perfection of medicine.
Therefore, it is said that plagues are diversified according to where they are made by the plague and according to the place on which the plague strikes.
And the causes for which plagues occur are likewise due to the piercing of stone, or the opening of space or wound, or striking with a lance, or with a club, or with an arrow, or similar to those causes that bring on sudden movements.
Plagues that are in the parts of the body may be thus: as a plague which seizes upon the head, or the nape, or the foot, or the belly, or the chest, and similar to those members.
And it is often recommended for the cure of certain plagues, in order to stop that reasoning and regulate concerning other plagues.
And one should begin with the simple plagues of the head, since the remembrance of the compounded ones will come at the commencement of the third chapter.
Therefore, when a simple headache occurs and it is not a fracture, consider this: if it is due to tension or something similar, and the patient has already bitten the tongue deeply enough and it is a severe headache and you fear the development of post-herpetic apoplexy, then you should cauterize and perform a flebotomy on the head as soon as possible; extract blood from the vein according to the quantity of virtue in it, unless there is any other cause prohibiting flebotomy, especially if the headache that has arisen from the illness is rare.
And flebotomy is the opposite of the affected area; and pay attention to the patient's diet, avoiding excessive food and drink.
If, however, any cause prohibits drawing blood, then reduce the diet and do not approach meat or wine.
And regarding the illness, if it develops into post-herpetic apoplexy, apply a hot compress soaked in olive oil or wine that is slightly heated.
If you are certain of the location of the abscess, then apply pressure to the sore, if it is recent, and its pus and the air have not changed the powder that I will describe shortly, then make a small incision.
And if the air has changed that, then apply various remedies until it is healed.
If the abscess is large or it is due to an opening in the space and of similar size, and the edges of the wound are not suitable for sewing, then adjust them with stitches as I will describe regarding the stitching of their wounds.
If the abscess has already been discovered through the skin and muscle, and it is not a retention but a small suspended one, then make an incision and, near the wound, treat the abscess with medicines and restore the flesh appropriately in that area, and order the patient to abstain from foods that are harsh: vegetables and fruits of a similar type and size to them, until they are healed.
And if you find putrid flesh in the wound that does not adhere to the bone, you cut out all the rotten parts and throw them away, and then take care of it.
If these plagues are caused by an artery or vein from which pus flows and it is not lanced by medicines, then you should inquire about the artery, and if you find one that is not incised, you should lance it with a knife or tie it off; and if cauterization is necessary to prevent further discharge after the pus has been drained, do so.
And if these plagues are simple and small, their cause is slight; so you sprinkle over them this powder, as it hardens before the air changes those.
The method of the powder is as follows: take one part olive oil from broken sesame seeds, two parts dragon's blood, and three parts non-extinct ash; mix all together finely and fill the plague with it, and constrict it well with a good bandage so that it adheres to that which caused it, and coagulate the pus.
And then tighten it over the pulleys and leave it there, and do not loosen it while it is in that position, for the medicine will not be effective until it is healed.
And sometimes it is treated solely with cautery, when there is no sign of inflammation or gangrene.
And this surgical procedure is performed on large tumors when it is appropriate to pause them and tighten them, and they are fresh with their own inflammation, the air of which has not been altered.
And if the air has altered them, especially in summer, then one does not understand the position of this powder, but instead cure them with what we have said: tighten over these inflamed spots with a mixture of egg and honey, or tighten over the pores of the ordered flour with water and honey until they are cured; and then apply the other treatment until they are healed.
If a fracture occurs in the bone due to a blow, and it is small, then you extract it with your hands.
And now, I will tell the cure for fractures of the skull that are dangerous.
Of the ailments of the head.
If the plague occurs in the head, it is not different in treatment, except for the plague of the head when it is simple.
If the nerves or arteries of the head are cut, then if it is nerves, the treatment should not be aggressive but rather to avoid harm to them as they cause violent spasms. Thus, as they inflame and squeeze, one should use things like vitriol and similar substances on them. And do not apply any treatment to the pain without understanding its cause, for the substance of the nerves is affected and their continuity leads to the brain, which is the source of all members' distress.
If it is treated with lighter medicines, then wash it with water twice, sometimes with rosewater or other waters, and apply heat after washing with water, and the other remedies afterward, following this method, and moisten it with humidity.
But if the pain is severe, then apply a suture, or tighten the edges of the wound, and afterward, treat it with poultices until it is healed.
But if the wound is deep or there is pus in it, then open it again at the most sensitive point with a perforation.
But if an artery is already incised and there is blood flow, then separate or dry it, or tie it, or cauterize it if that is necessary to stop the bleeding.
If you have already incised the spinal joints entirely and saved the neck veins, then adjust the edges of the wound with sutures on the spine's channel and do not touch that area; equalize it and return it to its natural shape, then tighten it gently without excessive stretch, and leave it for a few days; also care for the area with poultices in which there is stiffness and excitation until it heals.
If the disease has already taken hold in the bone, then probe it and if there are fragments of decay within, remove as many as you can; leave what is not suitable for healing until the plague consumes it, and separate it, alleviating its presence from the body.
And if the plague is recent, then sprinkle over it the powder that has been recommended to you. If the plague has caused an ulcer, then treat it with water from the source of its origin in accordance with its chapter.
If it is a lance or a cut and the patient feels the depth of pain, consider more carefully if the illness has an airborne quality when the patient's condition worsens; then know that the illness is deadly.
And if there is no depth in it and the illness is recent, then you should place on it from the first hour a poultice, and do not press hard so that the pus does not get trapped in the depths of the wound and return to the body, causing more harm; instead, place an attractive ointment on it and wipe it off twice a day.
And if the ointment is not at hand, then you should apply to the wound a clean cloth soaked in vinegar so that it draws out what comes from the moisture; and make the patient rest on the wound so that whatever is in it can flow properly.
If the disease has passed three days or more without causing muscle spasms, tremors of the heart, or stiffness in the joints, and other good dispositions of the body appear, then you will know that the disease is cured; and then treat those that remain with appropriate remedies until they are healed.
If the healing of the disease is prolonged and still no fistula has formed, then you will know that it is already cured; so treat it according to its nature.
If the disease is due to a cut or wound in the flesh or bone, and it is superficial on the foot or back, then treat it as mentioned above: with stitching if it's a large wound, or with powder if it's small.
If the disease has already affected the bone, and it is necessary to cut into the flesh to extract the bones if they are separated, then you should squeeze the plague and extract the bones. If they are not separated, then leave them inside so that the plague does not spread, as their removal is alleviated.
And for other accidental plagues in other members, the treatment from the beginning is what we have said.
On abdominal plague.
The disorder that occurs in the stomach is either great, or small, or moderate.
And small disruption is made difficult by another method, and I know that their reduction is more difficult if you do not attend to their intrusion into their place immediately, as it opens and thickens so that the entry into it becomes difficult.
And thus the best disruption is done by lying down, for in that position it is not difficult to return the intestine to its place, as it is difficult in both of the aforementioned species.
And you know that the suture of the abdomen is done in four ways, but two sutures are common to all other body wounds.
And the other two sutures communicate with other wounds, but they are still more appropriate for the suture of the abdomen.
And I recommend to each of you the exposition and declaration.
Therefore, it is said that when the wound is small and there is no cause for the intestine to protrude, making it difficult to return it to its place, this is in one of two ways: either due to the inadequacy of the disruption as we have mentioned, or when the intestine has become inflamed from the cold air.
And so when this occurs, you should know that you need to soak that which you immerse in a sponge or cloth dampened in warm water, or take water with lemon, fennel, and spices, and apply it to the hernia until the inflammation is resolved.
And in some cases, it is effective where there is stiffness, and water alone is not enough to resolve the inflammation.
And when you perceive that the inflammation is resolved, then moisten the hernia with water containing aloe and marshmallow, for these will alleviate the pain and discomfort caused by it.
However, if the pain and discomfort persist despite this treatment, then divide the disruption with a small instrument, which is used to incise hemorrhoids.
And the first treatment is better when it involves no cutting, and there is no need to immediately stop eating or fasting.
Of the instrument, consider its shape:
In one part of the sharp blade, and another part not sharp, and the tip is subtle, but it's not the subtlety of a spatula, rather it's slightly obtuse.
And therefore, when the disease has progressed and the hernia has protruded, it should be returned to its reduction according to its natural shape in its proper place, if possible over that, as it is better.
If the disruption is extensive, and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then you must make the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; but if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you must keep the head lower than the feet.
And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then you must pause your intention and consideration at that point so that the part with the disease is higher than the other.
And thus you should administer this in both great and minor ailments.
And in minor ailments, apply what you have prepared, and then make the medicine flow between your fingers, holding it entirely in your hand, adjusting the edges of the wound, and gradually uncovering from one point to another until any cause for the suture becomes apparent.
And this is the common method of suturing: take a needle, or count one needle according to the amount of the wound's width; then lay it at the edge of the wound from the little finger, and tighten the needle once; avoid putting any strain on both ends of the thread, but rather let the thread penetrate from the other side; when you have added both ends of the thread and both ends of the cloth, you have made four orders.
Then tighten the thread double around the needle, and in some cases, connect both parts together; add both edges of the wound and close it properly; take the thickness of your finger and insert another needle at that point, then attach the thread to it just as with the first needle; do not stop doing this for the needles until you have completely closed all the gaps of the wound.
And the needles should be of varying thickness, for the thin ones cut the flesh slightly; and the thick ones are difficult to insert into the wound, hence they must be both thin and thick.
And it should not be forgotten that the needle should be placed in both ends of the wound at once, so that the flesh is not cut too deeply and the injury heals before its consolidation.
And the sutures should not be prolonged, so that the injury is not hindered from healing.
Then cut the ends of the needles off so that they do not lead to further harm as the patient sleeps; and place your hand over the stitches, using clean, soft poultices from head to toe, which cover the ends of the needles; and leave them there until you know that the injury is healed.
And these types of stitches are most conveniently done with needles in any way suitable for small wounds, as one needle or two or around those can be used for the stitching.
The second stitch is thus: and it is that you administer a stitch to all four extremities, from the coccyx and two extremities of the leg, at once, with an needle in which thread is tightly wrapped in both subtlety and thickness.
And then, when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, return the needle from that entry point, starting from where it began, so that the thread retracts and pulls the wound closed, making the stitch like a drape with which the drapes are tightly bound.
And between each stitch, pause to measure the thickness of the said thread.
And this suture knows men well.
And I have used this suture to treat a man who had an infection in his belly that was caused by a knife, and it was the rupture of a major plague covering an area of about two palms around the hernia in the middle of the abdomen; and so I reduced the swelling that had been present for 24 hours.
And the wound was healed in about 15 days or so, and I treated it, and he recovered completely; and afterwards I visited him for many years, and he returned to his usual state.
And other doctors had judged that he would not recover; but by a miracle, because you did not treat him with any ointment or medicine, yet you applied heat to the wound twice a day and washed it daily with honey water, it healed completely.
There are two kinds of suture mentioned according to the account of words.
And begin with the suture of the wound, and insert the needle from outside to inside.
And so when the needle penetrates the wound and reaches the other side according to the rule and length of the body, leave the tip of the thread in which you inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate from the other end into the other end of the wound from outside to inside.
And when you have made it penetrate, make it penetrate again in the other end of that wound from outside to inside; and leave the tip of the thread on this side, and make the needle penetrate in the other end of the wound from inside to outside.
And make a penetration with that penetration which you cause to penetrate into the body at the end of the sight which is in the part of him within so that all that penetrates.
Then begin with this procedure on the side of the body, taking care of that extremity which is at the other end from the sight, and take out the needle from the thread with which it penetrated, then return it to that thread and place the extremity of the sight on the opposite side of this needle; and take out from the thread what belongs to him.
And do this once, then another time, and keep doing it until you have cooked everything that is outside according to this example.
And the sum of this manner of stitching is that you cook with a stitch of skin which I sew the fur, so that you cook the body once from the side of the end of the needle, and then do that other time until it is complete.
But the second kind of suture, which is most commonly used in Gaul, and this one is of great importance both for speech and for action, is that you sew according to the second layer, which some physicians sew, adding to it all necessary parts to make it suitable by nature; and apply the end of one part of it to the other end of the opposite part, and do so according to your discretion.
Take the needle at the end of the mirror and insert it into the opening on the inside, passing through both ends of the hernia; then turn the needle around and make it penetrate from outside to inside, through both ends of the hernia.
Then turn those stitches around and make some of the opening on the inside penetrate through to the outside in both ends of the mirror, other than the opposite side.
And this way of suture is better than the common light suture, and it is a suture of which one remembers beforehand.
This is the speech of Gaul.
And they may say to you, the stomach suture is corrected with two needles; so you must insert a thread into some of them, and begin to introduce the needle from this one, making it penetrate within the other side according to the suture of those which join the flesh alternately.
And you should know that when there is disruption in the middle part of the belly, the suture there becomes more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
The game of medical treatment for plague is judged according to other plagues.
Which is the cause that when you obtain the recent plague in front of its sore that the air alters it, and return the intestine and sew it up and prepare it properly, then place your hand over that fleshly powder.
And if the air has already altered the wound, then apply to that place hot compresses which are present with you until they cause hard pain and break the boils, and become healed and cured; and then treat this wound just as other wounds are treated until it is healed.
If you do not have any medicines on hand, then apply to it immediately, as it begins to feel hot, cold compresses, and change them every two hours during the day, just as you were taught, until it is healed, so that you do not need other medications due to improper preparations when the wounds are simple.
If you are afraid that the wound will communicate with other injuries in vital parts, then cover it with a linen cloth soaked in oil of high quality or in melted fat, and place it on the surface of the areas located between the angles and leave it there.
And if pain or putrefaction is felt in the intestines, as often happens, then apply a cold compress of black stinging nettle tea, especially if the infection has spread to the intestine and there is an exit penetrating the cavity.
And you should know that a hernia involving larger organs will heal more slowly than one affecting smaller organs.
And the hernia known as "inguinal" is difficult to heal because it does not receive cure from any plague; and this is due to the great number of veins in it, the magnitude of them, the subtlety of that body part, and its proximity to nerve nature.
If it is that you process the plague with a bandage and manage to stop it recently, reduce it according to your method of treatment for hernias generally.
If it has been some time and the skin has turned red or black, then you should tighten the bandage over the affected area to prevent pus, as there are veins and arteries beneath the skin.
And then cut through this other material, hold the two ends of the thread pendant from the opening left by the ulcer, so that by pulling on the thread, the attraction of it is alleviated and the expulsion of the thread from the ulcer's breach occurs.
Remembrance of hernias when they occur in the intestine.
When a rupture in the intestine occurs and is small, it is possible for some people to have it restored, so consider this: you may find someone who had been plagued by an intestinal ulcer, pierced with a lance, and was an old ulcer that had formed a fistula, and from it came management and ventilation.
Then you should pursue the cure for it, even if it was not confirmed in the healing of it; instead, follow that which brings heat to the area and the place is consolidated.
And having examined the place and confirmed that it is solidified, understand the affliction you suffer from this malicious event in your stomach; do not attempt to treat any other evil that may arise by consuming or drinking, and then immerse yourself in a bath and exercise according to its dictates.
And some experienced ones say that when the plague strikes in the intestine, and it is small, then you should tie it according to this manner: take a fork of large teeth; adjust both lips of the plague and place one fork of those that open the mouth over both lips of the plague; therefore, when it grasps those and tightens its mouth, cut off the head of it, because it sticks and does not dissolve.
Then place another fork near the first, and do not stop making forks one after another according to the amount of all the plague.
Then return it and thus remove the plague; break off those attached heads within the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
And it is possible that the hernia is narrow and delicate, made from the hernia of an animal, finer than a needle; so take the end of these hernial fibers, completely stripped, and attach the end of them to a thread, wrap it, and insert that thread into the hernia, and reduce it in its rupture.
And this method of stitching with catgut is nothing but a second way of trust and hope.
If the plague is severe and extensive, especially if it is in one of the delicate hernias, then it is not merely reduction, but subtlety, and there is no complete healing of it.
On the cure of wounds and fistulas.
You know that every wound and abscess, when it ages and becomes old, turns into a ulcer, and is not healed and can last forever; in any part of the body, it is generally called a fistula, and we call that our ulcer.
And a fistula, according to truth, is a cut that is bloody, hard, white and without pain, and it has the same curvature as the one caused by external pain; for this reason it is called acute pain.
And it is in some people's bodies that moisture accumulates, which can cause swelling; and in many cases, the humidity is absorbed within a few hours. And sometimes this humidity is excessive, and sometimes it is scanty, and sometimes it is thick, and sometimes it is thin.
It has already been shown all those causes, their signs, and the cure for them with medicines in detail.
And so, I will now explain the cure for a fistula that is caused by surgical operation with the hand.
And you should know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; some fistulas affect large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the skin, or the intestine, or the bladder, or any of the ribs, or any of the spinal joints, or any of the complex articulations of the hand and foot; and those are the ones that give rise near the primary member and of similar nature.
And therefore, among these fistulas that are according to this manner, is one of the most difficult maladies to cure and does not receive treatment; occupation with it requires effort and ignorance.
And if it is a fistula whose depth does not allow access to these places that are mentioned, and you wait and trust in its cure, and wish to gain knowledge of it, then take a probe or a forceps, and if the fistula is as indicated, inquire about it with him.
If the fistula is twisted, then investigate with a delicate probe, for the weight of his body's fluid is lifted and the twist must be corrected to heal the deformity.
And if the fistula presents an extremely horrible odor, it is not appropriate to attempt anything about it with a probe.
Then cleanse the orifices for their horrible nature, for the moisture by which you cleanse that one must also be applied to the other orifices and their flow.
And you must inquire extremely carefully, according to what manner it is possible for you to know if here there are bones or nerves, and whether the concave of the fistula is distant or close, or it is a fistula with only horrible odor which is entirely in the power of your strength, and from which you question the malady, and the discovery of pain depends on your compression with your hand over the area, and similar signs of the accidents and causes to the abscess.
And when you have carefully considered all those causes, you will then see the cure according to your knowledge: for you now consider whether it is a fistula close by or in a distant place, near a joint or nerve, artery or vein, or in one of the places that you know and call.
Now you examine the fistula according to the description given of its location, remove what is in that flow and corrupt flesh, and cure what has arisen in the opening of the flesh or from parts like them, and treat it until it is healed.
If the fistula is of great depth and according to rectitude, then you must make an incision into it as far as possible, and clean it of all corrupt flesh; and then apply some moistened compresses with sharp medicines, and insert them into the hollow of the fistula that you have understood with your hand.
And for this purpose, some times it is useful to use an acute medicine that corrodes everything that is hardened in the cavity of the fistula of corruption.
And then restore those that ignite healthy flesh until it is healed.
If it is not healed by this, then you cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and it is necessary to certify this, then you examine it and dry it according to what we have recommended; however, do not allow any cause from veins or nerves or from a major member, as we have said.
If the bone is exposed and there is no corruption or blackening, then you clean it until the corruption is completely removed; and then care for it with medicine until it heals.
And if the disease does not respond as expected to treatment, then you will know that you have not achieved complete eradication of the corruption; and then you examine it again, carefully doing the reason for it and purifying it with the last remaining strength, and appropriately restore it.
And therefore if it is healed, it is good; but if not, you will know that this corruption is in the deep recesses of the body, which has not been reached, and so to you, on that point, there is no cure but to lay it open.
And if the corrupted bone is small and within your reach, then you can use delicate forceps to extract it.
And if there are many bones, then carefully extract all of them, leaving no cause for concern due to your strength.
If any cause of discomfort arises from moisture, and in their dissection there is no fear or error, then incise those inflammations or flesh if they are here, and dislocate the bones.
If you are not prepared to separate the bones from your patient, then place your hand over the area where the pain occurs, and let it rest there until the pain subsides, ensuring that the inflammation does not penetrate between the bones, muscles, and ligaments, and be careful that the incision you have made in your operation is not closed.
In the meantime, if you are afraid, apply a hot compress or oil to the affected area, or immerse it in Egyptian honey or any other green ointment, for when the inflammations subside and the bones can be separated from their attachment, this attraction will be alleviated.
If it is a large bone, such as the bones of the leg or thigh or similar, and what is corrupted from it only affects the skin, then cut it off as close to the affected area as possible, until the blackness and corruption are removed, and then restore the wound.
If the part that is corrupted is extensive, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it becomes necessary to completely cut out that part in the location where the corruption has taken place, and once it is healed, treat it.
And I recommend to you that you enter into the patient's thigh to hold it in place and serve as an assistant to your operation.
Focus on a young man around 30 years old who experiences pain in his thigh, and the cause of the pain is a burst blood vessel inside the body until the material reaches the thigh, and it is a matter of apoplexy or a great apoplexy, without any external cause.
And therefore, the time should be extended for treatment due to the mistake of the doctors as the apoplexy becomes severe, and it will attract mobile materials, and its cure is slowed down until the leg is fistulated, and you make incisions in it that cause great pain and erosion and humidity in the body.
And after this, many physicians around these two years, and they do not focus on the knowledge but on the art, since you are called to it.
And I saw the patient's legs and the matter that was flowing from them through these terrible pains in their great body; and already the condition of that man was entirely stable, and the colour of him was citron-like.
And then you insert the probe into one of these openings and succeed in penetrating the bone with the probe.
And then you carefully examine all the openings and find those that lead to their origin from every part of the leg.
And then I carefully cut and incise over one of these openings until I discovered a part of the bone, and I found it corrupted, very putrid, and deteriorated; and already a part of the leg was rotten where I had penetrated into the marrow.
And then you will secure what I have discovered and prepared from the exposed bone.
And I thought that it was not the bone but that corruption which I had removed and secured, and I had already drained it.
Then I will pause the restoration of the plague with restorative medicine for a long time, and it is not consolidated.
Then I will repeat and expose the bone secondarily according to the initial discovery, and seek any ongoing corruption within the bone.
And I will secure what appears to me as that corruption, and then I will make holes in it to effect its cure and restoration, but it is not restored.
And so I exposed it again, and did not cut the bone in one piece but made holes in it, effecting its restoration, and yet it was not restored until I cut around a palm of it, extracted what was within its marrow, and then restored it with medicine; it became slightly consolidated and healed.
And no further repetition is required in the operation of removing it except for the arrangement of its fragility and the lack of patience to endure it and the fear of death, as it falls into a coma at all times due to excessive evacuation.
And therefore health is achieved through complete healing, and nothing is in place of the hard bone; its disposition within the body is good, and its virtue returns; it is adjusted to its dispositions, and no contrary movement or damage occurs during walking or any cause.
But if a bone protrudes outside the body, you must act as follows: take a linen bandage and wrap it tightly around the end of that protruding bone, asking someone to extend it; then place a thicker bandage over the first one, close it against the flesh that is exposed, and extend the tip to pull the flesh away from the gap you wish to close so that the saw does not harm the flesh.
And place a wedge or table under the bone, for when you do this, the saw is not forbidden to cut through the corrupt flesh.
And be careful with the sawing on the corrupt place little by little, because if it is in the concave part of the corrupted bone and does not appear in the sense of feeling, then force the cutting another time.
And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, sometimes it is a continuous break from one side to the other, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, then you should cut through all parts of the flesh; and place a wedge under, and saw the first break where the corruption has entered until the cutting of the other break continues.
And the sawing should be according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, cut that corrupt joint, and tighten the bone where it continues from the other side.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in their ratio but requires skill.
And if the corruption is in the chest or foot of the hand, it is very difficult; nevertheless, you must inquire about the corruption in what way it appears to you, and open that, and remove that according to some disposition possible for you, and with careful skill, so that neither veins nor nerves are harmed.
And you should know which ones are the bone cutters and the saws for cutting these bones must be very according to the position of the bones, and their preparation, and the thickness of those, and their subtlety, and size, and smallness, and hardness, and rarity; so that it is necessary that for every kind of operation, you prepare the suitable instrument for that operation.
And you will know that this operation signifies to you regarding the kind of instrument of which you stand in need; when you have great study and long experience of the manners of this art, and are a witness to the methods of various maladies, then you will already have for yourself what is suitable for it among instruments for all illnesses.
And you will learn, at the end of this chapter, the number of instruments which you will use with examples as you proceed with your training, in accordance with the prohibition that you will experience in dealing with others. Form of saw:
Another form of saw:
Form of another large saw:
Form of treatment: The head of this treatment should be in the form of a stellate key, and its points are in the shape of spikes.
And it is not appropriate to apply this unless the heads of the joints are irritated when they are corrupt or the opening of the mouth is excessively wide.
The form of the smaller razors:
The form of the broad razors:
The form of another saw appropriately made: it should be curved less and its blade sharp, and the bones of its handle firmly fitted. Form of it:
Shape of the scalpel with a concave edge:
Shape of another very thin scalpel:
Shape of another scalpel with an extremely curved tip:
Shape of a small scalpel resembling a tent:
Shape of another smaller saw instrument:
Shape of another cutting instrument; this one resembling a ray, with a serrated tip, and used in various places on the bones.
The form of the ray which is suitable for the treatment of one who is pierced by bones:
And the extremity of it is triangular with an acute point.
And it is made of Indian steel, and in appearance resembles all the causes we have mentioned of razors, scissors, and saws.
Of the incision of the extremity and the locking of the bones.
The extremities may be affected either by an intrinsic or extrinsic cause, and if the treatment you have administered for that corruption does not bring relief, or the corruption worsens to the point where it threatens the life or health of the member, then you must incise that member within which the malady is localized, so that the evil may be removed from causing death or severe harm to the member.
And the sign of that which happens is that the member becomes black as soon as fire has burned it, or if you see the darkness approaching that wound to that part which has been affected and takes over the whole body, then make an incision at once from that place.
And similarly, it is caused by the corruption and impact of certain poisonous sources such as from a scorpion's sting or a viper or a nettle and similar things.
And if the corruption or impact is on the tip of the finger, you make an incision on the finger and do not give space to the corruption for it to enter the hand.
And similarly, if it affects the hand, you make an incision at the root of the finger and do not give space to the corruption until it takes over the whole arm.
And if you change your mind, you cut the arm at the joint.
And if another corruption or a different environment affects the joint, then that is the death of the patient; and to treat another cause related to it in healing requires a great deal of virtue.
And it similarly does for the foot when corruption appears in one part, then you cut into it at a joint among the bones.
And if you take hold of the foot's edge, then cut through the entire foot. If it is possible to enter within the bone, then cut the leg at the joint of the bone.
And if the corruption has already spread to the bone, then there is no cure for it but dismissal, and leave the patient to die.
And the method of cutting or severing a member is that you tighten the ligament in the area where you want to cut, and tighten another ligament over the place; and the instrument extends a ligament to the parts left behind, and the minister extends another ligament onto it; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments without splitting them wide enough until all the flesh is uncovered; and then it is either cut or severed.
And it should be covered with clean cloth from all parts to prevent contact with the affected area, and bring the patient's injury to a halt, adjusted and carefully watched.
If bleeding occurs during the procedure, you should cauterize the site carefully, or apply some powders to constrict the flow of blood; and then return to your treatment until it is complete.
And then attach the affected member with ligaments in a way that is appropriate, and treat it until it heals.
And I advise you to dig into the skin of a man at his foot, this instrument that you and I have recommended, which occurred to him due to an accumulation of blackness on his foot resembling the burn of fire.
And that corruption, which was first acquired in the inner part of his foot, tends to spread throughout the entire foot.
And therefore, that man prepares himself for this disease by seeking relief from the pain and burning of his member with the urgency of its condition, and he incises into the foot at the joint, and it heals with fire.
For a long time, that disease condition occurred at the indicated part of the foot.
And therefore, it prevails over me, and thus I have perforated to let out that superfluity with the aid of what rests on my hand from the array of medicines, then purifying the body's part; and the superfluity is not ejected, and it begins to move towards another internal part where it started in the foot.
And the doctor attempts to cut into the patient's hand, and you do not want to do this hoping for the resolution of that superfluity, rather, you must hold fast to the incision of the patient's dead hand, for the virtue of the disease was in its decay.
And since he has left me, he has returned to his land and forced me to prepare and cut off the hand of that man, and he is healed.
And this account is not presented merely to describe this illness but to provide aid regarding what causes it and what its significance is, so that it may be understood and treated accordingly.
On the treatment of wounds and the quality of enema with medicines.
When abscess occurs in some fatty parts of the body and the space of the abscess is prolonged as it collects pus, then it ruptures and perforates, and the pus spills out from it, leaving the area empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin above it remains intact, and it does not progress to final corruption, and does not affect the bone or nerves or connective tissue, it is called a sinus, and is not named a fistula.
However, if the space is prolonged and corruption spreads throughout a member, it is then called a fistula and should not be incised.
And the treatment for it is to incise that whole cord as it is twisted, especially when it is subtile and made with a knife, and ensure that it does not stick to the area due to its corruption.
If you hope that the cord will not adhere and that that corruption does not continue due to its last effect, and if the cord has passed through the face, then treat it with a cleansing enema.
And it is that you consider the condition of the sinuses, and if they are great, and the arm that they affect has a foul odor, then cleanse them with an Egyptian medicine made of oil, wine, and spices, mixed together in a vessel, and heated over fire until the medicine becomes hot and effective.
And then take from him what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; cleanse the sinus with it, tighten the orifices of the body, and leave the medicine in him for a duration of two hours.
And then extract that foul matter; do this for as many days until the sinus is cleansed and the pain relieved.
In some cases, enema with ashes of vine is used when this medicine is not available to you; take the ashes of vines, place them in water, and then use that to cleanse the sinus until you feel that it has been relieved.
If the patient is intolerant to Egyptian medicine and ashes water, then cleanse the sinus with a mixture of honey, water, and third part of vinegar; also cleanse it with a mix of vinegar, honey, and water, for the honey cleanses and washes, while vinegar helps adhere the sinus, especially when vinegar has excessed in sharpness and dryness.
And after you have done this several times and feel that the swelling has subsided, then cleanse that part with water which nourishes the flesh in it.
And indeed, you take a mixture of dyphynic (a medicinal substance) and dissolve that oily crust and stop the bleeding; or you cleanse that part with some medicines and apply others which have already been described in the treatise on ointments.
And if the orifices of the sinus are narrow in which the catheter of the enema cannot be inserted, then gradually enlarge them with a small iron, and apply heat wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon until they are enlarged.
And if the orifices seem to be wide, then you close them with stitches and leave enough quantity so that between the enemas there is addition.
And if the opening of the patient from which the arm emerges is raised above its parts, dry it in the lowest place on them so that the arm runs between them, for when the arm is constricted in the depth of their sinus, flesh will be generated within it.
And if it is not possible to dry the sinus within the depth of the bone in the lowest place as you wish, then pierce what you have prepared for the member so that the arm can run from it lightly according to your intention and without any cause for the constriction of the arm.
He who is above the opening of the sinus, which keeps on throbbing at all times so that what is trapped in it comes out through the arm. And so you will know if what flows from the arm is hot or cold, or digested or undigested.
And so consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is infected.
And when your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the material that has accumulated over the sinus opening has become adherent, or a strong adhesion has formed, then on the third day, remove the bandage, dislodge the adhesion, and when you have removed the affliction, change the dressing for a new one and renew the ointment.
If from the sinus a thin, subtle space has been opened, then do not despair of the adhesion of it, for healing to itself belongs, for some people have slow generation of flesh in their wounds, and others have the opposite.
And if a bruised arm has been left for several days and the swelling does not subside, know that the bruising will not adhere; and if the adhesion of the bruise is prolonged, adjust your treatment with dry medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their nature and virtue, they should be dried as if with a specific ointment, when there is an excess of moisture from additional protection.
And the last remedy that is used, which should be applied, is to take a specific ointment and dissolve it in warm oil, and spread it over the affected area, and then wrap it with cloth, and apply that to it.
And it seems to be the same procedure when there is no arm injury; apply specific ointment mixed with honey, which should be thick, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe vera, and crush them all and sprinkle over honey while it's on fire, and wrap it in cloth and press that onto the affected area; and apply the honey you have prepared, which you noticed becoming thick, and sprinkle that in cloth and press it.
And in some cases, they administer to him long-drawn-out and finely chopped lilies of the sky (which are lilies of the sky), and erthwort flour and centaury, and use these simples either pure or adjusted, grind them and sift them and sprinkle them over honey which you have mixed; and apply it.
And if the sinew prolongs and is not healed by this treatment, then you know that the corruption is in the tendon of it, and it has already affected the bones or other hard members or their bindings; then you treat it with fisticulative treatment, as is said above.
On the treatment of pannarics (skin lesions), oozing nails, adding cuts to the finger, and making incisions.
Pannarics are an apostema (skin infection) that begins with the nail of the finger or toe, and it spreads to other parts, and as it prolongs, its treatment becomes more difficult; sometimes it is cauterized to prevent further spread, or it becomes corrupted, releasing pus that corrodes the root of the nail, causing it to rot completely. It then reaches the bone within, emitting an unpleasant odor, and the end of the finger becomes infected, and its color turns dull.
And therefore when you have dealt with that as we have said in the previous section and do not confirm your treatment, then cut off with a knife all the excess fluid that is formed in the joint and apply a hot cautery to it, for cauterization brings relief to this condition.
But if the bone is strong and the joint is healthy, but the inflammation's additions already penetrate the tissues inside, and they begin to prick and hurt it, then stop and make a subtle cut at the angle of the pricking joint, and push that aside, cut the meat easily, and apply over it the remedies of corrosives medicines as long as there remains something from the meat; and take care to treat it with ointments until it is healed.
But if corruption has already penetrated the bone, then cut into the bone and extract it, for never is a bone healed that is corrupted within it.
And if you observe corrosion and destruction in the area, then incise it with one of the knives according to your memory of its location, and then treat it until it is healed.
If it is necessary to perform percussion or incision on the swollen area due to intense pain, then begin by lancing the malformation, and carefully dry the nail using a sharp spatula, cutting across its top, but ensure the section does not penetrate the surrounding flesh, as this could cause further intense pain and lead to the growth of excess tissue at the site; treat that area with something that provides relief from the pain.
However, this adjustment, which is naturally present in the bodies of many people, is entirely flesh in some, entirely bone in others, or entirely nail.
Some of them originate in the inflammation of the joint, or it is the nature of some nuts in the area. He who is born into this world with certain knowledge does not suffer much, but he who is born into the joints with great strength suffers more.
And regarding those who are born fleshly, the cut is shallow, for you must insert the blade into their flesh at a slight angle.
He who is born with the problem in the joint's root, treatment is difficult; therefore, be wary of amputation from it.
For he who is born with knowledge in these parts, you must cut the flesh at the beginning around the bone with a round incision, and then close it with a suitable saw to ensure it heals properly.
The consolidation that occurs between the joints due to repeated movements or by nature in a person who has not experienced it before, or due to hernia or fire burn, or similar, therefore, you must remove that consolidation so that the joints return to their natural form.
And then place between their sheets some cloth soaked in warm oil so that the joints do not harden too quickly, and separate them with a thin sheet of lead until they are consolidated as required.
And if it seems that the consolidation occurs in some particular place, like the palm, then you should dry that consolidation according to what is prepared and suitable for the shape of the member.
Of the knowledge of veins, there are varicose veins.
Varicose veins are thick, twisted veins filled with melancholic excess fluid that occur in various parts of the body, most commonly appearing on the legs, particularly on the calves, and to a greater extent in those who lead an inactive lifestyle or perform heavy labor or carry heavy loads.
So, it is clear that you should administer a purge to the body from black choler at times with a strong expulsion, and also draw blood from the patient's basil vein.
The treatment for their pain is according to two manners: one is that it be incised and the black san (foul matter) be removed, and the other manner is that the vein be raised and all of it be extracted.
The incision is made in this way: first, the leg is soaked with hot water until the thick foul matter (san) is dissolved, which is sticky to the thigh, then firmly hold the patient's thigh at the superior part of the wound using a bandage, and incise the vein in one, two, or three places with an ample incision, and raise the black san (foul matter) from below the thigh, towards the wound, until the desired quantity is removed, as much as necessary to alleviate the disease.
Then tie it up tightly, and order the patient to abstain from hot foods that generate black bile.
And repeat the treatment through phlebotomy when the veins are swollen and this causes pain to the patient.
The elevation of their legs should be in this manner: you who support the leg of the patient, if it is stiff with pain, immerse it in water and soak the leg with lukewarm water until it becomes flexible and the veins are relaxed; or if it has been exercised with intense activity, immerse it in water as soon as possible while the member is still warm.
Then, carefully open the vein at the right place, either along its length or near its end, and apply pressure to stop the flow of blood, or cut it off entirely if necessary.
Then, open the vein with incisions and remove the vein from all parts until it appears healthy, and you must observe its condition to see if the disease is declining or getting worse.
And therefore, after you have evacuated the vein and examined it, you should look at the white part to see if there is any contraction.
And then you place yourself so that the ray is raised and freed from the chain, and suspend the weight with a strong hand.
Then make another cut, perpendicular to the first one, and carefully remove the chain from the vein so that it appears.
Then raise that one and cut into the rear section, after cutting deeply into the base, extract that one and lift it until it passes through the second section, and then extract it from the section above that one.
And do this until you extract the one from the most superior or highest section of all the sections, ensuring that all are removed; and then cut into it.
And if you do not follow and extract and raise, then insert a strong, double-ended needle into it and tie it and extract it, or insert the ray under and turn your hand over to where it is thrown. And be careful not to cause an incision; for if it is broken, it is difficult to raise that part and it will come back upon the patient through that injury.
And when all that is removed, you will place over the affected area vinegar and rose oil and unrose oil, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted without twisting that is wrapped around parts, and it is not according to rectitude as we have said, then you must cut open over all the twists of it and at the places where it wraps around, and raise it until it is completely elevated.
And be careful not to cut the vein and do not injure it, for it will be difficult to raise it; and use your prudence in that.
The form of the injury which is dried out:
It is not as sharp as with ulcers nor of acute intensity so as to not affect the vein; it has a thick flexibility, for if it were too thin, it would pierce the vein due to its thinness; it has the appropriate thickness on the surface as we have said.
Of the extraction of the vein of the thigh.
This vein is generated in the legs, as it is in the thigh (or groin) area in Arabic lands and in the rear regions of Indian lands that are dry and have little vegetation and no grass or open spaces.
And a very small amount is generated in other parts of the body, aside from the legs.
And the process of this condition is putrefaction, as seen when serpents and worms emerge from within the body, creeping and breeding between the fascia and flesh.
And the sign of the impending onset of gout is this vein that occurs in the leg, causing severe inflammation; then the affected area becomes tender; and soon after, the vein begins to leave the area of this inflammation, appearing as if it were torn from a plant.
And when the onset of gout appears, you will notice that you must wrap around that part a piece of lead as heavy as a dragon's weight. Enter within this lead, and know that it lifts the lead suspended from the leg.
And whenever you encounter any cause of this gout outside the body, wrap it in lead and know of it. And if the pain persists, you will insert a piece of lead and wrap it; but do not insert that which is cut into the flesh until it comes out, for if you do, it contracts and goes inward, causing abscesses, putrefaction at the site, and bad ulcers.
So that it may be treated further and extracted little by little, until it is completely removed from the body and none of its causes remain in the body.
And from this vein, some people have noted that it extends to the length of one's palm and fingers, and I myself have seen it reach as far as 20 palms.
And if it is incised during treatment, insert the ray into the tract and perforate that long tract through the body, until everything inside is evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; and then take care of it for the healing of abscesses.
This vein, in some cases, has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot, and it causes great pain, and it is known to come from any painful branch.
And therefore treat it as we have said in the division and pay attention to what is mentioned above.
Regarding the section on worms generated under the skin, it is called bovine inflammation.
This disease is called bovine inflammation in various lands, as it causes the animal great pain. It is caused by a small worm that is born between the skin and muscle tissue; it spreads throughout the body, pushing and weakening all its members until it ruptures the tendon and pulls it out.
And the generation of these worms is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, so that worms and serpents, roundworms, and tapeworms develop in the stomach.
It is feared by the evil of these worms, for when they enter the body and rise to the head, they attack the brain, strongly seizing it within and destroying it; this is what should be observed.
And so when you wish to cure and extract it, you do not do so unless you understand its movement and appearance, and then you grasp what is above it and what remains below it firmly, and dry it and extract that.
And if it is embedded in the flesh and does not cause pain, then apply a hot cautery to the place where it resides, and the main reason for fear is the corruption of it which corrupts the place as we have said.
If it is close to the head and affects the eyes, tighten the eyebrow with strong pressure, dry it, and extract that; and remember that the disease uses purification of the body through medicines that evacuate corrupt, bad humors, and be careful of foods that cause putrefaction.
On the section regarding the treatment of pain.
This illness is called nefritis in our land, and it is a pain that appears in some members, and then changes from one member to another.
And you have already seen that second one that I will recommend to you. You were called to tend to a sick woman in a village, and you uncovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein at the elbow, which you left open for an hour. As you watched it, the inflammation seemed to retreat, almost as if it were living silver moving from place to place.
Then, put your focus on the pain in that area and pressed it into the muscle, holding for an hour.
And repeat this process on the other side, until the pain in both arms is alleviated.
And I found myself revolving within my body, according to what I had seen; and I was too amazed by the change of it and the speed with which it moved from one member to another. And I had already seen this in my own feet according to that manner, however I have seen many whose intense pain is changed from one member to another. I have not seen this in the feet so severely as in women.
And I do not think that this is anything but that the woman was old, with a dry body and exposed veins, and in this appearance, the sensation of that changed wind is felt.
And it is necessary that this backward treatment does not appear in those who are healthy and have moist bodies with veins covered.
And when you wish to cure them and the patient feels that pain, do not show any apparent concern as we have said, but strengthen over that area and leave it slightly open and dry on that part until that airiness is reduced, and cauterize the spot.
If you do not find them in your feet, then cure that by relieving the body and removing that airiness, and use pills made of excrement and pills of sulfur and similar things.
Extraction of arrows.
Arrows vary according to species and the parts of the body they hit, for their diversity lies in that some have sharp points, others small, concave, dull tips, being solid; some have three angles, others have wings, and some are barred.
And among the signs of the servant, when it catches an arrow in him and penetrates a bone, and it comes out from the base which is over the brain, due to the violent soda, and scotoma, and vertigo, and pain in the legs, and inflammation and pain of the tongue, and spasms and mixing up of senses, and furious vomiting, and strong speech is completely lost and voice is destroyed, and from the place of the plague there comes a white humidity resembling powder, and bubbles from it like the fluidity of flesh.
And therefore if these signs appear to you, then abstain from treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is protruding.
But the signs of an arrow when it enters the heart, so that it is near the left nipple, and you feel a hard pain where it is lodged, not a visible cause; and strongly it causes the movement of the arrow to be similar to the pulse and flow of the black plague, and there is a chill in the extremities, and shortness of breath, and fainting; and thus you know that death descends with all its might.
And the signs when the arrow has pierced the lung, showing pus from the plague, and the vessels near the collarbone are affected, and there is a change in the patient's appearance, they gasp for air greatly, and demand frequent breathing support.
And if the arrow catches in the tendon in the foot, and the pain is mainly in the small ribs, then there is a great deal of pain and sighing, and all the muscles of the body are not at their best.
And if the arrow pierces the stomach, you will feel strong pain from the poison of the undigested food.
And if the arrow pierces the abdomen and becomes lodged there, causing a tear in the tissue or hernia, there is no hope for its cure except by removing the arrow.
And if the arrow pierces the bladder and it empties urine outside, causing pain to the patient due to some internal cause, then you should know that it is fatal.
The other members, such as the face, neck, back, shoulders, hips, legs and their corresponding parts, can be saved according to the best dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a poisonous arrow.
And I will tell you what I have seen regarding the nature of these arrows, so that you understand this about their cure.
The cause of which is that when an arrow pierces the lacrimal duct of a man's eye at the root of his nose and it is extracted from the other side, leaving the remnants of the arrow in his eyebrow, he recovers and there is no damage to his eye.
And another arrow was extracted from a Jew whose eye it had pierced in the gums, leaving the lower eyelid intact; the arrow was hidden and could not be removed from there except for a tiny tip to which it was attached, as it was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, capable of penetrating a lion's skull where no brows exist.
And the Jew recovered, and there was no further harm to his eye.
And he extracted another arrow from a Christian man which had fallen into his gullet, and it was an Arab arrow, the kind with feathers; and then I incised between its two barbs, and it was already submerged in the victim's gullet; and then I carefully withdrew it, and thus healed the Christian.
And he extracted another arrow from a man which had fallen into his belly, and he thought that he would die from it; so, after having waited three days without anything changing regarding the man's condition, he incised upon the arrow and ingeniously removed it, and thus he was healed, without any further harm to him.
He then encountered a man in whom an arrow had become lodged in his back, and the wound was infected; after applying heat for some time, he extracted the arrow at the root of the injury.
He also saw a woman whose belly was wounded by an arrow, and the injury was deeply infected, without any change in her condition over time; the woman did not experience severe discomfort in any of her natural functions.
And he sees another man whose face is pierced by an arrow, and the wound is serious, so he removes the arrow, causing little pain but many similar symptoms.
And he extracts the arrow from the man, whose face was pierced in the middle of his nose; it had already inclined to the right a little, and the entire arrow was hidden.
And you were called upon for the treatment of him, as the arrow's wound had become infected within three days.
Then he examined the wound of the arrow very closely; and then he inquired about it gently, feeling no pain, except for a slight prickling behind his right ear, and so he hoped that this prickling was due to the end of the arrow.
And he applied a poultice to the place with an astringent and digestive property, confident that by doing so, the location of the arrow would become apparent to him, allowing for the drainage of the wound.
And do not cut into the affected area to avoid any significant accidents that the arrow might have reached; continue applying the poultice over it for several days without incident; and as the inflammation subsides, break up the hernia by gradually removing the poultice every few days until you feel the arrow within its original sheath and heal completely.
And then you should focus on treating the acute inflammatory condition with specific medicines for several days until the fever subsides; gently attempt to dislodge it, and try to retreat the tip of the arrow subtly, which adheres to the wood.
Then you should adjust the opening of the hernia through that acute treatment until the arrow's tip becomes visibly apparent; then I dedicated four months to this.
And as the hernia became enlarged, I attempted to insert forks into it and hold them there, taking care not to slip or make any mistakes, until one day, through ingenious methods that will be described at the end of this chapter, I managed to extract it using forceps; then I restored the hernia.
And some physicians judged that the nasal cartilage was not restored, and they restored it, and the disease became solidified, and the malady was healed entirely, without any pain in it for any reason.
And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some arrows so that it gives this rule and meaning regarding what I have not said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood from the narrative, nor do they comprehend those in the book.
And the skilled artisans speak a little about what is present and much about what is absent; they seek new operations and new instruments for the descent of foreign causes from the art when accidents occur.
Therefore, you say that arrows are not shot from the members in which they are embedded but according to two manners: either by attraction of the place into which they enter, or on the contrary side of the other part.
And that which is ejected from the place where it enters, or is an arrow proceeding to a fleshy part, is thrown and ejected outward.
And if you do not adhere to the timing of when cats should be fed, then you will find that you leave it for a few days until the flesh around it decays and the attraction of it and its exit are alleviated.
And similarly, if it becomes stuck in the bones and you do not adhere to feeding times, you leave it for a few days until it decays and the attraction and motion are no longer present, and it is ejected.
And if you do not adhere to your feeding schedule for a few days, then you will find that you perforate the path of the arrow in that bone at every turn subtlety until the location is amplified by the arrow, and then you extract it.
If the arrow is already lodged in the body and affects a vital area, then you should explore that attempt, and if you feel it, draw near any objects suitable for attracting it.
And if you cannot get to it due to the constriction of the disease and the length of the arrowhead, here neither nerves nor veins are involved, then pierce the wound until it is enlarged and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
And if there are auricles involved that are held fast, then you must carefully cut away the flesh in which they are embedded from all sides with every tool at your disposal; and devise a plan regarding this, if you cannot dislodge the flesh from the fracture of the auricles and their torsion until it becomes weakened.
And when you administer the extraction of an arrow in any location, then use a torsion of your hand with forceps from all sides until it weakens; and carefully with the utmost subtlety so that the arrow is not broken and that it can be easily extracted along with its tip.
And if you cannot do that with your own effort, then wait for a few days until the parts that are in the path of the arrow can be separated, and then repeat the procedure when the pain has subsided. If you experience an unexpected flow of blood, apply what we have said about treatment in its chapter.
And observe your skill in incising veins, nerves, or cords, and use all means at your disposal to facilitate the exit of the arrow; do this with ease, tranquility, delay, and firmness as much as you can and as recommended by your physician.
And therefore, contract the arrow in such a way that the injury follows the shape according to which you aim the point of the arrow, as it is more beneficial. If this is not within your power, then administer what is within your power according to the shapes.
Pay attention to the arrows that are discharged in the opposite direction of the other party, or that have already begun to penetrate any part from outside, or make the tip of the arrow bulge due to the force applied beyond the desired depth, and then aim at it; and cut it according to the amount it takes for the forceps to grasp; and then fire it, as it is made light for discharge.
If it is retained in the bone, then you use a sharp knife according to the severity of the pain until the arrow penetrates the bone, and then extract it.
And if that does not work, leave it for a few days, then repeat the procedure until it heals.
If the point of the arrow is in that place, then push it towards the affected area.
If the point has fallen and you want to give impulse, then insert a sharp object and, if it is hard, strike it strongly into the hollow of the bone in the arrow's shaft and push it towards the affected area.
If the arrow is concave, then push it strongly towards the instrument, as the arrow is pushed away by that.
If the arrow is deeply embedded, you must compress all the flesh in which it lies, as much as you can, and treat that area as best you can.
If the arrow strikes the foot, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side, and it is close enough that you can touch the area without danger, then press upon that area until you can remove the arrow without damaging veins or nerves, and treat the wound as necessary, applying remedies to heal it.
Design of forceps for removing arrows:
Their ends should be shaped like the beak of a hawk, equipped with a serrated edge to grasp the arrow firmly so that it does not slip away.
And these are made in various sizes, from large to small, according to the amount of arrowhead and its fragility, as well as the extent of the wound and the compression it suffers.
so that the arrow's intrument is removed from the concave part and it is pushed out towards that side.
On venipuncture.
The veins for fleubotomy, of which there are several, are as follows: two pulsatile veins closest to the ears, known as the temporal arteries; two located in the two temple areas; two veins in the two tears, called lacrimal veins; a vein in the middle region of the forehead and one in the tip of the nose; two glands at the collarbone; two veins on the upper lip; two veins on the lower lip; these are known as the jugular veins; and finally, two veins beneath the tongue. When the veins that are flebotomized in the arms are examined, there is one that is cephalic and must be the deep vein; this is commonly called "the vein of the head," it is hard, and consists of a branch of the basilic and another of the cephalic; the people call it "the whole body's vein", the basilic is the vein that terminates in the domestic arm, and it is called 'citellar', while the common people call it "the abdominal vein"; at the end of the arm, and it rests on the fossa, this is where flebotomy is performed, and this one appears on the skin through clear indication; and there is also the small vein, which is between the aforementioned auricular vein and the smaller one nearby, located on both sides.
And on the foot and leg there are three veins: one of them has its origin in the curvature of the deep part of the wild vein; the second is superficial, and its location is below the domestic leg bandage; the sciatic vein, its place is below the wild leg bandage; and on the bandage there are other veins similar to these.
The treatment of veins that are close to the ears is an ancient practice for healing and improving the appearance of old scars, ulcers, and skin conditions on the head.
And the method of bleeding them is as follows: it should be done by shaving the patient's head, and rubbing the patient's head on the occipital area where both veins are located, applying firm pressure with a clean bandage so that the two areas where the ears are located appear; and you should seek to have a container beneath for catching the blood, and if you feel the pulse of the vein as described above, then proceed.
Then take the sharp scalpel, and insert it into the vein in the neck until the flow of blood stops (the process known as phlebotomy). Then hold the vein with your hand above the neck, and make an incision with the sharp scalpel on the vein. And the length of the incision should be the amount of two fingers adjusted or around that; and make the cut as deep as desired.
Then, apply strong poultices and leave them until they are healed.
And this is preceded at the beginning of the book with the incision of those and their cauterization.
However, of the two veins and arteries that are located near the temples, the jugular vein is an ancient and severe evil, causing frequent vision problems and acute excesses of fluid in the legs.
And the quality of performing a phlebotomy on those parts depends on what you have learned: compress the patient's collar until two veins appear by direct inspection, demonstrating their pulse, and then you will know for certain.
And then lift the cord above the vein as indicated by your right hand, insert the sharp phlebotomy instrument between them, and elevate the vein; cut it likewise in the other two veins; and allow the blood to flow according to the amount of your need.
Then carefully tighten the bandage around the patient's waist, place your right hand over the vein for an hour, and gently pull and press it until it is healed.
And having recalled them, and made the incision, and drawn them into the beginning of the wound.
And therefore, the application of phlebotomy to the vein on the forehead is similar to phlebotomy of the cephalic vein in ancient facial diseases, migraines, and putrid wounds.
And the quality of the phlebotomy depends on what you recommend; it is that the patient's bowels tighten with a band until the vein appears; and then take the instrument called a "fossor," which has this shape...
Stop the bleeding at the point which is on top of the vein in the trench and press on it either with a lean or another tool in its manner, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish; then clean the wound from the trench and tighten it until it heals.
Sometimes, it is opened with a lateral fluotomy, but not like other fluotomies of acute ends; instead, it is from a less extreme end, and the fluotomy is made across, as the bone there is softer and would be easily broken by a subtle fluotomy.
Consider the young veins that are the tear ducts of two eyes, affected by itching and tears from the eye's moisture and dirt, and to facial ailments.
And the quality of the fluotomy is that it tightens the collagen in a specific area, then you make fluotomies on those, and you stand over the top of them.
And perform the fluotomy according to the transverse direction along a slight incision, for in that place there is no flesh; and if the fluotomy is delicate, then only a small part of its extremity is cut off.
Then drain the pus as much as necessary, apply pressure on that area, tighten it for a night, and then remove the bandage.
The fluotomy of the nasal vein is effective for acute fever and severe inflammation, and for facial maladies such as migraines and redness that occur on the face, especially when they are long-standing.
And the advantage of this fluotomy is that it tightens the patient's condition, places its nose with the left hand, takes a delicate and long fluotomy along the middle part of the nasal cavity according to straightness, because the vein does not hurt here, and because the pus begins to flow shortly.
Ensure that you complete the flebotomy slowly with your hand and let the blood flow according to your need; then apply pressure for a night, as it is more easily restored.
The application of the flebotomy to both sides should be done with caution, starting with contraction of the vein and beginning of the healing process, as well as addressing other diseases, pain, and aggressive or bad corrosive ulcers.
And the quality of the flebotomy on those is that the disease tightens them in each part with adhesion; and the practitioner should be over the head of the patient, and the patient should lie on their side.
Then, carefully perform the flebotomy on the vein with an ample and gradual cut; extract the blood according to the season or as much as necessary; and then close it similar to the other vein.
And then clean the ligament, tighten both veins with a moderate strain so that the illness does not spread, and place it within the bandage where the plague has healed.
And regarding the healing of phlebotomy of the veins, it corresponds to small aphthas and pustules in the mouth, and the corruption of the gums, and bad ulcers and fissures, as well as bad ulcers that are in the nose and around the anus.
And the quality of phlebotomy for these is to cease the illness in front of you, tighten the neck of it with a bandage, then turn back the lips of it and inspect two veins, of which one is on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; and the indication of each is by the darkness of both, and this is because there are small black veins in their circumference; and then cut each through with a sharp incision.
If there is doubt left, and you do not know which one it is, then you begin with the incision of the most prominent one, and the most obvious pus among them.
And make it seem like the two veins that are on their lips.
If both veins that are on the tongue are left, then phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is performed at the preferences that are in the gullet, to the malady of the uvula, and to maladies of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomy of those is that it follows the malady among your teeth in front of the sun, raises the tongue, and watches for the veins from one side of the tongue and the other, and the color of each tends towards blackness.
And then make incisions on each one; and be careful not to finish cutting with the knife on those arteries.
And your veins that are fleubotomized in the thigh are those through which blood usually flows in all men. The fleubotomy of them is made according to two methods, either by using a syringe with mild pressure or a delicate olive, or using a cutting knife; it is called 'lessing' if it is done gently, and this is its form:
both the width of it as you go deeper, and it is suitable for opening the concave veins that are full, proceeding from those that contain thick clots.
And this phlebotomy is of smaller circumference and more subtle extremities, suitable for phlebotomy of small veins containing subtle, acute blood.
However, be cautious with phlebotomy of the basil vein, one of three veins, as it removes blood from the brain and heart, and thus can affect the legs and abdomen.
And it is important for the phlebotomist, when performing this phlebotomy, to guard carefully and be cautious in that area, as it has an artery, and if he makes a mistake and adjusts the puncturing of the phlebotomy, he will incise that artery and cause bleeding of blood, so it is necessary not to phlebotomize that area with a sharp phlebotomy instrument, but rather to cut it gently.
And if the causative factor does not appear through a clear manifestation, you must recognize that you should leave that and move to another, or seek some root in its place; or cut into it at the end of the arm, as it is manifest; and then secse that by fleubotomy as we have said.
If you decide to perform fleubotomy on the middle part of the arm, first recognize the tightness in the arm where you feel the location between the wrist and the elbow, then place your hand over it; bend the arm close to the body and cut into the vein with a concave incision as we have said; also be careful not to hit the artery in any space of the area.
And when you feel, with tension in the ligament, an inflation in the place that you have marked with your hand, then that inflammation is inflammation of the artery; therefore avoid that one.
And if you feel the blood flow in fleubotomy as with a pinprick, and the pain is subtle, then know that it is from arterial blood; now tie and stop the vessel for a long time; if the bleeding stops because it has been severed, then tighten the bandage and leave it.
And watch the patient from the discharge of urine, and be very careful of them and do not disturb them for some days until they are healed.
If the stone cannot be dislodged and you are not presenting any medical treatment to it, then you cut into the artery if it appears to you; for the end of the stone is contracted and the stone is dislodged; or take a piece of lemon and make that burn, and do as follows: take an equal amount and tighten it over the place of the vein with tape and poultice within the next day.
And if the stone is dislodged, it is good; and if not, treat that with the water as mentioned previously to remember the place of the powder from which the stone was dislodged.
And the removal of the stone from him is difficult due to the disposition of the location of the pain and the possibility of ligament in the arm.
Regarding the dark vein, the flebotomy is useful to extract the blood from the upper part of the head and leave it from the lower parts of the body; for this reason, it is composed of branches of the basilic and branches of the cephalic, as we have said.
And be wary of the flebotomist if he is timid about performing a flebotomy, because there is a nerve involved; then, upon finding the nerve during the puncturing for the flebotomy, a stupor will occur, and it will be difficult for him to heal, and some parts may not recover fully. This nerve causes movement in sensation; if it is hidden in some men and is subtle and not visible, you must pause and consider where you are performing the flebotomy with your force, and avoid damaging the nerve.
If the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein along its length.
The advantage of the flebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it extracts blood from the head and provides relief to illnesses of the feet.
And in this case, if you want to perform a phlebotomy with olive oil or myrtle oil, be sure to choose the vein carefully, as it is the safest of all veins, without leaving any arteries or nerves.
However, in some cases, the pain may be so intense that it is difficult to perform a phlebotomy in the first strike; in these cases, do not pay attention to the pain again.
The first sentence translated into English is: "The first [aspect] of which you should know that phlebotomy is not administered except for the preservation of health and in hope of relief and to prevent the occurrence of illnesses; phlebotomy is performed on one of the veins located in the elbow, specifically: cephalic, superficial, and basilic; it is done at the beginning of spring, after breakfast during spring and autumn, and in winter, when signs of replenishment appear.
And phlebotomy should be performed on the third day or, if it's the first time, after three hours passed from the beginning of the day.
Phlebotomy may be performed when it proves convenient and necessary, day or night, at any time and in any hour.
And it should be noted that phlebotomy is not performed on children under 13 years of age, women who are pregnant should not undergo phlebotomy unless necessary after the fourth month and up to the seventh, and the elderly, those who have already passed 60 years, are generally not subjected to phlebotomy.
And if anyone wishes to be freed from some condition in any way, he should cleanse his internal organs before the procedure with a lion's enema, if there is a great gap retained therein, so that the veins do not throw off the excess fluid during the fleubotomy of the purified organs, which are vital, and they do not affect the primary members.
And patients should not undergo fleubotomy without sacred knowledge and abstinence from food and drink, nor should they escape from ill health or madness until this is remedied; neither should it be performed on those with hydroptic maladies, or when there is a risk of colic, vomiting, abdominal pain, frequent urination, excessive work, exercise during meals or vigils, or any cause that debilitates the body, whether human or animal.
And it is also important to consider the subtle balance of humors in relation to this: if the spleen is large due to excessive eating and drinking, or because of medicinal treatments, if it is possible to address this through diet and medicine.
And then immerse yourself in a bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or some exercise for the purpose of relieving the pain.
And stop the bleeding of the patient in the foot at around the third hour of the day, as we have said.
And pierce that foot which is affected on that day from all animal misfortunes, as when there is tightness, anger, fear, and from all corporal accidents, as when there is excessive work or suffering, or any similar condition.
And at his side, let the causes be present of which the usual pain of men is aromatic, perfumed, and balmy, and similar to those according to the amount of possibility.
And follow the fleubotomy instrument over another cushion that is pus than the one of the patient who was to be fleubotomized.
And then extract the arm, and with your hand, massage the flebotomator two or three times; and tighten the ligament with a strap and wrap it two times.
And if the constriction is temperate, that is, not too much or too little, then it prevents the flow of blood; but if it is for relaxation and softening, then it prevents the complete cessation of blood flow.
And then apply the constriction, making sure that whoever has been flebotomized rubs their hands together between each other until the veins are inflated and visible to the touch.
And then the flebotomist should apply a small amount of ancient oil to their flebotomy point; and place their left hand's digit on the vein, leaving the location for the flebotomy, so that the vein protrudes slightly, and the pressure is released because veins must be struck while they are expanding due to blood flow, and from those that are full of air and when you stop the flebotomy over that one, it contracts towards the flebotomy point, and the flebotomist has completed their task; and do not let the flebotomy open the vein, and if it does, that vein will become constricted.
And therefore, for this reason, the flebotomist should be stopped and engaged in all these causes.
And then, after the flebotomy, if the vein is swollen at once, it is not good; but otherwise, you repeat this another time, leaving that place a little, or applying heat to it, if the location is not apt for cauterization.
If the location is apt for cauterization or the illness subsides, then leave it for a day or two, and do not strain the ligament, as strong heat from the cautery will cause further inflammation, nor should you immerse it in water.
And then repeat the flebotomy if necessary.
And if the opening is small and little blood flows, and you fear that it will not be enough, then repeat the flebotomy on that place according to its rectitude, and adjust the opening a little, and apply heat to it before cauterization, because the location is apt for cauterization in most cases where little openings are necessary.
It may be marked with a red spot, but do not pay attention to it, as it offers no clue; apply some oil to any part of the wound, as it soothes the body's suffering. And it is better at this site than oil or other oils.
And it seems that the application of oil is essential in all phlebotomy procedures where veins must be drained to prevent body corruption, and this becomes a remedy and a sign of wisdom when, upon stopping one of those on that site, the corruption is absorbed and turned back when it becomes thick.
And if a large abscess is formed at the site of phlebotomy due to various causes, especially when it is not stopped by bleeding but rather by cauterization, or in the perception of a small vein, and then you apply, and press on the spot with a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly heated, for an hour, as it dissolves.
And then, he should make sure to do this immediately after the extraction of the blood from that vein or another.
And if after some days a blackness or greenish color appears, do not take notice of it; and if you wish, apply some cause of aloe or myrrh mixed together, or some cause of mint juice or warmth or similar to that.
And often, accidents occur, requiring flebotomy of the basilic vein.
And therefore place your hand on that, and if you feel hardness, your compression should be on that; then that eminence is bad and harmful; and thus beware of placing your hand on any cause of what we have said, for strong blood flows from the sanitarian artery.
And make an embroidery on that where there is stiffness, so that the place becomes hardened, and then take care of that along with the other treatment until it is healed.
And take care to extract the blood from everyone according to the amount of their virtue and according to the color that appears on the surface of the wound.
If the wound is black, leave it to fester until it becomes rogue; similarly, if it appears thick, leave it until it becomes subtle; and if it is acute, until its sharpness diminishes.
And be careful with those who are full and strong and require blood extraction at once; in this case, enlarge the incision of the vein and make the flebotomies wider.
And for those who are weak, do the opposite; extract it in several stages and make the incision tight.
The best way to perform a vein flebotomy is to make a transverse section, not a puncture.
And this manner of phlebotomy avoids the flow of blood and the incision of nerves, and it is more laudable and safer than phlebotomy according to latitude and length.
And to which syncope is usually incident phlebotomy, and if you cure that before phlebotomy with a little wine infused in water or simple oxymel scalded; and extract it from the blood in three or four strokes.
And if there is a chill from the complexion, then take before phlebotomy wine infused in essences of myrrh or honey scented with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar, or in fragrant and strongly-scented essence.
And if syncope occurs after phlebotomy and it is caused by excessive blood loss, then take in a drink of beef blood mixed with fragrant essence; and use the aromatics such as alga (a herb?) and soothe your foot at that place.
And use other causes as mentioned in the division in the chapter on fainting for evacuation.
And here he should extend his arm and dissolve the hematoma again, focusing on the part from which flebotomy is most effective for evacuation, and its virtue is cold, which evacuates the small hematoma little by little, according to the amount of virtue in the continuous days.
If one wishes to extend their arm and dissolve the hematoma a second time, and their body is strong, then do this about seven or nine hours after the first flebotomy.
One who wishes to throw the hematoma from their body in the opposite direction of its decline, should make it be dissolved on the second or third day.
A person whose body has a great amount of already hardened and acute hematoma, causing fever, should have the hematoma removed in one go, with a considerable quantity being evacuated, and the perception amplified until fainting occurs, since you will have preserved all the conditions of flebotomy; and you must place your hand on the area of the hematoma to prevent death from fainting, as repeated attempts by an inexperienced or negligent flebotomist should be avoided.
And do not cover when you want to dislodge the arm and expel the blood a second time, if the orifice of the vein is already closed and it becomes difficult to draw out the blood, press down on that part with great force and gently bend it slightly, for this is too painful.
Habitize the layssa (bandage) around it as a second flebotomies; or, if this is not possible, use the sharpness of the flebotomy to coagulate the blood in the vein's orifice; or place a piece of turpentine or sage over it, and apply gentle compression until the blood has drained.
And if the vein is infected, bandage it and do not touch it until the infection has subsided.
And if it becomes necessary to evacuate the blood a second time, and there is no excuse, you may bleed them on that spot or on the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called the "funnel of the arm" is punctured in place of the fistula or basilica when they are not found or are obscured, as it is composed of those parts.
And the quality of the vein puncture is that the patient inserts their hand into the water until the wound turns red and the vein appears clearly.
Then apply pressure to that loosened connection with a strict bandage; and puncture the vein according to the transverse cut, not longitudinally or laterally.
And the incision should be wide, and your vein puncture should be such that you puncture it over the joint of the hand a little.
And if the flow of blood is blocked, insert your hand into the water and hold it there until you succeed in achieving your need, preventing the blood from running in the water.
If you were in the summer days, then you are excused from the hand's motion in cold water, and in winter, the body of the soul is most at rest in cold water during the time of yearn.
And the laceration of this vein is considered safer than all other veins, because it has no pulsating blood or nerves.
And the laceration of the saphenous vein on the right hand is suitable for treating liver ailments.
And the quality of the laceration is that you tighten your hand with force or on your own, since you have placed it in cold water, as long as the vein is swollen and clearly visible to the eye; then lacerate that one transversely; and if you pierce that one from top to bottom, it will not be of any use.
And be careful not to end the fluctation with the flail botom, for it leaves the nerves of that completely denuded flesh exposed.
Then repeat the hand movement in the water tail and let the blood flow through that, for if you do not repeat those movements in the water tail, the clot will be solidified in the orifice of the vein, and it is forbidden to flow.
And once the clot is extracted according to the amount needed, you should place your hand over the vein with oil and salt, so that it is not solidified suddenly; and carefully ensure that you do this in every narrow space.
But the youth of the flail botomy of that with your left hand, it is appropriate for the ailments of the chest.
And do the same with the flail botomy of him as you have done with the other.
And the treatment of the superficial vein of phlebotomy is for maladies that are left in the extremities of the body, as well as for illnesses of the heart, and to retain menstruation, and for maladies of old varicose veins and ulcers in the thighs and legs, and similar ailments.
And the quality of phlebotomy on him is that the illness immerses its foot in water, causing friction until the veins appear; and it is applied over the joint of the foot with a belt; and the position of the vein is then marked after the pus has been drained, and from there it branches out towards the surface of the foot in many directions.
And therefore, drain the pus widely from the vein, leaving the hernia below the foot, after its elevation, for it is better and more salutary.
And if you perform phlebotomy on the surface of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are left underneath the skin of the foot, and place your phlebotomy tool at an angle, as if you wanted to incise it.
And make the bloodletting successful.
If it is forbidden to raise the leg, then you should immerse the foot in warm water and let the blood flow out until it is evacuated.
And if the phlebotomist makes a mistake on the first attempt, then he should repeat the phlebotomy in another place, since the spot is clean; and do not fear any harm from it, but be careful of the nerves as we have said.
And do the same for the other foot equally.
And for the sciatic vein, the spot as we have said is below the knee at the entrance of the wild branch.
And the purpose of the phlebotomy on him is to relieve hip pain when it is caused by blood stagnation.
And the technique of phlebotomy in this case is that the disease enters the veins, and quickly and tightly draws out the blood from the thigh on both sides, using a long, thin bandage, so that it only appears through this means.
And therefore, when it appears, you perform phlebotomy on that part according to each method that is within your ability and according to the direction, and it is better; either incise it with an incision or sec it with a section, because the location of the disease is hot.
And it is in many people very painful; and if you find it, and it does not appear in the sensation of all, perform phlebotomy on one branch of the disease, and that is the one that appears on the back of the foot instead of the little toe and the ring finger.
And pay attention to the nerves, and let the blood flow from the wound as much as you want.
And then carefully dislodge the tightness and press upon the site of the flebotomy, tightly securing the place, as it is said to be salutary.
Of ventilation and the qualities of use of those.
Ventilators are of three types: of horns, or of glass, or of metal.
And ventilation is achieved according to two manners: one of them is through lancing and draining of pus, and the other is through ventilation without lancing.
And this ventilation through lancing is according to two manners, either with fire or without fire.
And the ventilators that are administered through lancing and draining of pus are twelve places in the body, of which one is where ventilation is paused, and it is the last opening in the head; and two openings from each side of the nape; and ventilators under the jaw, leaving the mandible below the mouth; and ventilators of two blades; and ventilators of two holes, and they are each two cubits long; and ventilators of two pegs; and ventilators of two cushions.
And the extraction of the sanies should not be from small veins scattered in the flesh, and thus does not catch the virtue through them, as is the case with phlebotomy; nor should it be covered that ventozacio (venisectomy) be done with fire or heat in any disease caused by congestion within until the body is entirely evacuated.
If it is necessary to cause venisectomy for illness or continuously, we should do so at the beginning and end of the month, in its middle part, and at any time suitable for it.
And therefore when it occurs for any reason among those, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, they command ventilation to be done rather than waiting two or three hours past the day.
The immediate relief from ventilation of the neck is that when it alleviates pressure on the head and what sinks into the holes; it is more effective than anything else in evacuating all the body.
And this ventilation is at the site of phlebotomy of the head.
And it is not advisable to use that which is of cold and wet nature, or where catarrh is present, as it causes great harm.
And for this reason, one should not use those herbs, especially in the cases of hardened pain in the joints and on the tops of which hardships are present.
May it be done to him who is lying on his side that he experiences relief; and for this reason you must command the bellows operator to place his hand gently over the suction points, lest there be a loss of the generated relief.
The use of the bellows over the chest (pulmonic) area is instead of phlebotomy of the superficial vein and basilic: and thus it confers relief to asthma, and to the constriction of the airways and the cutting of the muscle of the chest, and to coughing, and to congestion.
And it is necessary that the bellows over the chest be gently moved, for if it is suddenly stopped, it generates weakness in the body and stomach.
And the bellows over the head confers relief to accidental pains in the head and ophthalmia, and migraines, and pressure, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is instead of phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
And be sure to instruct the fan (or attendant) not to press their hand during the scraping so as not to puncture the artery and cause bleeding.
And the ventilation of the mouth is done by applying alcohol to it, and for the corruption (or inflammation) of the gums, and for conditions resembling those in the mouth, which are in place of phlebotomy with leech saliva, that is applied between the two lips.
But the ventilation that is done on both plates gives a heat cap, which is made by replacing with warmth.
And the ventilation of both parts inside the cavities gives an effect similar to phlebotomy of three veins, namely the basilic, femoral and cephalic veins; these attract the blood from all those manually accessible veins and also from the smaller veins connected to the larger ones, so as to achieve an attraction to the three mentioned veins.
And instruct the bellows-man not to overdo the scarification, for the place is denuded of flesh, leaving only nerves and arteries.
And it is a bellows used to blow over the anus and apply to hemorrhoids in the rear end and to pus ulcers left behind.
And you should instruct the bellows-man to use a strong bellows, made of iron, for the place needs a firm section; and its delicate blows cut deeply and it is scarified with scarification.
The bellows from the legs should be reduced in size gradually, for they draw the blood from all parts of the body, and alleviate old pains from varicose veins and the bladder; and they induce menstruation, and relieve cough and shortness of breath; and they take the place of phlebotomy for two veins, and of the cataplasm and the hot compress, and for two nails.
However, these weaknesses exhaust the body and cause fainting in many men.
And from the openings (or vents) of the loins, the healing is proper to the healing of the vents of both legs.
And the quality of the position of the vents is that it pauses the vent at the beginning of the wound and sucks by moderate suction, and does not prolong the position of the vents, but rather gently releases them, and retains those tightly, and allows the humors to come to the place due to equalization. And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the place turn red and swell, and the pain of the wound appears.
Then make incisions and repeat the suction gradually, and consider the condition of the body.
For that man whose flesh is tender from old age, be sure to make an incision once and not again, so as not to ulcerate the area.
And command the windbag to increase the incision depth slightly, and apply suction with facility.
And if the swelling in the sanction is great, then you must make two incisions, for the first incision opens the way for drainage of the swelling and its fluid. Make the second incision to the acquired scrutiny of the extraction of the large sanction.
And if the sanction is very foul-smelling, then make a third incision for the final extraction.
Finally, when we wish to extract the sanction little by little or in small parts, it suffices for us to make an incision.
And if we wish to extract a hard stone, we perform a thorough incision; and if we know that the stone is large, then we must make an incision deep enough.
And the term "scarification" refers solely to the depth of the cut.
And if the stone is large, hard, dense, and its pores are very tight, then the places where the suckers are applied should be softened, opened, and resolved; if it is in summer, use oil of aloe or violet, or pressed oil of almonds, or oil of chamomile; and if it is in winter, use butter, or oil of lilies, or camomile, or ginger, similar substances.
And if the excess is thick, sticky, then use oil of amber, or balsamic oil, or aloe oil, or oil of anise, and similar substances.
If the leech is of ample size and has tender flesh, then it must be forbidden from oil; and to these places where leeches are applied, the leeching should be done with lukewarm water or with water mixed with salt, or with water from a cistern, or with water from a vine, and similar substances.
And that one whose leech has a moist sanction, washes its leeches in wine or in water mixed with myrtle and sumac and similar substances.
And for that one whose excesses are heavy, wash the leeches in old wine, or in water mixed with fennel, which is majoran, or from the distillation of anise, or chamomile, and similar substances.
And take care that the leeching be protected from baths; because it is necessary that it be administered immediately before or after a bath for an hour or two, and take care that the leech rests near the area being treated.
What is it that must be done to regulate the flow of blood after phlebotomy before venesection?
When beginning the treatment: if the phlebotomist or the one who took the blood is irritable and has hot and inflamed Sanch (a traditional medicine made from plant extracts), then take care to provide causes of cooling, such as with milky acid, and in case of swelling, use fennel, laurel, and similar plants.
And interrupt their diet with light foods such as bread, lean meats, preserved foods with spices, and similar things.
And for those whose condition is fierce, take care to give them warm beer with aniseed or cannabis seed, sumac, and a mild wine; and recommend that they consume little food and drink, avoid light foods like chicken and duck, and eat fewer small birds and pigeons.
And during the day of ventilation and phlebotomy, the patient should take more liquids than food.
It is advisable to give some men a light diuretic such as alfaraca or musk, with a taste of nutmeg, before ventilation or phlebotomy, or immediately after, so that the principal members are comforted and the pain is alleviated; and one should not take those harsh remedies.
One should not perform ventilation on the areas that are subject to sudden blood loss, such as the liver, the surface of the foot, gout, and the umbilic, except in cases of excessive swelling, since these members do not tolerate scarification.
And it is not desirable for these purposes other than to attract the pain from a member, thus performing a pause in ventilation on the breast in cases of flux of blood from nasal sinus; and they use this so that the swelling is loosened deep within the member, just as one performs a pause on the abdomen and the umbilic; because it rarefies the member, it scalps it, and eases the pain as it resolves the swelling.
And it is now placed over the ulcers when they occur in their pressure or position, for by virtue of strong attraction it improves the pressure and eradicates the pus from its place.
And it seems to be as if it is placed over the liver and gallbladder, requiring ventilation in those enclosed spaces.
And these ventilations are administered using suction, as much as possible; and sometimes they are administered with fire.
And sometimes they are administered full of heated water in the liver ailments.
And this is for the ventilation to be filled and for great pus to form, it is only heated water or water in which suitable herbs are soaked.
The form of a wound dressing over fire: the size of the opening should be two fingers wide, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the filling should be the amount of a palm; and in the length of it, in the place that is on the perimeter, half of it, the drainage should be small according to the quantity that fits into it with an needle.
Use erings or lemons, with thick margins, lions, eagles and turtles to prevent them from damaging the member in its position over it.
And the middle of it should have a transverse groove of iron or ering, where a candle is placed over fire.
This dressing is significantly larger than the one we have previously discussed, and its size may vary according to the illness and the condition of the patient using it.
And the cups for children and the exhausted should be different from those for young people and those with strong bodies.
And the method of stopping this pain with fire on the member is to hold the flame of a well-prepared fire over a small piece of candle wax, and place it on the middle of the transverse blade at the exact spot of the pain, so that the fire surrounds the area without burning the patient's body.
After stopping the pain in the patient's member as previously described, and while holding the said position, if we have the gouty inflammations and they do not resist this treatment, the vapor will soon dissolve the inflammation.
Then adjust the flame according to your preference, and repeat the process if needed.
It is also possible to use a bellows in the treatment of pleurisy, with water instead of fire, where there is no transverse blade or point, and it is only filled with water and placed over the member without applying heat.
And this is the form of it: And this bellows, the larger it is, the better, because it can receive a great quantity of water.
Chapter .xcvii.
Bloodletting is not administered in most members but in those members where it is not possible to place bellows, due to their smallness, as well as the nose and similar parts; or in a member devoid of flesh, as in the case of the nose and its surroundings.
And the quality of using those that you have found bloodletting instruments in the infected waters of open wounds.
And it is appropriate to lay them in infected water during the day and night until they are painless, and do not cause any harm in the belly of those affected; and evacuate the body at the beginning with phlebotomy and bellows; and rub the patient's member until it turns red; and then place a cushion on top.
And when they are filled and bound.
And if it is possible to drain the area with an abscess, it is more beneficial in youth.
If not, wash the area with vinegar and then apply plenty of hot water; and it should be frothed and squeezed.
And if the fever of the illness persists and there is discharge from the veins, then you should immerse a cloth in hot water, and place it on top until the discharge stops.
And if the fever increases, sprinkle on it vitriol mixed with salt, or similar substances like those used for stopping bleeding, as long as the fever is drained; or place over the area dried beans, and leave them until the beans stick to the site, and the fever is drained.
And if, it being necessary, bloodletting be performed, change the leeches when possible.
And if bloodletting is prohibited, the place should be rubbed with a hot cloth or a needle should be inserted into the area until it bleeds; then they should be stopped, because when the pain diminishes, bleeding will cease.
And when you wish them to open, sprinkle some aloe, salt, or ash over it and catch it immediately.
Thus begins the process of healing from the third stage: restoration. This chapter is mentioned frequently in medical texts; it deals with the restoration of fractured and dislocated bones.
Oh, my child, know that those who boast of this chapter are foolish doctors and common people, and those who at any time have not studied the books of the Ancients nor read a single letter from them.
And for this reason, it is believed that this method of science in our land is neglected; and you should never forget this at any time; and I have not devoted myself to this later on, except due to the length of reading ancient books and studying the understanding of those times, so as to extract knowledge from them.
And I have devoted myself to experimentation and study throughout the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that my science encompasses and on which my experience is based; so that you may understand it concisely and be spared the trouble of elaboration; and I have abbreviated it at the end of explanation; and I have demonstrated it at the conclusion of declaration; and I have outlined in it forms of the instruments that are administered there, by adding to the explanation, as I have done in two preceding chapters.
First Chapter.
The ultimate compendiums and collections from the existence of bone fractures, of those which must be mentioned before we begin the remembrance of wounded members and the various states of each. Therefore, let us state in the preface of this chapter the summaries of the discourse; and the chapters to those who understand them at the beginning, the artificer is compelled and must stop on the truth of those; it is you and those who are quick to know or learn this noble art from others like you.
And therefore, it is said that when you encounter a fracture, dislocation, torsion or displacement of any part, you must immediately consider starting with bloodletting or removing the affected limb, or in some instances, if no other cause prohibits, use cauterization as a treatment, or as the case presents itself, or whether it be weak from age, or is in a state of decrepitude, or it's time for a violent heat, or violent friction.
And then, it is sufficient in its diet with herbs that are bitter and lean meats and crabs; and prohibits fatty meats and foods that fill the veins of the body, as long as you are careful to avoid gangrene, and if you do not fear the effusion of material into the member.
And then return the patient to their original condition, by which they are usually corrected.
And as the broken bone begins to be restored, you should know that the hernia should be fed with nourishing foods rich in fat and heavy in substance, such as bread cooked with water, rice, beans, meat, veal, fresh fish, and similar foods, and according to this regimen, a coagulation of the fracture will take place more lightly and better.
And know that the bones in the legs of old men or those who are withered cannot be continued and consolidated according to their nature due to the shrinkage of their limbs.
Nature nevertheless adjusts and amends the broken bone from any cause resembling gout in which there is inflammation that adheres and strengthens, until it becomes hardened and glued together, until the end of strength and firmness, as with fire at the beginning, unless some cause does not prevent its actions.
And for this reason, it is necessary to restrict the diet of the patient, food that has weight and viscosity and bulk, as we have said.
And you should know that the kinds of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of members, for the fracture of the bone of the leg is different from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the arm; and similarly, all other members differ among themselves.
And now I recall all kinds of fractures, explained in their respective chapters separately.
A great variety of fractures lie within itself. And there are various species of bone fractures in themselves; for some are curved fractures or those that occur in them stars; and sometimes it is a fracture according to the length of the bone: these are stage and stellate fractures, and others proceeding and not proceeding, as is done in the case when it is prepared to write, and fracture by plague and dislocation in the head, and small fissure fracture.
And every species has its own peculiarity or torment in restoration according to the distinct recollection of its place.
A clear sign of bone fracture. And this is how it translates: "And for this reason is known the fracture of the bone: its deformity, and that prominence and sensation of it when you compress it with your hand.
And therefore, if there is no deformity in the location nor is any pain felt when touching the bone due to its movement, then it is not a fracture, even though the illness may not cause much pain.
It is possible that it is a deformity or a small fracture, where you do not feel any pain when pressing with your hand, and then there is a sensation of pain due to compression; at this point, apply remedies of which you remember appropriate ones for the location; and make them tight for subtle constriction.
And you know that the location where it is curved and not split into two or anything else that does not happen in stages, when the whole part of its comparison is disturbed, then you must begin from your hour to correct it with caution after it has occurred.
And if it occurs that the abscess is severe, leave it for a few days until the abscess ceases; then dress it in any manner you can using light and clever techniques.
And know that the restoration of the intestine and the stitching of it is lighter than the operation on bones where the damage occurs.
Then strengthen it according to the recollection of the intestines.
If there are severe fractures in the bones, it is necessary to extend this broken member from both ends, whether it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two ligatures or one ligature and your hand.
And position the member as it was naturally before, while the fractures are extended in the broken member; then perforate to ensure those additions return to their proper places, using any manner of clever techniques you can.
And take care, according to your strength, that you do not cause harm to the patient through your operation, and pierce yourself according to your ability, applying heat or cold as is best for each case.
And make sure that at that opportune moment you apply your hand to it, and if you notice any different cause, correct that and suppress it with the amount of your virtue.
And avoid violent stretching and compression, as foolish doctors often cause abscesses with their operations, or contracture in the member, as we have seen this happen from their operations on their patients.
And the quality of the constriction of the limb at rest is what you should consider, because you must know that the broken limbs differ in their fragility, and in their size, and in the shape of those.
And of those that are small like the arm and the wrist and similar to those, you should understand that the envelopment should be with very thin cloth.
For those that are thick like the thigh or the leg, you should understand that there must be a complete and hard envelopment, for the lateral bandage connects the large member and tightens it from every side, so that nothing interferes with it.
And then begin, properly position your evacuation of the equilibrium, applying appropriate pressure to it over the site of that fracture with three or four wraps depending on the member; and tighten your hand slightly with the bandage.
And then I observe that at the beginning of the fracture site, there is more swelling, so tighten your hold on it to prevent further movement in the fractured area. Then I gradually stretch the wrapping around the fracture site and slowly ease up on the tightness, so as to open up the space at the site little by little.
Then I take another bandage and wrap it around the twisted area, covering the previous wrappings; and observe the openings left by the fracture, both on top of and below it. Your operation should be on the tightness of the new wrappings and in softening them as we have said about the initial wrappings above.
Then I place a stop or cloth between the wraps to accommodate any curvature in the fracture, if there is one; otherwise, do not place anything in it for no reason.
And then place your hand over the other part, and cover these neatly arranged sterile bandages over it, if there is no inflammation or abscess in the area, and press on what has the abscess and reduces the inflammation; leave that for a few days, and then tighten the bandages.
And the bandages should be of different types of canvas, carefully made; or of wooden splints; or of palm leaves; and their width should be according to this form and figure.
However, remember that the bandage placed over the fracture should be thicker and longer than the others, and its length according to the measurement of the member in size and smallness; then tighten the bandages over the other part as per your initial structure; and then arrange them properly over it as we have said regarding the structure, and it should be according to your structure, especially in the location of the fracture, and the longer it extends from the fracture, the less the tension.
And it is necessary that the threads be strong in thickness and fineness, and are numerous; if the threads are thick, as you have seen in some operations where the thread of the cord is knotted, it is a great mistake when tightness is not uniform.
Indeed, very thin threads are not suitable, for you will not be able to achieve the desired tightness with them, and it will not be possible to fit a thread between two fingers smaller than a finger itself.
If the patient's condition is aggravated by stiffness in the joints, then apply tightness at those places, placing a pad of leon (wool) or twisted flax between them to prevent any injury.
Sometimes the fracture is as a plague, causing disruption in the chain, and it comes to mind again in those who study it according to its specific features.
And you should know that a whole limb that is broken does not allow the application of a splint on the first day; this is because when the limb is large, it cannot be covered by a splint until several days have passed, or perhaps seven or ten, depending on your certainty of preventing an abscess from forming.
And this is the manner of the splints used by the ancients to restore, which are placed over fractures and dislocations and twists.
Method of splinting as a quick way to restore a fracture, especially suitable for complex cases and primarily for women and children, because it is something over which heat or friction should not pass: and you take flour dust, the core of the flour that prevents the movement of the millstone against the walls of the mill.
And if that is not sufficient, then take a thin and soft cloth, and form it into a not too thick or subtle construction, and use that instead.
Another method of plastering for repairing fractures, dislocations, and twists: prepare assafetida, labdanum, acacia, enula, and myrrh, all grounded from dragon's blood, mirra, and aloe, each in equal parts; mix them with licorice water or egg albumen if the patient's wound is fresh; apply this plaster, for it is of good composition and gently restores broken bones, and it benefits most people.
Another plastering method that aids in fractures and twists: prepare mallow and white alder, each from dragon's blood, 10 parts; myrrh and aloe, each 5 parts; acacia, 6 parts; and Armenian bole, 20 parts.
All these ingredients should be mixed in a mortar with a strong base, and combined, applied to the affected area, or taken with water or egg albumen and administered.
Method of plastering and separating joints and bones from their locations; this causes an accidental pain in those and in cracks and fractures: take fine wool, submerge it in hot wine and oil, and place it over the affected area.
This plaster is not only without restorative power but also cauterizes and expels pain effectively.
Another method of plastering that restores closed bones: take dry fig leaves and poppy leaves, mix them all together and make a plaster from them.
Method of a quick plaster administered for the restoration of broken bones and when you desire a resolution from an abscess: take root of althae, camomile flowers, violet flowers, whole meal flour, all finely ground; mix them with hot wine, if the member is not scorched.
If it is scorched, then apply that to the affected area with cold water from mint or cold water and use it.
Another method of applying a poultice for stronger resolution than the first mentioned, when there is a hard abscess, is to prepare a mixture of fennel root and seeds, dill, lovage, melilot, majorana, violet flowers, chamomile, and any other herbs; all should be crushed and steeped in sage or rosewater or vinegar according to the condition of the member and the color of the wound.
However, Hippocrates does not state in his book that it should be placed over the affected member before its restoration unless it is done with wax and oil, and for no other reason; he recommends that it should be between thickness and thinness.
A snake may be placed over the broken member after its restoration and for the causes of its withering, just as myrrh, onions, and similar herbs are used for similar conditions.
A method of applying a plaster for injury and pain: take equal parts of rye flour, wool from sheep's skin or goose feathers, and salt, mix them well, grind them and strain them, then make the plaster.
The amount should be adjusted according to the extent of the inflammation and, if it is not painful or causing pressure, or if the bone is not broken, it is not advisable to dislocate it; in such cases, you should not force any movement for several days. However, if pain, pressure, or inflammation occurs at the site, you should immediately remove the plaster or splint and rest the affected area.
Take a piece of linen and sponge from the sea, soak it in hot water, and apply it to the area until the pressure and pain are relieved; then let the member rest for an hour. Next, place over it clean wool soaked in warm vinegar and oil or rose oil, and cover with a cloth for a night, ensuring there is no infection and that the swelling in the member has subsided, and the pain is eased.
And then repeat that delicate stricture, applying a small plaster and not straining it with your initial tightness, but gently pressing it until it heals.
And if the abscess, swelling, pain, and inflammation, and all other symptoms have subsided, and you feel a need for a plaster and additional tightness, then repeat that process as you did at the beginning.
And if no such cause occurs in the member as we have mentioned, then do not remove it for three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes everything is left for twenty days, according to your judgment, due to the loosening of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and it approaches the coagulation of the flesh over that.
And then adjust the tightness more than your initial tightness, and regulate the quantity of food for the patient, according to the recall of their condition.
If you find the location of the fracture already cleaned and prepared but not covered, then know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching it; so embrocate that area with hot water several times daily for three days; slightly ease the tension, and through this operation direct the nourishment to the member, and it will be healed gradually.
But here's what the foolish restorers of a member fracture do differently when they don't cover it properly and restore it according to its curvature, which is an error in their operation, causing great fear; if it were a skilled surgeon, he would open up the area and heal it.
And you have seen none of them do this, so it is all the more reasonable that they should not do it.
**Chapter 2: On Fractures When They Occur in the Head.**
The fragments of fractures are diverse, and their shapes vary, and the causes are distinct; some fractures are caused by the impact of a blow that stops all the bones within the joint, leaving them shattered, just as it does in a club, and for this reason this type is called comminuted; or space cuts through some part of the bone, cuts through its flesh, and the incision does not pass through its posterior part; and this type of fracture is called complete dislocation.
And the complication of these two fractures is either great or small, and from fracture that involves compression or traction; and its cause is due to sudden impact or violent collision with a hard object, and they resemble each other in appearance.
And this fracture is either penetrating, approaching the pancreas and leaving the bones exposed, or it occurs on the surface of the bone; and the severity of these two fractures is either great or small.
And when it is a fracture that is damaged in the bone, at the delicate part of the hair root, and for this reason this specific type of fracture is called capillary.
This is a fracture that occurs either through an accident or the impact of a heavy object, causing some bone lamina to break off inside and resulting in a concave shape as seen in hernias when their inner layers are pushed out, and it is also caused by the sudden breaking of their entry into the depths.
This primarily occurs in the bones of children, as their bones are soft.
And for all these types of fractures, they are painful as if the stars are separated. And then, the doctor should reflect on all of this at its location.
And I have come to know all these kinds of fractures by observing them and examining their appearance and the evident corruption of flesh present on them.
And this capillary is known for what is discovered over the bone, it is washed and cleansed on it, as the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, one must consider the onset of illness and accidents, and if you examine the symptoms that indicate by their manifest signs of evil, such as vomiting from anger, extension, loss of understanding, muteness, fainting, acute fever, excretion of humors, and redness of those affected, and they resemble the symptoms in the major dispositions, then it is not a cure.
And if you detect incorrect accidents, you hope for health, then you begin the treatment of it.
The cause is that if the pain comes upon you at the beginning as it does and this happens during the winter days, then you must study the bone's exterior from the 13th day according to all dispositions.
And if it is during the summer days, then you must know that you should cut open the bone on the 7th day, after which what remains of the bone will be corrupted by pannicul, and accidents as we have mentioned will occur.
And if the fracture has already reached the pannicul covering the brain and is in small, torn pieces, then you must know that you should incise the divided and bruised part as I have mentioned before.
And it is that you cut open the patient's thigh, and discover the bone according to custom and method as possible according to the figure of the plague, and it should be lighter on the patient.
And if you are forced to detect the bone, discharge of pus or abscess cauterize it carefully, stand over it with something that covers it, and fill the area with bandages soaked in wine and rubbed oil, and let the wound rest until the abscess subsides and be certain of the flow of pus; then begin at the circumference of the bone and in the removal of it.
This is according to one of two surgical methods.
And one method is that you cut the bone with a sharp incision tool straight like this, and this is the form of it: And then administer another incision tool to this, slightly broader than that; and this is the form of it:
And then administer a broader incision tool than the second one.
And you should choose the number of incision tools necessary, some of which are broader than others; and some of them are shorter than others and are very sharp at their ends, made of iron or steel.
And use their help to facilitate the incision without damaging the head or causing harm to that person.
And if the bone is hard and dense, you must pierce it in a circular motion before applying the scalpel, which are called non-penetrating cuts.
And they are not called thus, but rather those that do not reach the end of the bone to which it is attached, so that at the cut, the tip or edge is round, not sharp, resembling a small circle or margin, which prevents it from being submerged and penetrating through the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take a great number of these cuts, each one suited to the specific nature of each bone, as long as your scalpel is sharp on all parts of the skull, with its length and brevity according to the amount of sharpness of this cut.
And this is the method for three types of treatments: When perforating the circumference of a broken bone, place the treatment over the bone and rotate it until you know that the bone is penetrated; then change the treatment to another location and apply it where it passes through all the thickness of the ray or surround it.
And then you cut with scissors what is between each part of the bone, making it thin enough to be able to place over it in a delicate manner, as we have said, until you remove the bone, or with your hand, or with any other tool that you use to press it, as well as with such thimbles and fine forceps.
And be sure to take all precautions so that the scissors do not touch any part of the healthy tissue.
And so when you have pierced the bone and it is separated from the healthy tissue if it continues to be attached, take out that fragment, carefully scrape and rub it on the roughness of the bone where it is in the other tool similar to scissors, but nevertheless be sure that it is more gentle and subtler than the others.
And if you break any part of the small or large bones, take what is most convenient to you from your tools, and then treat the wound with liniments and bandages as we have said.
And another way of operating is light, free from pain, which dissects bone and muscle with great ease; and this is the speech of it: It is necessary for you at the beginning that you begin to uncover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most violent and evident, while you have uncovered that part, and have stopped there the end of this slow and gentle cut, of which this is the form:
And the lenticular cut is round and does not cause any harm, while the acute cut is in two parts ahead in length, thus as you see; that the lenticular cut be adjusted to the shape of the face of the acute cut in the bone.
Then strike with a small hammer on the cut of a part until it is completely through the bone, while you are sure of the skin that no accident happens to you in any way, and if the medicant14 was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of their diseases; certainly, he would have been sleeping.
When a fracture occurs involving the panicle (adipose tissue) in certain parts of the bone, one should incise it with a curved scalpel at its edge, and deliver it from the body easily, as it is freed from its discomfort and pain.
If the bone fracture does not penetrate into the panicle, and what is detached or left attached to the bone is the fascia, which has asperities and subtle fibers, then you should smooth those asperities and eradicate those fibers with delicate razors that you have prepared in various quantities, so that it is possible for you to apply them in all areas the most suitable for their use and the most correct according to what you are doing during your operation on the fractured bone and its shape.
And you should administer in your reasoning with which you saw the bone at the beginning using the most sharp of those razors, and then use them on the thinnest part of it, without ceasing to do so according to continuity until you have administered the strongest and thinnest of these to all parts.
Place small capillary and delicate fractures in one of the other breaks, ensuring you administer treatment according to what you find for its rectification.
And it is because not all who have studied that art are proficient in it. And let us dwell on what he has written, having shown in great fractures.
And if the pannicle is contracted when you dislocate the bone, then take a cloth from it according to the extent of the damage, immerse it in hot oil and place it over the wound; and then take another cloth, folded or doubled, immerse it in wine and oil and place that over the first cloth, making it as loose as possible so as not to press the tissue; and then apply a latrine (or poultice), and do not tighten it unless the wound is large.
And leave this treatment for one or two days until you are certain of the abscess's safety; then remove it and administer medicines that promote dryness, such as lint, flour of herbs, powder of plants and of aristology, and similar substances.
And you should make this medicine into a powder that is sprinkled on the wound when it is dry; and generally, administer to the patient all medicines of the proper kind from which they abstain and do not bite.
And be careful according to your virtue that the wound in your treatment is clean; and do not allow any impurity such as pus or other; nor should you add violence to it; for when it is attached to the pannicle of the brain, it corrupts and kills it, and causes great evil to the patient.
And it causes harm to the head's blood vessels, as it cleanses the bones and most notably when the treatment of it is delayed, and it becomes black on its surface; and therefore consider carefully if it harms the patient the accidents that we have mentioned, knowing that it is harmful in every way.
And if a dark discoloration does not occur from the medicine applied to it, but rather because of that medicine, then you should take some honey and finely ground olive oil in equal parts, and with those lines wrap a cloth, and then place it over the affected area; and subsequently apply the curative spices that are appropriate until it is healed.
Chapter III.
On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken in two places, but rather from a combination of two bones, or one of those small ones seen, since it has two bones within it; the break occurs in the cartilage, and it is not truly broken, but rather subjected to atrophy, curvature, and sinusitis.
If one of the two parts is broken, then you should insert a small piece into its nose, and with the same instrument fix that fracture from within, and with another from without, until the nose returns to its natural shape. And do this for your ease, and be careful not to cause harm with your operation on the patient's pain.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and it does not heal towards that part, then cover it so that it is even with the edge of the rib where the swelling is greatest.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then do it like this.
And open it again to restoration in the first day of the fracture, if possible; otherwise, return the seventh or tenth day after the injury for further rest.
And insert a piece of cloth into the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part, or two pieces, if it's in two parts, and make sure the amount of cloth fills the nasal cavity.
And thus, some of the ancient remedies are that the joints should be bathed in a border of herbs, and changed throughout the day, which I have not seen; after covering the joint with albumen of chicken as a paste made from flour; then lay it until the bone is firm and the cartilage is strengthened.
And at times, they may insert something into the nose instead of a joint, due to its proximity, as it is wrapped in lion's cloth; and if you already have a fracture of the nose, painful and that malady does not prevent inspiration.
And this choice is not necessary; and if you wish, do this, and if you prefer, use joints.
And if another incident occurs with a post-operative abscess, apply a poultice to the nose with wax or a stick dipped in vinegar and warmed oil, or use a diaper.
If you do not accidentally cause an abscess, then cover it with external plaster made of sesame flour and powdered herbs mixed with egg white; and place your hand on the affected area, applying no pressure for any reason.
If you break or fracture the bones of the nose, then you must clean them and extract any fragments using appropriate instruments; and with a cut, care for it with what is necessary to heal and solidify, and apply suitable plasters.
And if an infection occurs inside the nose, then you must clean it with vapors and administer lead enemas until it is completely healed.
**Chapter .iv.**
**On the Restoration of the Mandible When Fractured.**
When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not severe, observe if the fracture is only outside, not divided into two and bent inward, then its healing will be light.
And if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left little finger into the patient's mouth; and conversely, if the fracture is on the left mandible, then insert your right little finger; and push with that the whiteness of the fracture inward to facilitate its healing outward, with your other hand from the outside of the bone's fracture. And do it equably thus.
And if the mandible fracture is already separated into two parts, then ensure that you administer extension to both parts according to their rectitude, so that their alignment may be possible.
And if there is a shock of teeth loss due to disruption, then tighten those of which you hope will heal with a thread of gold or silver or silk; and place a cerot over the broken mandible, and place a doubled cloth over it, and place a large, well-made star cloth on top, or a piece of sole leather matching the length of the mandible; and then secure it to her according to your expertise in binding her wound and the application that suits her, as long as she is not harmed.
And order the patient to rest and be at peace, and abstain from food and greedy drinks.
And if you estimate that the shape has already been altered in some way, then on the third day, you should remove and loosen what has become stuck, and correct what has been distorted by him, and apply to it a powder from wheat, or egg white, or chamomile flour, since you will have kept the bandage over him, and place upon the plaster a dragon's blood.
And having thus attached and adjusted the plaster over him, and the arrangement of the bones is not altered, leave it, unless it becomes loose while he heals and strengthens the fracture; for usually this fracture tightens up within three weeks.
And if another complication of abscess occurs, then administer what we have mentioned before in the treatment of him until he heals, and clean that abscess.
And if the fracture is a severe one, consider whether it involves a detached piece of bone or fragments, then you must be subtle in applying pressure to those fragments with what suits this case during the removal of those from the tools.
And if the wound of the fracture is narrow, then you should widen it with a flap operation according to the amount of your need.
And once you have removed those fragments, and if the wound of the fracture is not yet wide enough, then you should make it wider with the incision; otherwise, place a plaster over that one of the splints suitable for this case and bandage it, until it heals.
It appears that the text provided is a series of medical instructions in a medieval treatise, and the final line "Capitol .v." might indicate a section heading or a reference to a specific chapter or topic within the text. Without additional context or more lines from the same document, it's challenging to provide an accurate translation for this particular phrase.
On the restoration of the fork when it is bitten.
When the tendon attached to the fork breaks, it can be fractured in one of three ways.
Depending on whether it is broken, separated, or severed into two parts that do not occur simultaneously; it is more difficult to restore it; or it occurs in such a way that there are complications, making restoration difficult.
And for the operation on that fracture, when it is a severe case, you must have two assistants present, one holding the broken fork and another extending the leg at the site of the break.
Then apply the splint to the fracture in such a way that it takes the shape of the limb, without leaving any prominences or cavities.
And if you require more extension, remember to place a piece of cloth or wool between the patient's thighs, and adjust its length according to your need; then stretch and raise the fork with your hand until you feel the tension as you embrace the fracture as needed.
And if you cannot extend the end of the fork to reach the affected area, as it has reached its limit, then have the patient lie down on their back, and place a cushion over the affected muscle, half as thick as needed.
And the assistant should massage the muscle at the affected area while holding the fork's end against the bone in the joint, raising it until it aligns with the other side; then correct the fracture and stabilize it using your hands.
If you feel any stiffness in the fork and it is causing discomfort, then carefully cut away the excess material to make it more flexible.
And if it is held in the bone, you will ingeniously make an incision from one of the instruments that you have prepared for this purpose, since you had previously placed the fork, the tool used for digging, to the side; and this is the form of the instrument:
And it resembles a cup in which this is the concave shape; and its size should be according to what you have needed for it, whether it's the size of the bone or the depth of the issue.
The length of it should be according to what is possible for the operation; it should have two ends, thus, one end should be wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the plague that you have made when you extracted the fragment from the bone is wide, and it's secure from further damage, then you should adjust both edges of the wound with stitches.
And if the disruption is minor or you fear a bad infection, you will use moist drapes and poultices according to the amount of plague tissue rupture.
If an abscess forms dangerously, then insert a cloth soaked in hot oil and vinegar, and place it over the affected area.
And as long as the bone is not completely shattered; and for that reason, whenever you see the injury each day, if the ligament becomes softened or you notice the star already being re-shattered, you will correct it and tighten the bandage.
Then you should restrain the patient's sleep on their side, and each night place a small cushion beneath them to prevent their body from sinking too much; so that at that time the patient's supporters are elevated from the side of that area, and thus the fracture of the furcula is raised above the muscle; or, alternatively, the patient's arm should be lifted towards the collarbone.
And do not loosen the bandage unless it becomes too tight at the site of the injury or abscess, within 12 days.
Then you should change the dressing if you see any sign of its deterioration and adjust its tightness, restore it, and leave it until the fracture of the furcula is healed and the wound is sealed.
And it is tightened and supported according to its nature in twenty-eight days, and in some cases in some men it is done in less time than that.
**Chapter VI**
**On the Restoration of a Broken Shoulder**
The blade of the shovel is broken in its lateral part, but it is not completely shattered, only the edges are damaged.
And therefore, when the part is broken and it is broken in the middle part of its side, and it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture, you must prepare it and reduce it back to its natural position in every way with all the skill at your disposal.
Then apply a poultice of flour and honey on the broken area, and stop it with cloth; apply a layer of fine powder; and place a thin sheet of tablecloth over it according to the extent of the broken blade or a little more.
If the spine is concave in any part of the spatula, then you fill that concave space with a stopgap, and properly adjust the spine.
And then tighten it strongly over the dilated tongue with a constrictive band, maintaining the proper position of the spine until it is no longer necessary to keep it in place.
And consider the ligament each day; whenever it becomes softened, tighten it again and properly adjust the spine if it has moved from its place.
And keep an eye on the patient at their side.
And the spine will be restored in ten days or twenty-five days.
And therefore, when this period is complete, you will dissolve the ligament, and be sure that it is from among the bones whose beginnings are not feared nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed from the location of the infected bone and place a ligature there, then you cut over it, hold it, and act as we have said regarding the fracture of the rib of the snakebite wound cauterization if this should happen here.
**Capitol VII.**
**On the Restoration of a Broken Foot.**
A broken foot sometimes breaks in the middle part and tends to remain that way; its ends may be healed but the middle part remains fractured and disjointed.
And one of the dangers of this fracture is that it causes a decline in strength, resulting in great pain, difficulty walking, coughing, and severe vomiting; it is evident in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient be placed on their back, and place a cushion between their shoulders; then press the muscles of the patient, adjust the ribs to the joints of the two ribs, and be subtle in the operation of it and in the placement according to every manner possible and suitable for it, so that the shape of the bone returns as it was.
And then apply a plaster and stopgap over it, using a thin table of salt or chalk, and similar substances in elevation, as you wrap that with cloth; be subtle in fastening that over the broken bone so as not to cause harm; occasionally adjust the bandage according to the curve of the back, and tighten that which is too loose; constantly consider the bandage throughout the day, and when it softens, tighten that.
And if it becomes necessary to cause the displacement of that, due to corrosion or pressure or pain or swelling that occurs in the area, then you cut and loosen that, and remove the plaster and correct what happened by way of healing; reduce the plaster, if needed, and adjust the bandage so that it is healed.
Chapter .viii.
On the restoration of broken ribs.
You know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur lightly but in serious places that affect the back; and regarding their ends, away from the point of impact, it is not the case that they become tight at those sites, but rather due to what they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of him is not hidden from feeling, you must inquire about his condition to understand it.
And the restoration should be such that it treats the fracture as well as possible, according to its condition, and then apply a compress and strengthen the broken bone with a splint, if necessary.
If the rib fracture is moving towards the internal parts, it causes severe pain and piercing for the patient, similar to what happens to someone who has suffered a wound, due to the bone's inflammation; this also leads to difficulties in movement, coughing, and severe vomiting; and this is one of the most difficult conditions to treat.
And ancient remedies are ingeniously crafted from that clever substance.
And from them, they say: cover that which prevents food from the malady that causes inflammation and bloating, so that the belly is inflated and extended, and the rupture is pushed out of place.
We should avoid this at all costs so that it does not cause a minor wound to turn into a dangerous abscess if left untreated; and if it already has, then prompt assistance is required.
They also say that some remedies should be applied externally and then suck out the weakness; and it seems reasonable, yet it is feared that the wind might throw excess fluid into the area due to weakness.
They also say: cover the area with cloth that has been soaked in hot oil, and place poultices between the ribs until it is filled, compressing it according to its shape; and then it is treated for abdominal pain using both internal and external pleurisy remedies and medicines.
If the disease causes violent constriction that cannot be endured, and the bone punctures painfully, fear for the disease, then cut open at the site, expose the broken rib, and place your hand over it to preserve the integrity, remember the procedure, and cut through the bone to facilitate extraction.
And it is appropriate to adjust the two lips of the ulcer if it is large, using stitching, and treat it with bandages until it heals.
If an abscess occurs inside the body, cut open and apply poultices of heated oil to the site, and treat the disease with what covers the abscess within.
And elevate the patient's body part on which they lie, until it heals.
Chapter IX.
On the restoration of the fractured spine of the back and neck.
Sometimes, the bones of the neck can be fractured, and they tend to lose their shape, resembling the vertebrae of the back. And when this happens to anyone and you want to know if they will recover, consider: if their muscles are already relaxed, stunned, and dead, and they cannot move or stretch those parts, nor feel pain when pricked with a needle, then you know that they will not recover, and in such conditions, it is fatal.
And if they feel pain from compression and pricking in those areas, then know that the fracture of the bone is safe and the illness will heal with treatment.
And if you see the vertebrae of the neck resembling this and want to know if it will heal, consider their weight.
When you notice that it has already softened, apply to those parts where it occurred in the most, and when you lie on your back, take deep breaths and strive for ease, and sometimes it rises on its own and the person wants to urinate but cannot, then know that it is mortal, and therefore do not attempt to treat it.
If no cause occurs from those, then the cause is better and more easily resolved.
And the treatment for it is to pierce at the relaxation of the affected spine with a hot cautery or oil, or sometimes with vinegar; place this on that area several times a day until the cautery relaxes the affected part.
And then place a comforting and firm bandage, tightening it around that area; and instruct the patient to rest and be tranquil, and not sleep on the side where pain occurs until it is healed.
If you encounter a dislocation of the thigh bone or any other cause that has already separated from it, then cover it with a dry cloth and place the affected bone; and adjust the two edges of the wound, suturing if necessary; and treat the surrounding flesh infection until it heals.
If the last part of the thigh bone is broken and it is the end of the femur, then insert your left hand's thumb into the gap between the bones and try to fit them together with your other hand as best you can; and then apply a plaster and bandage over it, if these are necessary, and tighten it.
And if you feel broken bones within it, then bind over them and support the affected area, and treat the wound with the treatment that precedes healing.
**Chapter X.**
On the restoration of health.
The bones of the thighs are often broken, and when they break, the fracture is not uncommon in the extremities of those parts, and they pierce through to the inside; and this causes pain to the patient at the site and a numbing sensation in the limb when it is fractured.
And the restoration is that you place your hand over the area of the fracture, which is the shape of it.
And if the fracture is at the end of the limb, then you should wrap it according to what you have learned by similar reasoning, so that it takes on its natural shape.
If the fracture is in the long bone or has already begun to separate into parts, then you should make the patient lie on their stomach, so that you can prepare for the restoration of that fracture. And so once you have secured it, apply the plaster and then place a strip of wood or canvas over it, tightening firmly without fear of breakage or removal of the bandage.
And open the concavity so that it accommodates the swelling until it acquires the right level of firmness, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or side.
If there is a risk of abscess, stop the extension and restoration of it until the abscess is calm, and apply what was mentioned previously; then return to the restoration of it, and tighten it thus with a cover.
And if there is damage to the bones or they are broken, then treat them.
Chapter XI.
On the restoration of the broken assistant (or: support).
The adjutori is what lies between the thigh and the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, its restoration is in one of two ways, of which one is to take a flat piece of wood, roughly cut, according to this form:
And it should be seen in both ends of the ligament, and then suspended from an elevated place.
And follow the patient on their side; then throw your broken arm over the wood, until it reaches the middle part where the curve of the wood is attached.
And then suspend it over some heavy cause, or the physician should extend it to the parts below; and the surgeon should place his hands on the fracture at the same time, until the fracture returns as it ought to be.
And another method is to have the patient lie on their back and raise their chest with one hand while the other minister examines the fracture, and one of them holds what is above the fracture with their hands, and the other examines the pus beneath; and each of them stretches out according to their ability.
And if you want to increase the extent of the stretch, tighten your grip on the fracture and on the other ligament, and each of the two ministers stretches out in two directions.
And therefore, if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, you should stop half of the ligament over the tendon and leave the other half below the fracture towards the collarbone.
And similarly, if the fracture is near the collarbone, you should stop the ligament at that location and over the collarbone.
Immerse that in easy water and facilitate the work; then, as it is immersed according to its nature and applied with proper application, tighten it gently if it does not cause gangrene cautiously.
If it happens that gangrene occurs cautiously, then leave the tightness within the seventh day, place a cloth soaked in vinegar and rosin on it to rest until the abscess subsides, and then tighten it.
And the way to tighten it is to place a plaster over the fracture, then wrap new cloth around the plaster; adjust the arm on that support, and keep your hand open over its muscle.
And unravel the cloth and tighten it around the arm support to keep the arm in place without any movement if it does not prohibit any cause of the broken bone.
And then use stitches.
And it is that it rests on the fracture that is both thick and strong compared to the other bones; and it positions the width between each bone according to their shape, and the length of the bones according to the break, adding three parts from the total measurement.
Then tighten the bones with the strapping or bandage that I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And it is that the strapping or bandage over the fracture site should be tighter. And the tighter the fracture is held, the less restrictive the strapping or bandage will be.
And thus, after adjusting the position of the bones and the strapping as we have said in the moment when you restore the member to its proper place, then you will have completed your task.
And if you fear gangrene, then leave off the compression and the bandages within the seventh day as we have said.
And likewise, consider the dressing in all parts for three days to prevent any further damage or inflammation at the site; and avoid food that reaches the member due to excessive pressure; and therefore correct everything as we have said.
If you are certain that nothing further will occur from it, then do not untie the ligature but leave it for three days or more.
And the patient's rest should be on their back, and their hands over their stomach.
And place a warm compress filled with wool on the affected member, and consider at all times during night or day that the bandage not be loosened or dissolved from the broken member, or that the dressing become softened; therefore correct it according to your discretion.
And hold the patient's food according to the order we have mentioned above, so that at the beginning the food is subtle until it begins to thicken, and then you will notice that the food of the patient becomes thicker.
As for the custom of the assistant and the leg support, they should be tightened for 10 days; and then you will notice that they become loose, and baths should be administered and they should be medicated with ointments that correct it.
And if the fracture is old and infected, you will not loosen that ligament and stitches within one or two months.
**Chapter XII**
**On the Restoration of Arm Fractures**
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the forearm and the humerus; of these, one is smaller, and it is this that is known as the little finger side, and the other is larger and is supported below by the smaller bone, extending upwards.
And if the larger or smaller portion of the bowel is severed, it is usually cut at once.
And when the smaller portion of the bowel is severed above, its restoration is easier, and its healing is faster.
And when the larger portion of the bowel is severed below, the fracture of it is severe, and its healing is difficult.
And the most severe case is when two bones are severed at the same time.
Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the smaller portion above, it is good for the doctor, as he must restore it, which can be easily facilitated while it is still fresh.
But if the larger portion is what is broken, then it requires more extensive treatment as a result.
And if the two incisions are made simultaneously, then be sure to press the extraction most strongly.
And be sure to place your hand in the position of restoration and extension over one cushion, and the wrist of your hand at a lower position than all others, so that the patient's pain is reduced on a carefully prepared bed.
And place a cushion in front of him at the appropriate height or angle, so that the patient is not under strain.
Then the attendant should extend their arm away from the patient with your hand or bandage, and another attendant extends theirs above it similarly.
Then the doctor should align the bones within to reduce it according to the best position possible.
And if in the treatment of the bone there are obstructions, then you must reduce all the weight to its proper place using your virtue.
And if there appears a separation in it that affects the tendon and is not to your hope for its restoration, then you must cut off on it and stop it according to the manner we have spoken of above.
If the fracture is severe and you have already dealt with it in a special way, then take care of that.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you must line it with a cloth made of oiled rosin and white wax, acting with caution between skill and subtlety, and tighten the cloth over that subtle tension until the abscess yields; then remove the plaster and apply a paste prepared from powdered millstone and owl's clay, and place the bandage; and make sure the bandage that is placed on that fracture is both closer and stronger.
And you should know that the names of the bones in the arm are seen in the major positions, either in a single fracture or in two fractures together.
Then apply your pressure over the site of the fracture with greater strength and intensity, and as the tightness on the parts above the fracture or on the lower parts of it increases, ease the pressure slightly more gently according to the progression of the relief in the beginning of the chapter.
And the bandages that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough, and the thread used to tighten them should be of medium thickness, as we have recommended.
And consider the member and its ligament after a few days. And if any cause arises that requires correction, and as the pain occurs in the member, then apply water or some other remedy to the member until the pain ceases.
And you should not restrict the member until it relaxes, then return the tightness appropriately.
And if the tightness is already relaxed and the bone has healed and looks like those, then correct everything with your virtue.
And consider more if the nutrition is blocked from reaching the member due to excessive tightness, then you should gently relax that one for a few days until it can receive nutrition, and then strengthen it appropriately.
If the patient does not experience any of the causes we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to relax it within a few days or around those times.
And then hold the patient's hand with your virtue to prevent restless movements, and make them sleep on their back.
And you know that this fracture is healed in 30 days or in 42 days, or much sooner in 28 days, and all of this depends on the condition of the parts and the disposition of the virtue.
**Chapter XIII**
**On the Restoration of Fractures of the Hand and Fingers**
You know that the hand and fingers often suffer fractures, and these do not heal quickly unless the cause of the injury is treated.
And when the hand suffers a fracture or dislocation, you must ensure that the patient remains calm and places their hand gently over the affected area.
And the physician should carefully straighten the broken bones and secure them in place with splints, ensuring they are aligned correctly.
And then cover with a plaster and stop it, if you do not want to risk an infection; and place a sheet over it according to the extent of the wound, and you have already wrapped that in linen cloth.
If the fracture is in the inner parts near the belly of the hand, then make it resemble a piece of cloth, and command the patient to tighten that part of their fractured hand; then wrap a long strip of cloth around it tightly.
And the cloth from the body should be like a piece of cloth in which something is wrapped, so that the body is applied to the palm; and tighten it as much as it covers.
If the fracture is in external parts, then cover it with cloth and another piece of cloth left on the palm, so that the hand is covered and right; and tighten the bandage, just as the hand is moved to its normal position between the joints.
And if you suffer a fracture in one of the bones of the finger, when it is the middle finger, it should be wrapped according to its shape and then tightly bound with the palm, and if you wish, place a small right splint beneath it to elevate the fracture and prevent further damage.
If the fracture is in other fingers, such as those of the middle, index, thumb, or ring finger, it should be wrapped and bound to the finger it affects; or all fingers can be wrapped together in succession, which is better; or a small splint can be placed beneath it, just as we have said for the middle finger.
And consider, in your restoration, the proper position of the aperture of the abscess, carefully and opposite - during your operation - to what covers when any cause of those occurs, as it is described iteratively.
Chapter XIV.
On the restoration of the broken bone in the thigh.
The bone in the thigh moves and breaks, extending to the surrounding area and filling with pus.
And the restoration of it is done thus: the ligament is tightened over the fracture and another ligament is placed around the fracture, and the patient is laid on their belly and their face.
Then the minister extends all the ligament according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
If it is desired to open the thigh, then the ligament should be tightened towards the direction of the pelvis, so that extension occurs in it, and another ligament is placed around the fracture.
And if it seems that the rupture is in the same place, then make the specific ligament at the site strong and extend it to the surrounding parts.
Then the doctor should align the bones in their proper positions as they reduce the dislocation, ensuring that the bone is joined by a good connection; at this point, it is important to apply bandages and compression, otherwise, the member may become infected. If an infection occurs in the infected member, then leave it for a few days until the inflammation subsides, and later return to your treatment.
The compression should be done as follows: it is necessary to wrap around the fracture a hard bandage, folding it two or three times, and squeezing out any excess; then, wrap the leg until it reaches the thigh and the root of the injury.
And insert a long strip of linen between the thigh and the leg near the joint, then bring the ends of the strip from both parts, making them superior to the two parts, and then turn it over on the leg and thigh, removing what is superfluous from the bandage.
And then place your hand over the thigh at the site of that fracture, and place one of those stones on the bone of the leg.
And then fill the space between the thigh and the leg with soft drapes, so that the constriction is coagulated.
And then begin with a strong constriction from the middle over the site of the fracture using three or four folds, and as you move farther away from the site of the fracture, your constriction should be weaker and lighter and more moist.
And then extend the two ends of the strip to the other parts until it reaches the toe joint, and tighten both ends of the stones from the other part so that the ligament does not come out of its place.
And then carefully apply the compression to that area, ensuring it does not cause damage or infection or inflammation similar to those; and if any cause arises from them, then take care to dislodge it and correct what has happened immediately, as we have said before.
If there is pain in the bone due to pressure, then cover it as best you can; if not, make a cut over it and remove whatever is causing the pain, and treat that from which the pain arises until it is healed.
In some cases, this fracture of the thigh is so severe that it cannot be reduced to its proper position, as we have said in the aid and treatment of the leg.
However, in the restoration of it in this manner, do not cause the patient to become lame; and if it is restored by itself, use the other leg for walking, otherwise it will be necessary for the injured leg to rest.
And you should know that this condition is acute in 40 days or a month or slightly more, and all of this depends on the diversity of complications and other dispositions.
**Chapter XV**
**On the Restoration of the Broken Rib of the Right Side**
You should know that the fracture of the rib on the right side often ends in prolonged pain, frequently causing constriction and tightness.
If the fracture happens, it is often nothing more than a crack or break in its parts, and this is what is commonly called 'plague' or 'sore', and it has been the subject of much discussion.
And its restoration is such that it should be equal to what was broken in its parts, within the limits of what can be added and connected according to reason, ease, and fabrication.
And then apply a plaster and press upon that round spot, if it is needed; tighten around it with a suitable bandage.
And then consider all the arrangements that we have recommended for other fractures, so too with hot and cold treatments as appropriate to each case until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the restoration of the broken leg.
You know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is thick and is called the thigh bone; and the other is thin and is called the fibula.
And it happens in some cases of fracture that the two bones of the arm are affected, and for this reason restoration is made to them equally, and the operation on one is the same as on the other.
And if two bones are broken at the same time, the leg is completely shattered.
And if the broken bone is a fine splinter, the leg is shattered in many pieces.
And if the broken bone is thick and deep, you will find those fragments, and it is one of those causes that are not easily healed.
Then apply extension, compression, and traction to the fragments according to that engagement.
However, if the fracture of the leg is recent and has not yet formed a callus, extension should be less and more gentle, and you should favor healing with your skill.
And in the leg is any cause for operation on the arm, and when you bind the steels and complete all the surgery, you will take pieces of wood from a tree where the causes are left in place, which are fixed with palm strips; align them from those that require less thickness, and do not be too hard on your hands, and let the length of those be according to the length of the leg, and from the inside to the deepest part.
And then wrap each leg separately with a sheet in two layers according to its length, place one at the junction of the leg's bend from one side and another from the other, and they should be at the same depth as the sole of the foot.
Then fasten both sheets at three points on each extremity and in the middle point, so that with this tightness the leg is prevented from bending at the junctions of right and left, and it stays in a stable position.
And then administer a compress of cloth according to the length of the leg; and place it on the leg so that it retains its flexibility.
And most importantly, ensure that you do this in case of fracture, and when that condition is truly the issue.
And then consider each leg daily and examine it thoroughly, watching for any signs of detachment or inflammation or other similar causes; and when any such condition arises, be prepared to treat it with what is appropriate until it is healed.
Capital XVII.
On the fracture of the talus bone and the bones of the foot, and on their healing.
The talus bone does not experience a fracture in all cases; rather, it is the bones of the foot that sometimes suffer fractures; and the joints of the foot rarely experience fractures, but they may suffer from wear and tear due to poor positioning.
And if the bones of the foot do indeed fracture and those bones become displaced towards one another, then the patient should lie on their side with the affected foot elevated between them.
Then place one foot over that which is elevated between the bones, and press down on those, squeezing them, until they return to their proper position.
And then apply a plaster and bandage over it, leaving the foot's belly on a small table with two legs.
And then tighten it around the foot with a gentle stretch, as you have wrapped it with cloth and other means, which are necessary for its healing.
And after three or four days have passed, you will loosen the ligament, as you will find the bones entangled, or broken or dislocated, and the operation on those is just as you know it.
But if it is indeed broken, then restore those, and engage them again as you have learned and practiced in the restoration of these bones with your hand. And then place this broken bone in line with the length of the finger, and slightly on one side; and put the foot back on this table which you have adjusted, and tighten that around it gently.
If what is broken from the bones is two or three pieces or more, then you should place your hand on each side of the broken part wrapped in a lion cloth, tighten the table at the base of the foot, and stand on one of the table's legs to make an incision in the sole for good retention.
And it is also important that you do not forget to consider all the causes mentioned above in other fractures due to accidents we have discussed; be prepared for any such accident.
**Chapter XVIII.**
On Fracture of the Knee Joint (Femur), Thigh Bone (Hip), and Shins (Male)
When the knee joint (femur) is fractured, make an incision in the middle of the curved surface, then gently tilt the leg slightly forward and secure it behind.
And then the midwife fills the cavity with hot compresses, applying them to the affected area as needed; and the woman is made to bend her knees and elevate them slowly, so that all discharge comes out until the cavity is emptied in front of the separation of the wound and the broken bone returns.
Then place powders on the patient's back, and when they want to urinate, facilitate the opening of the cavity and collect the urine; then reduce it and return it in the same way as you mixed it at the beginning, and return them to their original powder.
And do this for seven days or around that time, as it is restored.
And if you wish, take a sheep bladder and insert a cane tube into its opening; then place the entire bladder inside the wound and blow air through the tube until the bladder is inflated within the wound, as the fracture returns.
And then it is filled with a bandage and remains for some days according to our recommendation, until it heals.
And when the bone of the thigh of a man or woman is broken, then in the restoration and healing process, we apply what we have recommended for the hip bone.
And what is right should not be overlooked in these proximal fractures, which rarely occur, especially to those who have little knowledge or experience with this my book; for that fracture presents itself to you in the greatest dispositions for direct restoration and tightening, and thus understand well.
But in the case of a broken arm, take a splint from above and place it on the arm; then wrap it with cloth, and wrap it again, and lay it for three days or so, until it heals.
Chapter .XIX.
On the restoration of broken bones when they are injured.
It is convenient for him who suffers a fracture due to an accident, especially if the bone is large, as with the bone of the thigh or its helpers, or similar to those that you amputate and cauterize as soon as possible, if the circumstances of amputation or cauterization to you or by testimony require it, as we have said above.
And if the infection spreads to the sanies (veins or arteries), then you must cauterize it by applying pressure as you do when sealing veins, if other causes do not prevent it.
Then begin restoring the fracture on that same day, and do not prolong it, if otherwise there is a risk of gangrene.
If you encounter an apothema (abscess) carefully, then leave its restoration within the sixth day, until the abscess is gone, and do not approach it on the third day and the eighth of every month, for you would cause worse accidents.
If a bone is broken and prominent over an exposed wound, then cover that so you can perforate and reduce it with your hands easily and without much extension.
If extension is beyond your control and the condition of it demands your utmost, then reduce it with your hands using this instrument; an instrument made of metal, whose length is around seven or eight digits, and whose width corresponds to the amount of damage; and for this reason, a physician must have several of these according to what he needs for treatment in all types of fractures.
And both should be done with minimal force so that they are not bent or distorted during the operation.
And it should be of such acute extremity that its margin is in its own extremities; and the upper part of it should extend with great tension, from the middle of it within the folds.
And this is the form of it:
And it is called "voluntary hernia lip" in Greek, hence the term 'paleta pauca'.
For the purpose that the acute extremity of it be elevated above the extreme end of the prominent bone.
And it should be applied at once while the bone returns to its place, and be wrapped with some bandage.
And therefore, you should wrap the extremities of the fracture together, and if the broken extremity is thin and does not take the instrument well for a good grasp, you must then insert the extremity of that bone within the instrument to have it hold firmly.
If you cannot return the bone to its original position, cut open that part which we have mentioned for it, using scissors or saw in whatever way is possible to you.
Then take hold of that which is embedded in the bone, with its rough and small splinters.
And when the bone is returned to its place and the malady finds pain alleviated, you will know that the bone has not yet returned to its natural position; and then do what you have learned to bring great relief to the patient.
When your restoration of the bone is complete, immerse a steril black cloth in vinegar, and especially if it's summer, do not place any oily dressing on the wound or other cause that could lead to infection.
And then apply stakes at the appropriate time for the complete restoration of the bone, leaving the wound exposed so that you can incise the tissue with scissors and wrap it according to the size of the wound.
And be very careful not to strain the wound toward the fracture, as you have seen foolish doctors do this, leading to the patient's death or severe corruption and putrefaction, which is unhygienic. If the tension is slight, soft, different from the tension of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you are afraid of further complications from the ones we have already recommended, and you feel pain in that area, do not press on it, but rather apply this hard bandage made of strong cloth instead of stakes, and tighten it around those parts.
And when after one or two days the pain begins to arise, which is born in the joint, then you remove from over it the cloth which you had placed upon that affected part, and soon afterward administer some remedies, such as we usually use to treat pains, thus as with a four-part ointment resembling that.
It is also necessary that you loosen the crust and examine the wound each morning and evening until it is healed and firm, and ensure that the member is prepared in such a way that the pus flows from it to the parts around with ease.
If the wound takes many days and is not healed nor does the pus leave the joint, then you should know that here are only delays in the healing process, so take care everywhere where the wound tries to form again. And of those methods, some separate the dead and remove it, while others, not being able to separate them, place the member in such a way that it causes pain, then pierce and incise according to what is possible for you.
And if the plague becomes infected or pus forms, it is a sign of inflammation or some other type of corruption and putrefaction, then you should treat each one of these as you deem necessary for the cure of which a description precedes in its chapter.
And concerning what I must say and you present your case: when the bowels are torn, they protrude over the member as if from the thigh and hip bones and resemble those of the larger members, and do not attempt to attract or extract them under any circumstances, for it often leads to death; after cleansing that space, wait until it heals on its own, which can take a few days or even longer; and tend to the plague if you have observed it, and if not, leave it be.
**Chapter XX.**
**On the Cure for Nodules That Occur at the Site of Any Fracture.**
Motions witnessed cause this misalignment during the healing process of a fracture, especially near joints, and it disrupts the natural function of the member; thus, it prohibits the member from performing its natural action.
Then consider whether the misalignment is recent and administer those medicines that have been effective for such cases, including aloe, senna, castor oil, and similar ones; so that you either take some or all of them, and apply those with astringent properties to the misalignment directly, and constrict them firmly around it.
And maintain this tightness for no more than a few days; then release it and repeat the process until the misalignment is remedied; or place a plate of lead on it, as lead has the property to reduce any swelling in the members.
If the misalignment has already changed to a hard and tight state due to the necessity of keeping it in place, then cut it away from the surrounding tissue, remove any excess or protruding parts, or cut it off at the root until it is remedied; and treat that area once it is healed.
Chapter .xxi.
On the restoration of a fracture, once it is healed, then the delicate member should be straightened and secured according to its natural shape.
When a bone fracture is healed, and the delicate member is straightened and secured, it should not be done except for justifiable reasons: among which one is the lack of solution for the ligament and its attachment not according to what is needed; or due to excessive tightness of the ligaments that prevents nutrition from reaching the member; or excessive accumulation of fluid; or improper movement at an inappropriate time; or because of stiffness in the blood vessels in the patient's body, and due to frailty in them.
And the cure for this is to restrict food for the patient and make their heart tender while the blood clot multiplies in it; and administer baths; and gently massage it.
And then apply pressure to the member, so that the pressure draws to it the necessary nutrition or continues the warm humidification with water until the nutrition flows and returns to its natural form.
Chapter XXII.
On the healing of broken bones when they are restored crookedly and the operation of covering them is forbidden.
When it happens to the already restored member, then the healing of its crookedness and deformity of the broken bone and joint is sought, and this is what gives shape to the member; nevertheless, the member is not forbidden from its natural operation, provided that you receive the approval of one who considers that member newly broken.
There have indeed been many false doctors and restorers who have done this on our earth, and this operation is most reproachable, losing in great fear the sign of which is mortal.
If recent claudication and nodation are present, then it should be treated with a compress soaked in herbal tea containing soothing herbs such as elderflower and ramsone, and also melilot; similar to those used in medicine named "amerans consolidatio".
And sometimes it is dissolved with frequent gentle friction, particularly on the wettest parts, and the affected member should be moved through all its ranges at regular intervals.
If the deformity has progressed and it is severe and curved, becoming a stone and requiring treatment with iron, then you should see that pus has ceased and the continuation of the bone is dissolved, and it is incised where unnecessary pressure on that part of the body from the bone is relieved, and it is given ease through solicitude and study.
Chapter .xxiii.
On the subject of dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of any joint from its normal position, resulting in a loss of movement and damage to the affected body part, causing severe pain and injury to the patient.
Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it should be reduced as soon as possible, and not delayed, for if it is delayed, the joint becomes stiff and reduction becomes difficult.
And for this reason, it should not be moved too much or stretched during the period of stiffness, as it causes muscle spasms and severe pain.
If this occurs, you should rest in a splint and immobilize the affected area to prevent further stiffness, then apply hot water and oil to the dislocated joint and gently reduce it.
And every part of the body should be treated with this, whose memory will return to its proper place.
And you have already arranged the parts of the dislocated joint as previously described in the fracture; from the upper part of the body, it descends to the lower part.
Chapter .XXIIIII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
If both mandibles are dislocated and not treated, the dislocation of both occurs in one of two ways: either they are slightly moved from their places with little force, and a little fluid is discharged; or they are completely dislocated and swollen to such an extent that saliva from the wound cannot drain, and he cannot open his mouth nor close it, and his tongue is wrapped around itself.
When the displacement of a joint is slight, it often returns to its proper position on its own without any significant cause.
If the displacement is complete and severe, it is necessary to apply gentle reduction of the joint as soon as possible without delay.
And the practitioner should have a firm grip on the patient's head, and the doctor inserts his finger into the gap of the dislocated jaw inside the patient's mouth, if the displacement is on one side; or he inserts two fingers together, if the displacement is on both sides, and all other digits are outside, which equalize; and commands the patient to stop moving their jaws and stabilize them until they return to their proper position.
And if the reduction is difficult, especially when both jaws are simultaneously dislocated, then apply evaporation with hot water and oil until a gentle reduction of both can be achieved without delay, as we have said before.
And so when we return and find them equally engorged, and the opening of the hernia is closed and not softened, then place a layer of cloth over these drape powders, and make it with wax and finely ground oil; and then apply it tightly and easily.
And the patient should sleep on their back, with their head between two pillows, so that they do not strain either to the right or left; and do not force them to do anything; having their food cut into small pieces, until the pains are eased and the jaws are relaxed, then let them eat what they wish.
And this should be facilitated, and do not work on the opening of the mouth during eating, drinking, or coughing, until the jaw is relaxed and healed.
And if it is difficult to reduce the two jaws when they are dislocated at any time and do not return to their proper places, then severe chills and persistent fever occur, and great pain is felt in the patient's belly, and often they vomit clear cholera.
And when you see this, you will know it is a loss; you will observe many deaths among those to whom this happens in a few days.
**Chapter 25**
**On the Reduction of a Dislocated Furca and the End of a Muscle**
The furca is not dislocated from the thigh inside due to its attachment to the leg; sometimes, however, it is dislocated at the outside joint, and this is evident through sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient remains on their back and extends their arms. Then tighten the area with your palm using a firm pressure, so that it returns.
And then apply pressure over that dressing and poultice and tighten it.
The end of the limb that has suffered the injury should not be displaced; it must be reduced and immobilized as we have mentioned, according to what your equipment allows.
And then apply pressure over that dressing, poultice, and splint, and order the patient to remain still and at rest until it heals.
In this treatment, the cure involves reducing the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from its place.
Chapter XXVI.
On the reduction of muscle dislocation.
You should know that muscle displacement occurs in three ways, one of which is when it is displaced at the attachment to the bone on both sides.
And the second is when it is displaced at the origin of the muscle, and this requires care; it is not displaced at the rear attachments through the shoulder; and it is not displaced at the front attachments by nerves.
It is most commonly displaced and comes out at the attachment on the sides of the bone, especially in those where there is little flesh, it is slightly displaced; but in those with much muscle, it presents more difficulty.
And many people suffer from accidents due to a blow or fall, and the muscle of him is torn in pieces like a cauterized scar, and it is separated by what has already been displaced.
Then consider that you enter here when you are overstretched by it, and now you proceed with the treatment of it.
And it is known that dislocation occurs when the muscle fibers are torn; so that you can distinguish between the displaced muscle and the intact muscle, as you find great diversity among them; and you find in the head of the muscle a concavity where the pain is felt upon touching the head of the muscle like a needle, and the patient cannot move his hand to its original position nor limit its movements.
If the dislocation is in the foot or ankle and you find clear pain upon touching, it is not hidden.
And from this dislocation, light reduction is done when it is fresh and the patient is young.
And the reduction of it is that the minister raises the patient's hand to its original position; and then he places ties under the pain of it, and raises the joint to its strength in its place, and the minister raises the patient's hand and extends it; and then he holds it there so that it returns gently.
It is not possible to provide a line-by-line translation without the full context and understanding of the medieval language used in this text. The provided sentence appears to be fragmented and contains grammatical structures and vocabulary that are not entirely clear or consistent with any specific modern language.
And then the patient is made to lie on their back and rest, with the testicles hanging down, waiting for them to be drawn between relaxation and tension; and the doctor places his foot on the expectation, raises the head of the muscle towards the verture (or: vertically), and pulls the patient's testicles so that they are not damaged by the strain, while another assistant holds the patient's testicles, preventing them from being injured by the strain, for at this point they will return to their place.
And if you wish, reduce this second in this manner: make sure to have present a man who is taller than the patient, and stand on that side, then insert your muscle between the testicles and lift the testicles up until they are suspended in the air, and another assistant pulls the patient's testicles away from their stomach. If the patient is lighter, then be sure to check what other cause might be suspending them, for this will make the dislocation return quickly.
And it is reduced in another manner: a long stick is placed on the ground with its head shaped like a mortar, neither too thick nor too thin, and it is positioned beneath the patient; then, drapes are placed over the head of the stick, and the hernia remains according to the length of the stick, and the doctor's hand is extended to the opposite side, and the patient's body part is pulled from the other side with force, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
If the reduction is difficult due to any of the causes we have mentioned, then use this remedy: take a stick whose length is equal to the distance between two hands (about four digits) and its thickness should be adjusted according to the form of the hernia.
Then, place linen drapes over the head to prevent the stick from causing further harm to the hernia.
And then it is paused, leaving the patient's thigh open, and the hand or arm is extended over the thigh within the openings, and the thigh is wrapped over the leg and the end of the arm.
It is then paused with the arm over a scale according to its width, and the hand is extended within the openings, and the other part is suspended from the other side, so that the joint can be reached shortly.
And once the instrument is inserted according to any method possible, and you notice that you have left the thread of wool from the needle in place, prepare a plaster with powder from a mill mixed with egg albumen over all the muscle, so it is thoroughly wrapped around, and tighten the thread left hanging at the joint; then wrap the ligature over the plaster, attach your hand to the patient's side, and leave it for seven days.
And ensure that the patient's food intake is restricted, as long as the member is supported, for it aids in the healing of the injury.
Then gradually increase the food intake and exercise; and if it remains stopped and is not softened, then healing has occurred.
If the joint is dislocated due to moisture that occurs in it or for another reason, then it should be administered a pointed cautery from three sides, as mentioned in the chapter on cauterization.
And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the bandages and tightness are removed from it some times, but it is not fixed and raised, then you know that the nerves in it, which are at the top of the muscle, are already injured or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
From the dislocation of that which is caused, you must place the foot and the ankle or the joints behind, reduction is done with pressure and extension with the hands, so that it returns.
And both these strictures should be treated, and care should be taken until it is healed.
And if the healing becomes serious in the member and there is delay in its movement, then the illness uses many baths at intervals until that gravity is alleviated and it returns to its original nature.
Chapter XXVII.
On the cure for dislocation of the hip.
You know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; it is dislocated in all parts, most notably in front of the back part, and the dislocation of it is not concealed by any vestige or touch according to some figure being dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip, it is clearly declared to you, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm or touch its muscle.
And cover them with blankets, reduce the dislocation as soon as it arrives at the safe cautery, for if you see the cautery safe, reduction is difficult and its healing is not complete; especially when it is in the back parts, because it is worse than all other types of dislocation, causes great pain, and many times ends up in death.
And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce, is that his hand be extended to two others, and his arm be stretched out, and the hands of the physician be on the thigh and beneath him, and he presses the joint with the fingers of his other hand until it returns to its place.
If the dislocation is in the front parts, then return by bending his hand with his other hand, until it strikes the thigh with the base of his palm.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply violent extension and strong motion.
And indeed, two attendants should stretch their arms, and have these two assistants hold this elevation, so that it is not disturbed during the extension.
Then carefully turn the patient's arms in all directions, since the sheet or bandage is wrapped long around their hand or ligament.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he applies some oil to it, which helps cause lubrication of the joint and facilitates its return; then gently push the joint back into place until it returns to its original position.
Then return the intestine to its cavity, which is placed over the pack in which it is compressed and secured with white bandages, and be careful to relax any tightness, lowering the arm from the collarbone and leaving it for a few days.
Then it should be loosened; and thus, if the joint is formed in its place, you loosen the ligament from him and leave it as is.
And if you see the joint is not too strained, you will repeat the application of the plaster and liniment, leaving it for some days until it is completely healed; then remove it.
If due to the gravity of the condition, reduction of the joint is difficult and its disposition is in movement, then administer moisture in a bath and gentle friction, and rest, until it is relieved; or apply heat to the aching joint, if it is a case of stiffened movement; and wrap it up, leaving it on the bone for the day and night. Then secure that position and immerse the patient in a bath; and when it is dry, rub the joint with gentle friction, repeating the application of heat to the aching joint, if it is stiffened in movement, once, twice, and three times. in the bath, until it is relaxed.
And if you wish, place your hand over that moist and scraped split in the leg's flesh, press and hold it there; do this several times, as that part is moist and will return to its proper state.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, which is the joint between the arm and hand.
In some cases, the hand's joint is dislocated and its reduction upon dislocation is easy; conversely, other joints are more difficult to reduce, especially if the location becomes inflamed or develops an abscess after dislocation.
And the reduction of the dislocated joint is that you place the hand's joint from the patient on a table and make them extend their hand, while the physician places his hand or palm over the joint's entrance, and gently pushes it until it returns to its proper location.
However, it is necessary to consider that if the palm of the hand has already been placed on the patient's stomach, then the patient's illness will cause their back to rest against a table in order to achieve extension and reduction; and if dislocation has occurred before to the back of the hand, then the position of the hand from that moment on should be intrinsically over the table so that the doctor's hand can act upon that proximity of the joint.
And therefore, if this is done soon, it is good; otherwise, tighten the bandage around them, giving way to the hernia and leaving space for it; and do not focus on this, because otherwise, you will neither suffer nor be able to achieve the reduction of it as days pass.
However, the joint should be treated according to its deformity; do not consider the illness as a cause, but rather that the hand becomes softened and cannot grasp any cause; then know that the nerves are torn or stretched, and it is only by heating them over a cautery near their accommodation and making them firm that you can confer any cause.
Therefore, when the illness has returned, place your hand on the poultice which we have prepared and leave it there for several days; then loosen it and place it again, and exercise your hand over it.
If the movement of it is stopped and some gravity occurs in it, then apply gentle heat and friction a few times, until it is relieved.
**Chapter 29.**
**On the Treatment of Dislocations**
Sometimes the joints are completely dislocated.
And when a digit is dislocated and taken to the back of the hand or the palm, tighten the digit and push the dislocation back into place with your fingers, until it returns to its position.
And then hold the head of the bone, suspend the part that is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
And then suspend it and stretch it until it is correctly aligned on that very day.
And at night, according to this narrative, continue to stretch it as described during the day and exercise movement, and do this for several days until it is straight.
And do the same thing, if it is dislocated in the mother's abdomen, hold it as described and perform on it the first surgical operation until it heals.
And do the same thing when it is dislocated in other parts.
Chapter .xxx.
On the treatment of displaced vertebrae in the back.
When any of the vertebrae in the back or neck become dislocated, it is a serious condition that requires immediate attention, as the lack of proper treatment can lead to permanent damage and even death.
And the indication of this is that the management of the patient's condition is outside their control, and they cannot hold onto it; sometimes the limbs of the body or both legs or both arms become weakened, or a vertebra becomes dislocated, because often times these are broken and require removal from four parts.
Therefore, when it is already dislocated from behind and is called gelatinization.
The treatment for it is that you must consider whether the gelatinization occurred in childhood, because in such cases, there is neither cure nor complete healing.
Place in that which you see by chance or through percussion or similar to those, the Ancients have already described the methods of cure in lengthy discourse, from which the greatest benefit returns; you have perhaps already been constrained and opened up from that of which there is little excuse due to its excessive use, thanks to my close proximity to my intention, to which I have here exposed and perfected myself from various instruments of which I will now show and spread this.
And of those, only the one that occurs in the back itself is cured by what you have recommended.
And it is because the disease has spread over its face so that it is equal to a wall, and it has extended beneath him great pain so that his foot cannot be moved.
And then place a straight stick under them, planted in the ground at the end of the leg around the patient's head, and another stick on either side of their feet at the other end of the leg.
The minister holds the stick, and it should not be planted in a pit; another minister holds the other according to that form.
Then cover the patient's head and tie their hair with a lion's braid; extend the end of this braid to the stick that is placed at the head, and tie it to it; also tighten the other braid over their hips, supporting their legs, and adjust all the braids, tying them to the other stick which is placed at their feet.
Then the minister who lowers the stick should extend the braid to the end of the stick, and neither the sticks nor the braids in their places where they are fixed should be broken, but nonetheless they should not be tightly held as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or he places them on a table, and then adjusts the patient's feet on the table until they return.
If it does not return in this manner, take a table whose width or length is three arms' length, and dig into the wall of which we have said that it is closest to where the illness resides, a place where the end of the table can fit. And then place the edge of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and presses firmly until the spine is constrained and returns to its place.
And if you wish, open again the space which was closed with the hand; and it is that you place yourself on the ground, the patient's head in the last part of the leg two fists long, the length of each fist being one palm, and make a cut in each fist where the blood flows back, and each foot is firmly held on the ground so that there is no more bleeding.
And take a rod made of wood, in which is a hole, and turn it around in both directions of the two rods.
And at the end of it there is a notch in which the rod is formed, its length being equal to a palm where it turns; and the other two rods are similar to that one.
And then tighten the ligatures that you have tied around the patient's foot in the gap where it is supposed to be lifted, and the ligatures that you have tied around their thighs in the turn that is supposed to support their chest.
And then each turn should have a minister who twists the turn with their hand, and the doctor does the same with the spine as we have said.
And when the spine is returned to its place and the area is cleansed, you should apply a dry, albumen poultice and cover it; then place a piece of cloth over the poultice from a table whose width is about three times the length of the affected area and its length covers the place of the swelling, and on the end of the spine.
And then use the remedies we have mentioned, and feed the patient with delicate, nutritious food until they are healed.
And if any danger is perceived in the area at the end of healing, then medicines that soften and soothe should be administered through table treatment for a long time, which we have recommended; and this has already been applied to that place by means of a lead plate.
And in some cases, there is an imminent danger at the end of the spine joints, caused by dislocation; and it is that bone which you should be particularly careful about, as its strong reaction to this medicine can cause death.
Chapter .xxxi.
On the cure of a dislocated hip.
You know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle should not dislocate except for those who suffer from other joints with slight removal and convexity.
And the hip joint is dislocated in four ways: when it is dislocated inward, or outward, or forward, or backward.
And it is most commonly dislocated inward, and rarely forward or backward.
And the sign of the dislocation inward is that when you adjust the leg of the patient according to the healthy side, the affected side becomes longer and more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their foot in the normal way, and this is where the limb feels a sharp pain from the sudden stretch, thus indicating the point of injury.
And the sign of that which suffers from dislocation is when parts are displaced outside, as its accidents are contrary to this occurrence.
The sign of one who suffers dislocation in the front parts is that their leg expands completely, but still experiences pain at the site of the injury; if it perforates and cannot return to its place in front, then the patient's urine becomes retained, their testicles are swollen, and they should move the affected leg on a stretcher.
The sign of one who suffers dislocation in the back parts is that they do not expand the affected leg, nor can they bend it where it joins the knee; the affected leg is shorter than the other, the testicles are softened, and the head of the injury points to that location.
However, the reduction of this dislocation depends on your consideration, for if the dislocation is old and long-standing, having been left untreated by you, then it should be reduced according to its position, but not as a complete cure; thus, it does not make sense to attempt such treatment.
Place in that case where the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four types of dislocations, then you cut to it when you reduce the joint and extend it in both the internal and external parts, and turn it to the right and left, for thus it returns strongly and does not require other treatment.
If it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong support and extend the patient's leg from the affected side, or use a bandage, or a ligament that is tight over the leg; another minister should extend your hand on top of it so that he places his fingers beneath the patient's thighs; and another person should tighten the ligament at the root of the thigh and hold one end of the ligament.
And extend the leg or the internal part to angle the joint at the fork's position, or from the back part to the front of the hip.
And it is the extension of all these at once, as long as the patient's illness is elevated to their upper body and the legs hang down.
And this type of extension is particularly useful for all four parts.
And therefore, if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it will be good; otherwise, it will be necessary to consider all kinds of things regarding their treatment.
In the reduction of the hernia, when it is dislocated and the dislocation occurs within the folds, the patient should be placed on their side; then, the ligaments should be tightened around the base of the fold in the area between the top of the fold and the place where the hernial sac protrudes; and finally, extend the ligament above the protruding part of the sac to the most superior point of the fork.
Then, another assistant should strongly grasp the patient's legs, press the swollen area of the hernia, and stretch it outward with force until it returns to its place.
And this specific type is of lighter cure which reduces this member compared to other types.
If it is excused from you and you do not follow the treatment for this type of cure at all, then know that both feet of the patient must be bound together with a strong, light ligature on both the toes and both the soles.
And the length of each of them is measured by a quantity of four times, and the affected leg must be extended more than the other by a quantity of two times.
Then the hernia should be suspended over the top of the foot, and it should be in the lower part; and the length of it from the ground is a quantity of two bras.
Then command a strong young person to cut off the top of the hernia, and hang it from another young person, while another young person reduces the hernia with firm pressure, for the joint will return to its place at great speed.
In the proper reduction, when there is a dislocation in the joint that has come out, take care that the patient maintains pressure with their hands according to what we have recommended regarding the frozen state; and tighten the ligament properly on the affected thigh and on the patient's chest.
Then use two sticks as supports: one on the patient's feet and the other on their head; place a wet cloth around the middle of the thigh where the hernia is located to prevent damage while the sticks keep the space between the thighs open, so that the hernia's extension to the sides is not pulled.
And each assistant should extend their help, and the doctor with his hand should complete the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the front parts, you should ensure that the leg is slightly extended, and according to this method, the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the affected joint, then he tightens with his other hand, and at that compression, he returns it to its position between the joints.
If the dislocation is in the back parts, you should not ensure that the patient is extended at the joints, but rather elevated above the ground; once it is paused on a firm surface, if the extent of the dislocation outside the joints is seen, as we said regarding the placement of the body on two joints, and its face and ligaments are extended, as we have said, there is no harm.
And it should be ensured that compression is applied with a splint on the area where the joint is dislocated.
Therefore, when the reduction is complete according to need — and the sign of the reduction of the hernia is not hidden from you, and it extends from the patient's thighs two folds, and when you see those edges and the hernia extrudes its fold and you expand that as an excuse, then you know that the member according to need has returned — and now you adjust two things and place a plaster and remove the bandage so that the width is not damaged in any of the parts; and keep the patient at rest for three days or four.
Then carefully remove the ligament and the plaster, and compare one thigh to the other.
Now, if you see those edges in appearance, then you will know that the dislocation is already healed, and therefore let the patient go.
And if you see any cause for softening, then return and plaster that, and remove it according to your initial stretching, and let it go in three days.
And then, after that, he should be made to walk slowly for a few days, until he is comfortable.
**Capitol .xxxii.**
On the treatment of a dislocated joint.
A dislocated joint can occur in three ways: when it is displaced outward, inward, or to the sides, and when it is not displaced forward.
And the sign of a dislocated joint is that the patient applies their leg to the affected area; then you will know that the joint is dislocated.
And the restoration of the joint in all ways is to cease the patient's movement directly, so that they extend their leg if possible; hold the patient's thigh with both hands, and place their foot between your feet; then attach the dislocated joint to your palms, and grasp it between your fingers over the patient's joint until it returns to its place.
And the sign of its resolution is that their leg adheres to the thigh in a non-painful position.
Then apply a plaster to hold the leg to the thigh, and then bind those parts with a bandage for three or four days, and then remove the bandage.
And do not use the affected limb for walking for a few days, until it is healed and comfortable.
If the reduction of the hernia is not urgent, then administer a strong extension to the ligaments whose treatment has been described above in the previous narrative.
Chapter .xxxiii. (The number xxxiii represents the chapter number, not a translation.)
On the treatment of the dislocation of the talus (a bone in the ankle).
Some times the leg is remedied by a slight removal, and sometimes it is dislocated completely, and the dislocation is made either inside or outside the joints.
And the sign of the dislocation of the leg is that you see the thigh swollen proceeding towards the part where it is dislocated.
The treatment for the dislocation of the leg is by gentle reduction, and it should be extended easily with the hands and then encased until it heals.
However, in the cure of a complete dislocation, it is necessary to cease the harm directly, and have someone strong and brave hold the leg firmly behind at its middle part.
Then with your right hand, raise the foot from its superior part, and with your left hand, hold it lower on the foot at the location of the ankle.
And then gently pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and with your left hand make two movements downwards, and then extend your left leg; push the foot of the patient towards the bed on the right side, while straightening their leg on the left side, this is how the work should be done.
And do this twice as we have counted.
And on the third attempt, gently push the foot of the patient towards the bed, while you are at the ankle.
So if you return in one attempt or two according to this manner, and if you turn the foot inside out, it is good; otherwise, repeat the operation over it, for that is how it should be done.
If it is forbidden for you to reduce it in this way that we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and take a flat stone, and place it firmly on top of them, and compress the hernia between their thighs, and you have already wrapped them up with a cloth so that the hernia does not pop out.
And then the doctor should hold the patient's legs with one minister, and another should stretch the foot towards its toes or the ligament that lies on the top of the foot; and another minister should stretch it against the extension of its side, and the padding between the thighs of the patient should retain this, so that the weight of the body is not pulled away from the parts below after its extension.
Then the doctor should re-align the dislocation with his hands, and another minister should hold the healthy thigh at the opposite side, so that the dislocation returns to its natural position.
And when the dislocation returns to its place and it is declared that the reduction is successful, then apply a plaster and reinforce those ligaments strongly, and bind the foot with ligament to the leg.
And take care of the nerves that are behind on the sole, so that the ligament over them is not strained or harmed strongly.
And then place him in this position for two days or three; and if the ligament softens, remove that.
And on the third or fourth day, remove that and forbid the patient from moving for forty days. If it is necessary to move that space, there is no guarantee that the dislocation will not be further damaged and corrupted, and this can prevent healing.
And if you apply a hot poultice to an abscess, then follow the treatment methods we have described earlier, in other words, cure and wash it, as long as it is healed.
Chapter .xxxiiii. (Note: "Capitol" likely refers to "Chapter" in this context, as it is a common heading in medieval treatises.)
On the treatment of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
When a dislocation is slight, it should be reduced gently; for what is not difficult should be done swiftly.
If the dislocation is in one of the toes of the foot, then you should make the patient lie down with their foot elevated either on a bed or a table, and keep it in that position as if they were walking.
And then you should stand by the foot, place your hand on it to prevent any further movement from the joints, and press gently with the foot until it returns to its normal position, ensuring that the dislocation has been reduced and does not reappear in the prominent area.
And then place a board under the foot of the patient that supports the entire foot, with two ends raised slightly, and tighten this structure gently but firmly for three days; afterwards, remove it and make the patient rest from walking for several days until it is completely healed and pain-free.
Chapter .xxxv.
On the types of dislocation that occur due to illness, fracture, or any other cause.
When any of those causes occurs and you attempt treatment and restoration, frequent consequences lead to death.
And for this reason, it is not appropriate to presumptuously claim expertise in its cure, but rather he who is skilled in the art, with great experience, mercy, and compassion, should act tardily, neither too quickly nor arrogantly; and use cautery only when necessary, leaving judgment of illness to divine providence, unless you hope for health from peril, alleviation from malady, and have some hope. And therefore, endeavor as much as possible to reduce it at the beginning of the cause, before applying cautery.
And then, if the member returns to its normal position, administer treatment with a warm poultice and care for the affliction using drying ointments as appropriate.
If the dislocation is a fracture and occurs in separately mobile joints, then you should drill through their articulations and do as we have said regarding simple injuries of this type in the places mentioned.
And observe and steer clear, according to your virtue, of the instrument in the ways of fear as it is preceded by my instruction; for what is better for you than your Creator, more enduring to your glory, and brings greater health to your true body in due time. Thus, the words of Alcasan (or Albucasim) are perfectly realized, from which God be blessed. Indeed.
