Oh, my sons, as you have completed this book, which is the last of medical science, through the completion of its content it has reached its end, and due to its explanations, and its demonstrations, and its declarations, I believe you have fully grasped this treatise, which is a part of the greatest operation, namely surgery.
For surgery, considered the most complex of medical operations in our region and in our time, is fraught with great peril due to the lack of knowledge about it, and the study of it has ceased; and there remain only a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have led to many errors and misconceptions, as the understanding of its principles is closed, and its power and art extended.
And it has appeared to me that I should revive the order of this treatise according to the second way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that the forms of cautery tools and other surgical instruments be included as an addition to the declaration, and for the preparation of them, which is a necessary cause.
The cause for which there is no longer a skilled artisan with their hand in this our time is because the art of medicine is long, and requires that its practitioner be well-versed in anatomy, understanding the youth of the members and the shapes of those, and the conjunction and separation of them; and have knowledge of bones, nerves, and ligaments, and the names of those, and their extraction; and also of the pulsating veins and the static ones, and the places of their emission.
And for this reason Hippocrates says that the name is fitting, as he was small in stature but great in the art of medicine.
We have already spoken of this at the beginning of this book; for those who are not aware of what we have told you about anatomy, they are not exempt from falling into errors that will lead to men's deaths, as you have seen many of them, some well-formed in this science but lacking in knowledge and experience.
When you see a foolish doctor who has cut an abscess on the breast of a woman and cut some arteries in her breast so that much blood flows inside, causing the woman to die from it among others.
And you see another doctor who tried to remove a stone from a man who had been suffering in his state; the stone was large, and he came to him and extracted that stone with part of the bladder, so that man died on the third day.
And you have already called for help to remove it, and you see that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, he will die.
And you see another doctor who was paid a stipend by a duke in our land to perform surgery; he took a black crust that was supposed to be cut from the patient's thigh; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he removed the fracture above the wound with pincers and pliers with strong tension, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
And then, according to their wishes, loosen the bandages, rest, and apply a cold compress for some days, and command that the inflammation be reduced; and thus, while the matter is still fresh and the wound open, it can heal and avoid destruction.
And they will call upon him, and he will loosen the bandages, and success brings calm and thus reduces their pain.
However, if the corruption is already confirmed in the member, so that it cannot be restrained, and does not cease to spread the corruption throughout the member until the patient comes to danger.
And see another doctor who perforates a cancerous abscess, and it becomes ulcerated after some days, until the fire of his malignancy is increased over him by his lord.
Which causes is because the pain in the bone is purely from melancholic humor, then it does not cover that it will come to him by a ferrous weapon, but rather it should be in the member which suffers that it is completely destroyed.
And therefore, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation should be divided into two parts: one is in an operation associated with health, and another in work which poses danger to the most important dispositions.
And you have already encountered this throughout all parts of this book where operations are performed with error and fear; it is therefore necessary for you to keep this and set that aside, so that the foolish do not take advantage to speak against you and slander you.
And therefore, take up your tools with diligence and the protection of God, and your patients with ease and firmness.
And use the best method for the grace of God to achieve salvation and glorious success, leave behind the terrible illnesses with difficult healing, and set aside your tools that make you afraid, so that cowardice in your faith and in your name does not abandon you: for more remains to your glory, both now and in eternity, for your sanctity.
They already slice open some of their wounds: Do not treat bad ailments badly, lest bad doctors become famous.
And you have already divided this book into three chapters.
Begin the division of the book, and first, the first part. The first chapter organized within the book's sections is about foot care, in the forms of instruments and the use of cauterization tools, and anything else necessary for the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter deals with incisions and punctures, and the use of cups, plasters, and the extraction of arrows and similar objects. It is organized according to the forms of instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the treatment of twists and similar conditions; a chapter ordered on the internal parts of the foot, and on the shapes of the instruments.
Understand what I have said about the quality of the youth of that cautery and the documents of it, and in what circumstances cautery is prohibited.
Therefore it is said that the discourse on the quality of cautery's youth and the documents of it is a long and prolix topic, subtle for knowledge, and secrets hidden; and many scholars have spoken about it, and there are disagreements among them, and I am satisfied with a small part of their discourses, fearing prolongations.
And therefore it is said that cautery will confer relief to the entire universal connection, which is of material or its material, except for two connections, which are connections with their own material.
In the connection that is dry and lacks material, opinions differ; some say that cautery is beneficial for such conditions, while others claim the opposite, stating that cautery is not suitable for ailments caused by dryness and lack of moisture, as the nature of fire is dryness and heat, and it would be counterproductive to treat a dry and barren condition with something hot and dry.
And those who say the opposite claim that cautery is beneficial for all dry and barren ailments in the body, as when you compare the human body and its moisture to the connection of fire, you find the human body dry.
And he says through the argument of those who claim this, that he has personally discovered this through experimentation.
However, it is not advisable for anyone to attempt this procedure if they are untrained and unexperienced in the art of cautery from prior study, as they must be familiar with the variety of human compositions, the disposition of diseases within them, their causes, and the circumstances of their occurrence, as well as the passage of time.
In other circumstances, there is no cause for fear, especially in cases of pain and swelling, as all doctors agree on these treatments, and they are consistent in applying cautery to relieve them.
And know, my children, that the secret of healing by cautery with fire and the goodness of it, lie in cautery as a medicinal flame, for fire is simple; its action affects only the member being cauterized, without causing pain to other members adjacent to it, but rather, with a slight discomfort.
The action of the medicinal flame reaches those members from which it diverges, and it strongly promotes healing in a member suffering from a difficult-to-heal disease, aiding greatly.
Kindle the fire, due to its subtlety and the excellence of its substance, does not cause harm but rather serves as a superfluous aid. It is already known to us through experience and the long service of studying the art regarding the truth of causes; for this reason, I excuse you from the length of my speech. And if it were not that this secret fire, hidden in this brief moment, cannot be freely read by you, I would have revealed its nature and the quality of its operation in the body, as well as its expulsion of ailments, demonstrated through philosophical discourse, which would benefit your understanding.
And know this, my children, that the best time for making cautery and applying pressure is in the season of spring.
And you say that cautery is convenient at all times, so that the harm caused by time's passage is overshadowed by the healing effect of cautery, especially when cautery is for pains or necessary pains, severe and acute, which do not suffer from tardiness, lest one fear those that bring evil, which is better than allowing further harm to enter through time.
And thus, do not sit on your feet, my sons, for it is only the common people and foolish doctors who believe that this illness, which is healed by cautery, will never return, and they pause at its consequences.
And the cause is not so much as they believe, for cautery is but a place of medicine that alters the composition and dries up the humors which are the cause of the pain.
Yet, one may use cautery superfluously over medicine because of the desire for its strength and virtue in operation and the grandeur of its lord.
And it is possible that their illness may return at some time in the future, according to the constitution of the illness and its location, and the virtue of it, and what is prepared in their bodies from the addition of superfluities and humors, and what has been acquired by them from food and similar causes; for the illness in which cautery is administered is a subtle illness in members with few superfluities and humors, so when dent cautery is performed for pain and similar reasons, it is possible that that pain will not return in them, but this is done in small doses.
And it is said in popular speech that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and it is a false saying, as those who understand it believe there is no cure that surpasses medicine or any other cause except cautery.
And the reason is to the contrary; and the understanding that cautery is the last resort of medicine is only when one applies the methods of healing in some ailments, and those medicines do not help, and then at the end of the cause, one administers cautery, and it proves beneficial for that. And from here onwards, it becomes clear that cautery is not the last resort of medicine, but according to the understanding of popular opinion and many foolish doctors.
And the ancients said that hot cautery is better than cold cautery, and they did not say this except for the equality of heat and the subtlety of its substance.
And they say that the place of cautery does not burn unless it is absolutely true, for you have already seen and proven that it does not do so in every body but only in certain ones; cauterization with fire from gold is good and better than what they said; however, when you make cauterization with fire, it is not declared to you, because the gold is consumed according to the amount you want due to the heat of the fire, and if you adjust it over the fire, the gold melts into the fire, and some sheets fall into the fire so that the artisan can catch them by the occupation of that task.
And for this, cauterization with iron should be made more lightly and precisely to ensure the correctness of the operation.
You have already organized this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and you have organized those from the beginning within the feet, so that now I am asking him what he wants from it.
**First Chapter**
This cautery confers upon the patient the benefit of heat and moisture, two remedies for accidents caused by cold, which is the root of many fluxes, known as rheumatism, from the head to the extremities, and flu-like symptoms, and also sleep disturbances, toothache and throat pain, and generally all illnesses that arise from cold, as well as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar conditions in those ailments.
The method of this cautery is as follows: first, you must evacuate the illness with a laxative medicine for three or four nights, depending on the severity of the illness, the age of the patient, and their usual condition.
And then command them to shave their head with a razor, and make that incision between your legs on a clean bench, and place their hands on the afflicted foot.
Then place the edge of your palm close to the razor's blade, between the patient's toes, and press down. However, if the inflamed area of the middle part of the foot has been determined, mark it with a sign and take the olive-shaped cautery whose form is as follows:
And then place that on the healthy area marked with a sign, descending in such a way that the patient's hand is slowly constrained, and you turn it.
Then slowly lift your hand and examine the area, and if you already see any bone exposed, as well as the quantity of gravel-like matter, raise your hand again, and if it does not return to that position against the instrument, or another one from that side, cool it down until you see the bone, as I have told you.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the area and leave it for three days.
Then apply pressure to the engorged area at the border and leave it, ensuring that the scale of the burn is destroyed. Then treat the area with an ointment containing four ingredients until it is healed.
And it is said that when the Roman plague opens up, the better the limb gets, so it is better and more rejuvenated.
They also say that the bone should be cauterized within the flesh and hold the cautery until some part of the bone's specific nature is hardened.
Then remove what is adjusted to the bone and clean it.
And they say others that the pointed cautery should be used on the rear, as it first penetrates strongly into the bone, and then envelops it, and this is the form of the small cautery: And they believe that from that place, the vapours of the head escape.
And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then it should be treated until it is consolidated.
I do not see these two types of cautery suitable for everyone, but rather for certain individuals out of necessity; and indeed, when it comes to health, better is the natural cure when possible; for the head is exposed due to the solution of continuity of its parts, as we have witnessed in other members, especially when the head of the malady is of a fiery nature.
And the specific type of cautery that comes first is safer and better for me; from this one, and through this work, health is achieved.
Second chapter.
On cautery of the head.
When chronic and persistent pain occurs throughout the head, and these symptoms prolong the illness, one uses weapons, splints, tourniquets, emplasters, poultices, hot water, dogs, cats, feathers, and similar things; but especially if a cautery has already been applied that does not heal or benefit from any of those causes, then consider this: if the nature of the head illness is strong, it is not necessary to apply another cautery on top of it. And then cauterize that area on the side of the head where the skull is cracked using an internal cautery. Cut the skull open and expose the amount we have found, then cauterize that area with a cautery on the back left side of the head at a place called the "vas" – it is the location where the wind is stopped. And apply your hand to it, do not expose the bones, for the disease finds great pain in this place, unlike all other cauterizations on the head.
And you should apply this cauterization in its proper place, because you know that the cauterization with which the horns of the head and the occiput are treated is a more delicate cauterization than the one applied to the middle part of the head; and this is its form.
Capital chapters.
On the treatment of old migraines.
When a severe pain in the head or a pain radiating to the eye occurs, it is necessary to use purifying medicines for the head and administer other treatments as mentioned regarding the various ailments; if these do not prove effective, then cauterization should be performed in two ways: either with acute, burning medicine or with iron.
You might use burning medicines or cautery, take a hot cloth and cut off the ends of it from both sides. And then you should incise the place of pain in the temple with a scalpel until it is felt to be in the right place, as long as it remains hidden.
Then apply pressure to it as it is relaxed due to the release of constriction, and leave it for three hours; next, remove the compress and let the pain subside for two or three days, then apply a warm bath to the affected area until the pain disappears.
And then apply a poultice to it until it is healed.
And if you choose to do this using some of the burning medicines that I have written about in the two treatises on burning medicines, then...
Apply the cautery according to this manner: take a fire from the cautery whose shape is as follows:
It is called a clavicle, because its head has the shape of a clavus (clover) with some curvature, and in the middle part of it, there is a small eminence.
Then place your hand over the painful area, holding it in such a way that the pain does not become more intense, and slowly turn the cautery at a controlled speed.
And if the amount of blood that is clotted by the specific nature of the wound is equal to or greater than the capacity of the vessel, raise your hand so that the artery that remains below is not clotted, in order that no more blood flows out.
Then soak it in salt water and place that over the area for three days; and afterwards apply a poultice with hot compresses until it is healed.
And if you see, burn the end of the knife with a cautery, and be careful not to make an incision into an artery in this newly formed wound.
Capital quarter.
Of the cauterization of old wounds.
When treating an old wound as we have discussed in the previous section on cure and dividing maladies, and if the treatment does not take effect and the pain persists due to a lack of appropriate medication or fire cautery, you should ignite the cuticular cautery until it turns white. Then place your hand over the area for a moment as you make an incision along the length of the painful line, identifying the source of the greatest discomfort.
However, it is necessary for you to be careful about the continuation of the mandible, which is badly affected by chewing, and that the wound is not adhered and the nerves which are damaged, and that there is no muscle spasm.
And if it is concerning the care and prevention of the flow of blood from an artery that is cut, for in the cutting of it there is fear, especially to him who ignores what he does and is unstudious and impatient; and leaves the operation on him at the beginning.
And come to the remembrance of the regulation of the flow of accidental blood from the artery according to your manner in its place in this book.
And if you see this illness that does not respond to these cauterizations and you see the patient's condition tolerable, cauterize in the middle part of the head as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
And if you find, administer the cauterizations that we have said in the chapter of artery constriction with cauterization having two blades, this is the better and more effective cauterization.
Chapter 5.
On the treatment of ear pain.
When there is pain in the ear caused by friction and it is treated with lacrimal and other remedies as mentioned in the previous section, and if the pain persists, apply heat with a cautery. This is known as a "puncta," which has this form:
Then apply the puncta close to the heat source, and it should be rotated around the entire ear, or in any pattern that relieves the pain. Use the cautery along the edge of the ear pain gradually, until the area is relieved from the pressure.
And if the cautery with the three points is applied all over the ear, and when it is removed, care should be taken of the areas until they are healed.
Chapter .vi.
**On the cauterization of tortuous (varicose) veins.**
The tortuous veins that are cured and treated by cauterization are precisely those that come from varicose humors, as we have mentioned in the divisions of illnesses.
Cauterization should be avoided for this species that is caused by drying or spasm of the nerve.
When you treat that species of tortuous vein with shaking and splashing and do not apply your treatment, know that you cauterize the illness in three places: first, you burn the tip of the auricle; second, a small portion on their temple; and third, the connection of the two lips.
And hold the hot cautery against the opposite side of the afflicted part, for relaxation is only seen in the area that appears to be healed.
And the method of cauterization is that you apply the hot cautery to the base of the earlobe, slightly above the ear lobe, and on the temple, its length corresponding to the length of the finger, and hold your hand with the cautery until the quantity of the substance in the vein is burned.
This is the form of the cautery, and it is special from the knife, whose shape is placed flat on the table. However, it may be even more subtle, as you will see with your own eyes; and take care to avoid excessive roughness on its surface.
And take care of the area that is exposed during the procedure until it heals.
Chapter .VII.
On the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and treatment with what we have mentioned does not help and the patient has no fever, then cauterize at four points: above all the joints of the head; also cauterize at the middle point of the head, as we have said; and cauterize the joint (or gland) under the chin. And the manner of the cautery is done as it has been said above.
And it is cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is more difficult to treat; and then apply what you have processed.
Chapter .VIII.
About the cauterization of oblivion performed by flame.
You should give the patient in the beginning small doses of herbs and pills, the servants will then administer them.
Then shave the entire head of the patient and apply the plaster to his neck as described in the treatise on plasters.
And repeat this several times, as it is the manner of cauterization. And do this according to the order of those methods I have already mentioned.
And thus, if for those methods healing is good, otherwise make three cauterizations to him in the last part of his head, descending from the higher part of the head to the lower part behind it. And between each cautery, he should ensure the thickest part of the skin is held, and then carefully perform the cauterization as it progresses.
If the patient tolerates the pain, and the illness permits, perform the cauterization on the middle part of the body; but if greater relief is sought, cauterize both the upper and lower parts.
Ensure the care of what has been healed, and perform the cauterization with olive oil according to the shape previously indicated.
Chapter IX.
On the cauterization of parasites and the softening of the entire body.
Understand that you should proceed with the softening of the head as we have discussed; then carefully shave the patient's head, and cauterize it in the middle part with a cautery, and cauterize all parts of the head, and cauterize over the last joint of it, and cauterize three times over the spine of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the case of severe stiffness and pain in the body, and the pain persists, apply four cauterizations on the spine of the back, and later with cautery until the burning sensation of the patient disappears, and raise your hand. Then carefully tend to it until it is healed, and this cauterization should be with olive oil.
Chapter X.
On the cauterization of epilepsy.
The epileptic is not cauterized, but that kind of epilepsy is due to phlegm.
And therefore, it is important to purify the patient's brain from the beginning of their illness and, for other remedies, as we have mentioned in the previous division when the disease is severe and does not yield to medical treatment.
And if it is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then administer liquids and soft foods to them for several days, improving their diet.
And then shave the patient's head, and apply a cautery to it in the middle part of the head as previously described, and another cautery on the back of their head, and over any corners of the head that have been cauterized. And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then apply cauteries as mentioned, having a paralyzing and softening effect on the body over the spine of the neck and the spine of the back.
And apply the olive cautery as previously described.
If the patient is a child, then apply subtle cauteries according to this method.
Chapter .xi.
On the cauterization of melancholia.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted by excessive moisture and gross phlegm, cauterize it with the cautery that we have spoken of when it has led to paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess of moisture declining into melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then he should drink water that purifies their brain according to what has been preceded in the division.
Then shave the patient's head, make a decent cut from the hairline down to the circle, and pause it in the middle of the scalp.
And the patient should feel relaxed, and be held from all sides.
And then apply a liniment; it is more worthy of being done before shearing sheep. And heat that above the fire for tempering in measure, which causes them to suffer more when placed in it. Then take that in the middle part of his head in a circular manner, and loosen it within so that it becomes cooled.
And do this to the patient once a week for an entire week, following his diet as mentioned above until he is healed; or if you wish, make small punctures with a carefully arranged cautery, too. This type of cautery moistens the brain equally.
Then apply that warm compress on the edges or in the form of a cloth made from lupine.
Chapter .xii.
About the treatment of water retention in the legs.
When the onset of water retention in the legs is indicated by the symptoms previously described in the section, then begin and cause the patient to drink a substance that purges their head, and pay attention to all humidity.
And perform the sudorific bath with degu (a purgative substance) for several days.
Then command the patient to scrape their head, and cauterize the affected area with a hot iron at the middle of the head; and cauterize twice with two irons over two temples if it is the onset of water retention in both legs, or on one side if it is the onset in one leg.
Cut with a cautery all the veins and arteries that are left in the leg; and the cauterize in that length in the breadth of the temples.
And be careful of blood flows when cauterizing; and if you see blood flow from it, stop any further medication that is within your power.
And come to knowledge that is derived from arteries and amputation of those, and caution against blood flows.
Sometimes, the cervical region is cauterized between two bones using two cauterizing instruments.
Chapter XIII
On the cauterization of ancient tears.
When eye tears are ancient and frequent, and through veins and arteries in the manifest location of the head outside, it is verified that this is a sign of fluid excess, tighten the fleckmatique muscles, cauterize that which we have mentioned in the chapter on the beginning of hot water in the eyes, cauterize in the middle part of the head, and two cauteries below the temples, and two cauteries below the cervix between two bones. And if there is additional indigestion, cauterize that on the entire length of the coa (hair) of the eye above the upper eyelid with a small cautery.
**Chapter XIII**
**On the Cauterization of Nose Bleeds**
When treating the condition we mentioned in the previous section and your treatment is not effective, prepare a drink with medicinal herbs for the patient to consume over three nights; then shave the patient's head, and cauterize with a midget cautery or olive-shaped cautery. And then apply a cautery to that, using a clavified cautery on both sides of the eye, leaving the hairs intact.
And be careful not to burn that.
And the shape of this clavified cautery is as follows.
Chapter XV.
On the softening cautery of the eyelids of the eyes.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or moisture, apply a cautery to that eyelid with a lunate cautery; and this is the shape of it:
And if you, apply a cautery to both eyebrows with a small amount of two cauteries along their entire length, and they should be elongated from the temples. And the length of each cautery should be according to the quantity of the swelling.
And do not press too hard with the cautery, but according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is adhered.
**Chapter XVI**
Regarding the cautery of the eyelid, when the hairs turn inside out and close the eye, apply the cautery to the affected area.
When the hairs of the eyelid turn inside out and close the eye, apply the cautery in two ways: either by making incisions or by using a medicinal cautery that burns.
If you use a fire cautery, command the patient to look away from where the hairs are being cut, ensuring they do not see; and if you must hold them in place, tighten the bandage around their eyes until the hairs have grown back.
Therefore as they become heated and engorged, place the patient's head in a low position, and then apply pressure over the eyeballs with your hands, indicating according to the shape of a dead leaf, and be the beginning of the sign close to the hair.
And then apply a cold compress or a thick paste of owl's egg or bird droppings on the eye.
And shape the cautery according to this form.
And cauterize over the indicated figure, little by little, in repeated passes, until the surface of the wound is completely sealed, just as if it were covered with myrtle leaf, appearing healthy.
The sign of healing of the eye work is that you see the eyelid of the eye contracted and the hairs raised at the site of the eye's puncture.
And so raise your hand and place it there for three days, then continue to apply pressure to the affected area until the swelling subsides. And then apply care to that with ointment until it heals.
If it returns through the skin for any reason and the eyelid becomes softened, then make another cautery over that just as you had done originally.
If the hair is on the eyelid, then cauterize it until it is raised to its natural position and healed so that the hair does not remain.
But the cautery with medicinal fire is that you order the patient to remove the hair until it is prolonged and healed, and then make a bandage in the shape of a fir-leaf from cloth.
And then take some known soap and a living fire, or whatever is at hand, and mix those causes together, making it into a paste so that it is not cooled; and spread this from it over the cloth which is made thus in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it on the affected joint or joints; and leave the fragrant part steeped in lard, and keep the head of the patient raised.
And then cease speaking of the medicine and apply it gently, not forcing it, so that the patient feels the bite of the medicine as if from fire.
And so, as you continue to apply this, if the patient perceives the medicine's bite, then cease it and change to a better-spoken word; thus, when the bite ceases, again apply the medicine and wash away the odor with water. And consider whether several times the eyelid has been lifted, as is done for a constriction from fire or incision, for this is good. If it does not return to that of the medicine in the place where the medicine was not absorbed and does not become discolored until your operation is concealed and the wound is contracted, then continue with this.
And then apply pressure to the area until the pain of adhesion is eradicated, and treat it with a definite ointment or some other remedy until it heals.
And it is necessary for you to perform your operation with careful vigilance so that no part of the medicine falls out, and if the eyelid becomes softened after several days due to the cause of hair in the eye, continue your treatment on that area where the eyelid is softened, and precisely as you did at the beginning, and envelop it until it heals.
This is the form of the myrtle leaf.
And you know that the eyes of men differ in size and shape, and therefore your treatment should be adapted accordingly.
And let not the method of treatment be hidden from him who studies this art.
Chapter .xvii.
On cauterization of the fistula in the tear duct of the eye.
When you treat a fistula using the method we have described for dividing maladies and your treatment does not work, then know that you should cauterize it as follows: command the patient to hold their head in a certain position, and place a minister's head between their thighs in such a way that it is neither moved nor shaken by the patient's own head.
Then apply some hot compresses made of lard or a paste of chickpea flour on the eye of the patient.
And shape the cautery as follows:
which should be concave, similar to the shape of a cane or a spiral pen, from one end where the cautery is made.
And if you see, they penetrate into the other extremity. And if you wish to get out this way, try it with caution.
Yet, he who is experienced is better at the task at hand.
And press the fistula if it is open, and try to clean and dry it. And if it is not open, then open it and remove the pus from it.
And place the hot cautery on it, and with your hand, gently but firmly, press against the cautery at the root of the nose, so that you do not burn your hand or disturb the patient's distress, and then apply the cautery to the grooves of the nose and soften that area.
And so if at the beginning of the burning cautery it penetrates into the bone, that is good; otherwise, repeat the cautery once or twice, as necessary, and leave it in place for three days, then apply a poultice with drying ointment until it heals.
If after passing ten days it does not heal, then apply a sharp, corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and cut as required in its chapter.
There is another method of cauterization for fistulas that some ancient physicians mentioned: go to the place of the fistula and burn it, then apply a thin layer of molten lead; hold your hand with good pressure, avoiding harming the patient from the heat of the molten lead so that it does not enter the wound; cover the area where you have applied the lead over the patient's wound with cloth soaked in honey or water, as the molten lead will adhere to the fistula and heal it through miraculous cure.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cautery and treatment, it is good; otherwise, it will be necessary to apply a poultice and reduce the fistula to the nose according to its proper place.
**Chapter XVIII**
**On the Cauterization of the Hernia**
**Various accidents cause fissures on the lips, especially in children's lips.**
Therefore, if you treat those fissures as we have said in the previous sections and do not benefit from your treatment, then take a hot iron with a sharp point and make incisions according to this form that I will show:
and the cavity of him according to the thinness of the blade.
Place your hand carefully over those cracks so that the cautery reaches the depth of the cracks.
And then carefully remove the cautery when it has healed.
**Chapter XIX**
**On the Cauterization of Fistulas in the Mouth**
When, during the extraction of the uvula, or the palate, or the teeth, an abscess forms and it bursts, and it becomes chronic, and a fistula appears, and you treat it but do not allow proper healing, then you must ignite a cautery according to the extent of the fistula, and insert that flame into the opening of the fistula, and with your hand guide the burning flame to its depth, doing this once or twice; and then attend to the treatment as we have mentioned for the cure until it is healed.
And if the wound is clean and healed, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to expose the location and treat the corrupt bone as it will be described in its chapter.
**Capitol XX.**
On the treatment of teeth and the softening of arteries.
When the arteries are softened by moisture and the teeth are painful, and these conditions do not yield to medicinal treatment, then place the patient's chin on their knee, and shape the cautery so that it approaches the tooth. Then, place your finger over the tooth and insert the burning cautery swiftly, holding it for a very brief moment so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth, which has been reached.
Then remove your hand and repeat the application of the cautery several times as desired.
Then make the patient gargle with salt water for an hour, after which they should spit it out, because the painful tooth will be numbed and the softened gum will be tightened, and the corrupt moisture will be dried up.
Chapter .xxi.
On the treatment of tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to cold, or there is swelling or pus, and the treatment with medicine does not help, then cautery should be performed in two ways: either with cow's dung cautery or with fire cautery.
Cautery with cow's dung involves taking cow dung and forming it into a ball, then inserting it into the hollow of the ferrule (a type of dental device), and holding it there until the tooth pain is numbed by the cold.
And repeat this process several times until the heat from the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you see, dip a cloth or piece of fabric in the hot water on that side, place it over the painful tooth, and place the burning iron on it until the iron reaches the depth of the tooth's cavity.
However, the use of fire for cauterization only suits the eration or extraction of iron, and it should not be too rough on the tissue, nor should the heat of the fire reach the patient's mouth.
Then shape the cautery as required, place it over the tooth, and hold your hand over it until the cautery cools down; do this several times as the pain may resurface on the same day or the next.
And ensure that the patient opens their mouth wide with ease and holds the cautery for about an hour, then spit it out; this is the shape of the cautery.
And apply the cautery where you have made the incision as best as you can.
And this is the shape of the cannula.
Chapter XXII.
On the cauterization of extrophules.
When extrophules are filled with phlegm and cold humors that are resistant to digestion by medicines, and you wish to drain them slightly, then apply the cautery in a curved shape following this method: have two heated ends so that the smoke from one end can ignite the other. Place the burning tip over the affected area once, and if more is needed, repeat on the other side until the swelling subsides.
And if the swelling is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the swelling. Then bind it tightly for three days and place a warm compress over it until the affected area is healed by the heat.
And then apply that medicine, bandages, and compresses until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
On cauterization of wounds and on the constriction of vessels.
When humidity appears on the surface of the lung, especially when it is chilled from compression, then it should be evacuated through the use of purgative medicines at the beginning, and then cauterize that place with a hot iron in the affected area.
And be careful not to burn the lung with the hot iron nor to inflame the patient's bowels, but only slightly.
And cauterize that or another cautery on the joint of the neck at the last spinal bone of the patient. The cautery of him is to be done as described above.
Then take care of that as described above until it is healed.
Chapter .XXIIIII. (or Chapter 23, if numbering is as per a modern system)
On cauterization for lung diseases and cough.
When cough and lung diseases are caused by humidity, and the patient has no fever or phlegm, and it is an ancient illness, then cauterize as follows: make two incisions with a cautery over the furcula (the bone in the base of the throat) at the places where the lion's teeth and tongue meet; and another cautery halfway up the foot between the two mamillos (breast bones); and cauterize both in the manner described above.
And if you wish, your puncturing cautery may be the one called a point, the shape of which precedes in the puncturing of the pain of auricles.
And make punctures within these; and then carefully apply those things that are mentioned above so that it heals.
And now, the cautery has three prongs for cauterization to that area: once you can make three cauteries according to this form:
Chapter 25.
On cauterization of the tongue, which is the help's head.
When the head of the helper is dislocated due to slick humidity and does not stop in the hour of its return, you must reduce its dislocation until it is to its usual place, and then with a slight movement, it should be displaced as it ought to be, as we have witnessed. First, reduce the dislocation, and then return the patient to their back or side; and raise the ribcage which was in the opening within the tongue to the parts above using your left hand, if the joint is dislocated within.
And then apply the cautery, which has two points; and this is its form:
Then apply the cautery to the opening through which that one penetrates into the other part; and the figure of cauterization will appear when two cauteries are used.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count, and that is why the cauteries are eight.
Then place the entire cautery on the wound with salt, and make the patient lie in tranquility; the member will not be harmed for any length of time until it is healed.
And if the dislocation is in the joints above and it persists, make this done, cauterize over the muscle with a hot iron cautery or with pointed cautery, because the joint is confirmed, the humidity is broken, and the malady is healed.
Chapter .XXVI.
On cauterization of the stomach.
When inflammation of the stomach occurs and moisture fills what was previously a space within its folds, and if you continue with treatment methods without consideration, soon you will find that the disease buries itself in the patient's back, extending their arms and legs, and cauterize that area with three cauterizations: one leaving a mark on the foot approximately the size of a finger, and two others on either side of the spinal column, forming a triangular shape; for those who are not properly aligned, this will cause pus.
And if the depth of the cauterization is two-thirds of the thickness of the skin.
And the shape of the cautery should be according to this form. If you wish, cauterize with a larger cautery at the center of the stomach in this shape; and this should be a circular cautery according to this form:
And the stomach should be cauterized by puncturing it in the place that this cautery frightens: and you know how much point you want to try, then cauterize that with cautery on the points; and then care for that which is left of the cure until it is healed.
**Chapter XXVII.**
**On the Cauterization of Veins.**
When pain in the vein arises from coldness or moisture or excessive wind, and the disease is treated as we have said, and it does not subside, then place the patient in a supine position, and apply three cauterizations according to this form and with this quantity on the vein below the hipbone, which will bring about the patient's decubitus.
And the space between each cautery should be according to its thickness, and the cauteries should be according to the length of the body on the right side.
And do not be tempted by the sharp cauteries.
And if the amount of this (substance) that is adhered to the quantity of the nature of the wound, and it is not adjusted properly; and if the illness stands on the patient's feet; and if it is not standing, then it should sit, which has already extended its parts and raised its arms.
And with your skill and caution in the art, you can cauterize these cauteries with a cuttlefish cautery.
And be careful not to burn too much during cauterization, and focus the gaze of all present so that the whole body is heated and penetrates within the intestines, for the bowels here are delicate; and know this.
Chapter 28.
On the incision of an abscess in the leg with cautery.
When an abscess forms in the leg and you want to know if it is in the flesh or around it (the tunic), if it is in the flesh of the leg, the disease takes on greater severity and the pain becomes acute.
And if it is around the flesh of the leg (the tunic), as the pain is very acute and often exhausts the doctors in treating it.
Therefore, position the patient so that their neck is reversed; then identify the location of the abscess to be treated; and apply the pointed cautery similar in shape to what was described on the previous page. And cauterize with these cauteries until the entire wound is healed, so that it reaches the bone, and until the infection disappears.
And take care of this one for the healing of other abscesses until it is cured.
And do not use these cautery techniques except those studied in the art of medicine and practiced by experts who have learned from experience; however, for this operation, it is better to follow the instructions we have given and choose a safer method.
Chapter .XXIX.
On the cauterization of pleurisy.
Ancient cauterization techniques for pleurisy, according to this method, involve taking the long, thin point from a dried-out arrow and inserting it into the size of the affected area.
Then immerse them in oil and apply heat, cauterizing the area between the continuation of the furcula and the collarbone with a cautery; place two small cauterizations below, slightly declining from the part where the beard is, and two cauterizations at an angle between the fifth rib and the cartilage, slightly declining towards the back parts; another cautery in the middle part of the leg; and one over the stomach, and three cauterizations at the back parts; and one cautery in the area between the two shoulders, and two cauterizations on each side of the leg, leaving the cautery between the two shoulders.
And take care that your hand does not burn with the cautery, but rather on the visible part of the cord in operation.
They also speak of other ancient practices where certain men use hot iron cauteries that burn like a ray and ignite this, and insert it into the space between the ribs, as long as it alleviates this pain and heals the wound, as we have said about the cautery for the foot.
In this perforation with cautery, there is no cause for fear, as it often happens in the fystula site where healing does not occur.
**Chapter XXX.**
**On the Cauterization of Ulcers.**
When treating the illness of the ulcer using what we have said about treatment in the section and you do not apply your cure, then cauterize it in one of three ways, all of which are correct: one is to make three or four incisions along the length of the ulcer according to the figure of the cautery on the leg, the shape of which has been previously described.
And between each cautery, the thickness of a finger or slightly less, and the manner of the cautery is the manner we have described in the cautery of the flesh entirely.
And do not hold your hand against the cautery; and the patient should lie on their back.
And there is another manner of cauterizing, where you ignite the cautery with two points, which we have described in the chapter on the dislocation of muscles, raising the cord that is in the straight part of the membra, so that it holds the patient's left side without pain.
And your elevation should be such that you raise the cord according to the length of the body, so that cauterizations are made according to the breadth of the body.
Then bring together the two points, ignite the fire, in that place where they penetrate each other with the cord from the other side.
And then remove the cautery; thus are made four incisions.
And if you see, cauterize with a cautery that has three points.
Then dress the wounds of the cautery so that they do not become inflamed for too many days, as it is more comfortable than other causes preceding in the treatment.
Chapter XXXI
On the cauterization of gout.
Cauterization should not be applied directly to gout but specifically to the inflamed joint.
When treating gout using the methods discussed above and you do not achieve relief, then make four incisions in a circle around the affected joint, and place one cautery on the abdomen, another on the thigh, another on the ankle, two between the spinal bones, and one directly below the foot, and another cautery on the abdomen. And the depth of the cautery should be determined according to the severity of the case.
And then apply the cautery gently so that it does not burn for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient of treatment with the cautery alone, but add two intentions to it, and it will be celebrated in them as aids for healing.
The shape of the cautery that is applied to the stomach should be according to its form from before, and it is that which is used for cauterizing the back, being olive-shaped as per its previous form.
Chapter .xxxii. (Note: "Capitol" likely refers to "Chapter", with ".xxxii" indicating the specific chapter number)
On the Cauterization of Feet and Other Parts:
When the feet are immersed in water and filled with amber liquid, cauterize them on the sole of the foot between the big toe and little finger, and hold the cautery with your hand without twisting it; then raise your hand slightly, but do not withdraw it completely, as the amber liquid will drip.
Make the cautery in this manner: Then apply two cauteries to both sides; on each side, make a cautery with the tip of the cutting cautery. And the cautery should be according to the length of the thigh: one on each side, leaving one and placing the other in the middle of the thigh; and two cauteries on each thigh.
And leave the plague open for a long time so that no water remains in it.
And then address those causes that we have mentioned.
**Chapter XXXIII**
**On the Cauterization of Abdominal Parts**
When abdominal parts are infected and swollen due to cold and moisture, which affect the digestive and retentive functions located in the stomach and intestines, it is treated with healing methods and not by confining them. Sometimes, during severe illness, patients endure painful cauterization of these affected parts, first applying a large cautery on their stomach as mentioned previously regarding gastric cauterization, then using circular and four cauteries around the subtle abdominal openings, or a fine-pointed cautery; and also cauterizing over the alcatin (a term for a specific condition or organ, perhaps) with two cauteries.
And if the humidity and illness persist and the patient endures it, then cauterize over the anus and intestines, strongly applying two cauteries near the stomach and around the groin, as this is a perfect cure for a condition that would otherwise persist.
Chapter .xxxiv.
On the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
When they are of a natural origin, stemming from thick humors or corrupted moisture, and are not cured by the means mentioned in the previous section, then cauterize them with three cauterizations over the pus at the base of the spine in a small, triangular shape, and another cauterization on the navel below by two cuts.
If it appears that the patient's stomach is chilled and their food is not digested, and their face becomes pale, then cauterize over the stomach with a large cautery as previously mentioned; also cauterize on the tongue with one cautery, and on the belly with another cautery using a nail-like cautery, leave the cauterizations open for some time, and then tend to them until they heal.
Chapter .xxxv.
Regarding the cauterization of hernias, they should be treated with excision.
When you excise the hernia, you use the cautery that is shaped like a ray. Insert that ignited instrument into the excised hernia, and secure the patient's hand so that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the sanie flows.
And do this once or twice, for if the hernias are too numerous, cauterize each one of them as we have mentioned, and then apply some ointment to them so that they heal.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on anything, it is better to do so later in the healing process.
**Capitol .xxxvi.**
About the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in the natural openings of the body.
When nature does not comply with the treatment we have described in its proper place, and the patient is frightened by that, it is beneficial to apply cauterization.
So when one sees a fistula in nature that is ancient, with corrupt sanitation and humidity, it is therefore most appropriate to begin attempting to heal it subtly, and then gradually introduce the amount of pressure corresponding to the depth of the fistula as described in the aforementioned attempt.
Near the cautery that resembles a ray. And then apply the ignited cautery to this fistula, according to the amount in which it enters.
And apply the cautery repeatedly until those corrupt bodies are burned, once or twice or three times, according to your need's quantity.
And be careful of the burning of nerves and veins; if a fistula goes to the bladder or intestinal cavity, be mindful of all those places; and do not intervene unless the fistula is in fleshy tissue and you think it won't penetrate further.
And then tend to the area until it heals.
And if the area is sealed and the foreign bodies are removed from it, and they remain like that for a long time, then know that it is completely healed.
And if the foreign bodies are not removed from it, then know that they are penetrating or corrupting its internal parts, or falling into those causes of which there will be recollection in that place.
Chapter .xxxvii.
On the cauterization of ulcers.
When ulcers cause pain due to cold or excessive heat, and the patient's condition deteriorates, it is necessary to cauterize them using a pointed cautery directly on each ulcer, which helps alleviate the discomfort.
And we should cauterize strongly according to a slight delay, so that three cauterizations will come in succession, and thus they will be more deeply healed.
Chapter .xxxviii.
On the cauterization of the bladder.
When the bladder becomes weakened and softened due to friction and moisture such that the disease does not retain urine, apply a cautery at the outlet of the urethra on top of the bladder; the hairs of the penis begin to fall out, and cauterize with a cautery at the right outlet, and another at the left.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the depth of the pain; apply a cautery at the lower part of the back, or two cauteries if necessary.
And the cautery should be driven according to how it is processed.
Chapter .XXXIX.
On cauterization of the breast.
When the breast becomes irritated and moistened, and by these means conception is forbidden, and the menstruation of the patient is corrupted, and excitation is delayed, and pain occurs with the coming in of their menses, then know that the place should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said concerning the cautery of the bladder; or two cauteries, and they should be driven firmly.
Chapter .XL.
On cauterization of the dislocated ankle.
When moist mucus is infiltrated at the site of the ankle dislocation, and it causes the displacement of its parts, a sign of this is that the affected area appears longer than the other when compared between them. And the location of the dislocation is compressed within it, drawing blood.
So, you should cauterize the patient over the dislocated ankle using a circular cautery, as you will have already tried to realign the joint by its surroundings, and thus, the dislocation falls into its proper place within the circle.
And the cautery mentioned previously also has its shape in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not at hand, then cauterize it with three large olive cauteries.
And make the cautery according to the severity of the inflammation in all the vein; and take care that it heals properly.
Chapter .xli.
On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain appears in the area of the ankle, caused by cold, wetness, the patient is treated with the method we have mentioned and it does not help, then know that you should remove the bad humor from the body through foul pills or artificial pills or similar ones; and then cauterize it.
And the method of the cautery on that area follows two ways: either with cautery using burning medicines or with fire.
According to two methods of knowledge, one of which is to cauterize that on the opening of the anus with three triangular cauteries according to this form and make them go deep enough. And the space between each cautery should be according to the thickness of the said part, and if the cauteries are olive-sized or large.
Sometimes, four cauteries may be placed on the most painful areas around the anus' opening.
And if you wish, cauterize the circle that precedes the shape in the cauterization of the hernia opening, one that is circular and burns away all the spasms.
And this is the method of cautery in such cases where pain is fixed around the anus and not spread throughout the thigh.
If it is extended within the thigh, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the thigh at the place where you direct the pain; and apply a cautery to the ankle for four days from the inner side.
And if the cautery is cutaneous, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the intensity of the pain in the joint.
And if the pain shifts to the area near the feet, then cauterize that place with a cautery at three, four, or more points if needed.
And if the pain shifts to the side of the thigh, then cauterize that place with a cutaneous cautery.
And be careful in all cautery so that you do not finish with the cautery as you irritate nerves or cause great harm, and thereby against the patient's illness aggravate or constrict.
And you have already seen one after another of those which are cauterized on the leg and finally in the cauterization, and the hot bed inflated until the swelling reached the foot, and the fire pierced and corrupted all over the foot. And then apply a strong acid solution of the belly, and do this with death.
And if the pain is in two parts, then cauterize each according to this manner.
And the wise ones said about the cauterization of water cautery, which is this manner: make it resemble a circle of iron whose circuit is the width of a palm; and its orifice should be according to the thickness of a date palm bone or perhaps a little more.
And they drew inside that circle another one-third; and they made the space between them equal to the length of a night's rest; and those circles were two in number; and the length of those lines was a night or two nights, and they made on the margin of that iron ring decently decorated in the circles; and this is the form of it.
Near the fire, it is ignited so that it rotates and sparks, then it is placed over the water's edge, the patient lying on their side. And therefore, it is cauterized with three pointed cauteries at once.
Then, it is left like that for three days; the wound is dressed with a border and left open for too many days; and care is taken to heal it within.
Albucasis says: O, my sons, of this kind of cautery we have used little due to the fear of looking at it, and because few of us have found those that look at it.
One should apply the best cautery to him who suffers from it, and find a way to ease the pain in that place.
Maybe cautery and medicines should be used so that you make two circles with a perforated armor on which the hook of the iron gate can be inserted, with the length of the wall in its narrowest point equal to two nuts or something like them.
And if the space between some parts is such that it corresponds to the thickness of the said part, they should be placed above and below, and joined together in this manner.
Then place your hand over the affected area where the patient feels pain from the water, and take some cold water, forming it into two circles, and apply heat to it little by little, for a duration of an hour, allowing the patient to endure the burning sensation and the tightening — for that burning sensation is as if fire is biting.
Then raise your hand with the instrument, and remove all cold water from the affected area with warm water.
And then place a bandage over it for three days and rest on the edge until the swelling subsides, leave it for several days, and it will heal; this is later in youth.
And then apply treatment until it is healed.
If the pain spreads to the thigh or leg, place him in a position that holds water as it is done with the anvil immersion.
And this is the manner of water treatment, and you have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Prepare a mixture of alkali and cause no extincted from both parts, cut them, and place in a new container, making a small hole in the middle through which the desired amount will enter.
And place the base of one wave against another, and rest upon that firm surface a living caustic of hot water, which by its power seeps through these tissues, and as you compress them with your hand firmly but gently, allow the hot water to flow from the wave into the space left between them.
Then adjust the amount of water, and rest upon another living caustic and renewable base, as this will provide a strong and acute force, which is administered in many medical operations and in cauterizing other parts of the body, for it acts as fire.
And there are certain medicines that are cauterized with wide fire, quickly and skillfully, combining them in such a way that they become more effective.
Now let me relate the operation and cure by which a man of olden times treated pain in the legs and sciatica, and how admirable was the simplicity of that method, and I say that no other treatment is needed, for it healed him completely, as he immediately soaked himself in hot water and rested.
And it is that it should be taken from a certain green herb, and if it is not available, a recent fig should be used; then it is squeezed with a little grey and placed on the water where the pain is, or on the object, or on the leg, and it is heated.
And it should be left for three hours or as long as the patient's condition allows for the reduction of the adhesion.
Then immerse it in water and when the patient's body is relaxed, insert that into the sun, as the pain ceases and healing occurs.
And know that no one should use cautery with these medicines unless the evacuation of the body is appropriate.
It may already be said that when the narrow vein of the goat is cauterized, it will heal well; and the cautery should be applied to it in this manner: take wool and dip it in ancient oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the bones.
And then take a dried goat's gut, inflame it with fire until it is charred, and place it over the wound until it is extended. And repeat this, ceasing only when the pain and swelling from the bite disappear in the water.
And this method of cautery is called the "cow's cautery.
Chapter .xlii. (This appears to be a roman numeral indicating the chapter number, not a translation.)
On the cauterization of joint pain.
Sometimes pain in the back is caused by various factors, such as muscle strain or injury, or excessive evacuation, and for similar reasons, due to the infusion of foul, wet matter.
And cautery does not cut except in this single species which is made by the effusion of hot material.
Therefore, in this manner, evacuation of the malady is done with pills that resemble it, which are placed on either side where the pain occurs three lines according to its latitude, so that you make points in each line, with cautery or otherwise, depending on the quantity that is suitable from the tolerance of the malady and the strength of the pill.
And cautery is done with a pointed cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or four, using the claw cautery in this manner:
Chapter XXXIII.
On cauterization at the onset of gout.
Symptoms of this illness are seen in small children; and the sign of its onset in children is that their tight muscles cause elevation and limitation of motion in the evening.
It is found in the last segment of the spine and in the nerves associated with it, which begin to rise above the other spinal segments.
And therefore, when you observe this and wish to prevent it, use a pointed cautery to make an incision in the shape of a circle as follows: that takes the cautery over the entire segment of the spine without cutting through it.
And if you wish, use the pointed cautery to make two or three lines around the spine. And the points should be appropriate between them.
And then attend to the area until it heals through what we have said.
Beware that cauterization should not be administered to a bleeding wound caused by the spasm of nerves.
Chapter XLIV.
On the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And thus, when gout caused by cold is treated with the proper method and the pain does not recede, then severe cauterization should be applied.
And it is that you cauterize this immediate evacuation in the circulation of the joint of the foot with hot cautery.
And this is the form of the olive cautery:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pain increases within the toes or other joints, and this becomes severe, then cauterize over any affected toe with three or four hot cauteries from this olive cautery.
And if these hot cauteries that you use are sufficient, then cauterize and do not press too hard with the cautery, just enough to affect the specific area.
And if the pains pierce into the bones, apply the cauterization that we have mentioned in its chapter.
And if the pains are only in the joints, it is called rheum, then pierce along the course of the filaments as they twist, puncture at those two lines.
And if the pains remain in these places, then pierce along the course of the filaments on each node and on the pinched nerve of the hand.
And if the pains pierce into other joints or muscles, apply cauterization to any parts of the limbs.
And do not empty the body of bad humors and medicines, for if good regimen is followed and inflammation is drained through this cauterization, it will be healed by God's grace.
Chapter .xlv.
On cauterization of fractures.
When there is a fracture in the angles and it exposes the hernias against the abdomen, then it begins, at this point, to be necessary to return the intestines or hernia to its cavity, and you must order the patient to fast for the day and use gentle remedies so that the gap does not open from his stomach.
Then continue to support the patient between your hands on his back, and command him to keep his breath in so that no air enters or hernia appears.
Then return the patient to his original position and attempt to open the fracture over the bone of the thigh, indicating its end by showing the similarity of its shape to a circle in the upper parts of the body that have been broken.
And then apply the cautery, whose shape this is:
As it enters the skin, it causes itching and redness. And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then apply the cautery over that sign with your hand steady, and when you feel the bone of the toe enter into the socket, repeat this again if at first you did not succeed in getting it into the socket.
And observe carefully the position of the hernia during cauterization, so as not to damage it, preventing further complications or serious harm from occurring.
And you should know that when you perform cauterization, you must not touch the bone, as it will affect your operation.
And be careful that the cauterization of children is subtle according to their size and age.
And take care of the cauterized area for three days, applying fresh bandages until the wound from the heat is healed.
And tend to those with other burns until they are healed.
And the patient should lie on their back for ten days until the area is sealed and the plague (presumably a wound or infection) is healed.
And it is necessary to prevent the flow of food to them according to the duration of their cure, so that they do not protrude from the abdomen due to the effort of healing.
And when it is appropriate to lift after approximately 10 days, administer treatment properly and maintain that for another 40 days.
And it should also reduce work, and the intake of food and drink, and avoid loud voices, for when one follows this regimen of healing entirely, they will be healed.
And let me explain the cure for ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, which begins at the start, and that they do not remain, cauterize the rupture with a red hot iron according to the amount of it, and so it is expelled from the body just as the third part of the intestine; and then care should be taken regarding what we have said, and it should not be overlooked.
And they already said that the first rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, as it is indicated and tried.
and it is stopped with a line that they hold for the width in the wound from above and below; then place your hand with a pointed cautery; but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Chapter XLVI.
On cauterization of twists.
When pain extends to other parts of the body due to an injury or blow and continues for a long time without yielding to treatment with medicines, then apply cauterization with a pointed cautery.
And the cautery should be applied to every member according to its size and extent, nature and severity of the wound, location of the twist and pain in it.
Therefore, if the first cautery is successful, it is good; otherwise, repeat the cautery on him; for usually, in those pains, members are punctured to the member that is closest to it, so that you should succeed with these pointed cauteries until the patient is healed.
**Chapter XLVII**
**On the Cauterization of Leprosy**
Lepers sometimes need cauterization due to severe damage, especially if the type of leprosy is caused by putrefaction of the flame and melancholy.
And therefore, when you wish to cauterize it, consider if the leprosy is acute and if it responds to treatment as described in the previous sections and not to others, or if it does not improve and you fear that the corruption has spread throughout the body and all its members, then cauterize it on the head with pointed instruments: first at the center of the head, and second behind it, beginning at the temples and extending down to the nape, or serve it in other ways.
And finally, with the cautery, make a slight incision within the skin while pressing on the bone, thereby releasing the tension of the bands, so that the expulsion of thick vapors is facilitated; and cauterize over the wound as necessary.
If leprosy has already spread over the body and appears manifestly, you should know that you cauterize those with these cauteries which we have mentioned above; cauterize on the tip of the nose, and make two cauteries on each eyelid, and make two cauteries on both sides of the spine at the nape of the neck, and make six cauteries on the spine, and one large cautery near the coccyx, and one on the coccyx itself, and make two cauteries on each thigh, and one on each leg, and two on each arm, and one on each hand. Cauterize over all the joints of the bones of the hands and feet, and on every talon of their feet, and on the soles of their feet, and on the tendons of their legs.
And be careful of the nerves that are on the sole, do not irritate them.
And in some cases, it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the penis, and another on the opening of the stomach, and another on the intestine.
And you know that the more precise the cauterization, the greater its effectiveness and the less painful it is for the patient; indeed, since the disease lies in the cautery, the body is already stunned.
And take care that the cauterizations be of appropriate size or small according to the members and joints as previously mentioned regarding the kinds of tools.
And then cure the cautery with fine flour mixed with honey and other remedies as long as it heals.
Chapter .xlviii.
On the cauterization of stupor.
When a member is stabbed or numbed and treated with medicines, oils, and bandages, but remains unhealthy, you should cauterize the stunned member with a cautery according to the severity of the member or the lightness of it.
And the hot cautery should enter the depth of the skin slightly. And then take care so that the wound heals properly.
And in some cases, the stupor is cauterized from the roots to the hands and feet, and the spinal columns of the back, as well as the surroundings of the nerves which supply that member, and thus the stupor is removed.
Do not attempt to treat this unless he who does so is knowledgeable in the anatomy of the body's members and the emergence of nerves throughout the body's movements.
**Chapter XLIX**
**On the Cauterization of Hemorrhoids**
When hemorrhoids are old and do not respond to any of the common medical treatments, then you cauterize them with a hot iron, according to their size, until the white and red color of the hemorrhoid is reduced and its color changes.
And then prepare a cure from flour of wheat and lentils mixed with rose oil and leaves of arnoses, or dove dung or eagle dung, each in equal parts, and wrap it in a cloth and place it over the affected area until it is healed.
Chapter 1.
On cauterization of cracks.
When cancer begins to form and it wishes to spread, cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circumference as it is turned.
And the wise ones say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle location; however, I have not seen this, as I fear it may be ulcerated, and I have seen this a few times before.
It is more accurate to cauterize it around its circumference in a circular manner as we have said, or with multiple cauterizations.
Conclusion.
On cauterization of abrasions.
When an abrasion takes time to heal, it may be due to excess moisture, the state of the injury, being old and weak with little blood flow, or time; if you want to hasten the healing of the abrasion, cauterize around it with small pointed cautery tools; then apply a dressing to prevent further irritation.
If you choose to pierce the abrasion with cautery, then heat the cautery tool whose shape is thus: and rest it on the middle of the abrasion until the needle penetrates.
And if the cautery is applied to that spot which is deepest, in order to relieve pressure on the arm; then take care of it until it heals.
Chapter .lii. (This seems to be a chapter number, not a translation request.)
On the cauterization of corrosion.
Corrodent is a wandering corruption in the member, which corrodes it as if fire were eating dry wood.
Therefore, if you encounter that corrosion in a place where cauterization with fire is necessary, then you should use hot cautery pins, small or large as appropriate for the place where it is corroding.
And then cauterize it completely from all sides, ensuring that you eliminate all corrosion and do not leave any cause for it to return.
And then bind it for three days, and apply oil mixed with ash repeatedly over the cauterized places until all scaling is completely eradicated and all corruption removed.
And then apply a warm poultice to that moist flesh wound.
If, after three days, the flesh does not heal and become sound, it is good; otherwise, repeat the cautery over what is broken in the corrupted places.
And corrosion is treated with certain medicines some times instead of cautery, for those are half-measures in place of burning. However, cautery with fire is more suitable for removing the pus of young wounds.
And you have already stated the cure for it with sharp medicine in the incision, so take that when you find it necessary to heal the wound.
(End) Chapter IIII.
On the cauterization of closures and other similar things.
When swelling occurs in the parts around a foot with malady, which is called a 'clau' (toenail), and it causes severe, protruding pain, it is treated as follows: cauterization using fire or water.
Cauterization with fire involves lighting the cautery instrument shaped like a feather, made of iron according to the size of the nail in all parts, and with subtle edges.
Then hold the flame over the nail and carefully rotate the cautery around the nail's perimeter until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail. And leave it for three days until it begins to heal. And then apply a poultice of wild mallows, triced with salt, and leave the poultice on that for a night, so that it may be eradicated from its roots.
And then treat the area with a ointment of generative flesh until it is healed.
And if these remedies do not help and harmful occurrences manifest on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then you must apply cautery to those affected areas with water, and for this, take a needle or a sharp knife or a pen-shaped instrument, and place it over the nail; then pour a small amount of hot water into the needle, and with your hand, compress that area thoroughly, pushing the edge of the needle into the root of the nail, and you will see the water flowing out from under the nail. Wait for the patient to feel a little bit of a burn from the hot water for an hour, then remove it, because the nail's roots will be eradicated.
And thus they also make those cuts in such a way that everything of their own is within their bodies.
And then they should take care of those pustules that the roots of the hairs have been eradicated with the application of ointments that the flesh rejuvenates.
Chapter III.
On cauterization of tremor.
When you encounter any tremor caused by irritation of the nerves or fever from a related cause, or any other similar reason, you should know that you cauterize it with four cautery instruments or with a hot iron on each spinal joint, between each spinal bone with one cautery; and cauterize on the patient's foot, and over their stomach with olive cautery.
And the tremor of him rests and hastens the healing of the sick disease.
Chapter XXV.
On cauterization for accidental burns on the body.
When burns on the body have appeared and caused pustules that are filled with corrupt gross matter, at the beginning, when treating them, cauterize over all parts of the fistula with a delicate iron or a wooden stick, whose tip is heated by fire; or cut with a long razor; or cauterize with a lenticular iron.
Sometimes, too, cauterization is applied at the beginning of their expulsion according to this manner; they are not broken, and by eliminating excess matter, these are healed.
However, be aware that this should be done with an appropriate evacuation through phlebotomy.
**Capitol VI.**
**On the cauterization of flux of gangrene through incision of the arc (or vessel).**
**Observations regarding flux from arc (vessels) that should be incised near the infection, which must be drained, or at the onset of abscesses or cauterization on a limb, and it appears similar, but it is difficult to control.**
Therefore, when this occurs to anyone, you should use both your hands on the orifice of the vessel, and press over it, holding firmly until the flux of gangrene stops, so that it does not escape.
And then apply to the fire a few large and small olive cauterizes, by number many, and blow upon them until they become hot embers.
And then take from those a small or large one, according to the location and the disease in which the artery is broken, over that vein quickly pushing the pus that you have drained as mentioned, and cauterize it until it is completely cut off and restricts that flow.
And if the clot is expelled from the orifice of the artery as you drain the pus and extract the cauterize, take another cauterize carefully from those prepared in the fire, and thus continue doing so until the clot is restricted.
And be careful not to injure the nerve here, which may bring about another misfortune for the patient.
And you should know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to restrict the flow there, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of four means: either by cauterization as we have mentioned, or by extraction when it is not extracted, for when its extremities are cut off, the clot is restricted and the flow is stopped, or by using thread or bandage to apply a strong constriction, or by applying medicines whose virtue is to restrict the clot; and these should be firmly applied with pillows or compresses.
He who administers a proper restriction of it with bandages or by positioning opposing causes and similar ones, does not relieve but aggravates.
If this should happen to anyone and neither a doctor nor medicine is at hand, then open the aforementioned wound on the affected part as we have said, and understand that great pressure within it is necessary to stop the flow of the malady; and on the armpit, do not hesitate to apply hot water of extreme coldness until the swelling is frozen and thickened; and seek out what cautery or medicine is required.
From incisions and punctures, and from veins and phlebotomy, and from plaies and their likes.
We have discussed in the first chapter all illnesses in which fire cautery is appropriate and medicinal combustibles useful, as well as their occasions and causes, and the instruments necessary for them according to the forms of cautery; I have arranged the chapters on the ascending order from head to feet.
And you will proceed in this chapter in such a manner that the one who seeks it may be relieved, when he has requested it.
And before you begin this, know, son, that this chapter is about fear, as it is in the first chapter of cautery.
And because you must be extremely careful, for in the operation which is in this chapter, one often sees the evacuation of catarrh that is harmful to life; therefore, the application of the vein or incision on the abscess, or the perception of discharge, or purification of the wound, or extraction of an arrow, or beginning of a fever, and similar things. And from all of these, fear and trembling accompany them, and in most cases, death.
And I warn you that it should not fall on you in which there is a state of flux, for sometimes you must handle with the ways of men, or rather, the erratic ways of illnesses. And it is from them that you must learn about their illness and you must lighten it for them lest death overtake them, and because of the urgency of their illness, and its longevity, the illness itself means death.
And it is of these that one gives to you the name of hope and says, "You must hope for health," while their illness is destructive.
And therefore do not agree with anyone who comes to you of this nature, but let your caution be greater than their belief and their greed; and do not presume any cause regarding them unless through certain knowledge that verifies it for you, to which commendable succession has occurred.
Use in the treatment of all your illnesses the prognosis and indication of that which is to be made whole, for it assists you in acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
Oh, my children, may God inspire your understanding and do not let you stray from His guidance and protection, for it is in His hands.
And you have ordered this distinct chapter according to the preceding chapter on cautery, from the treatment of the head down to the feet, so that it may assist you in what you ask regarding this and of which you have need.
First Chapter.
On the treatment of water contained in the head of children.
You know that this illness often manifests in children during teething, and when the blackness enters the child's head, its vitality is affected.
And some times it appears suddenly for a hidden cause that is unclear.
This disease is sometimes seen only in children, and to all those whom I have seen die from it, I have observed this work left on them.
And you have seen that a child whose head was filled with water, and the head of him was always so magnified that he could not lift it up over his great head, and more than this, the moisture increased within until fire death resulted.
And this moisture is either added between the skin and bone or it is added beneath the bones on top of the brain.
For the operation on that one, if the moisture is between the skin and bone and the swelling is slight, then you must make an opening in the middle place of the head with a fissure at its width, and the length of this fissure should be two fingers deep so that the moisture can escape, and this is the form of the spatula:
And therefore, if the humidity is further increased and the swelling is greater, there are here two cracks according to this manner:
And if the humidity leaves the bones, it is a sign that you must open the compartments of the head completely and the water is squeezed out when you press with your hand on the affected area, which should not be hidden from view. Ensure that you make three cuts in the middle part of the head according to this manner:
and then extract all the humidity; and tighten the cuts with bandages and downy cushions; and drill over them daily with wine and oil within five days, and loosen the adhesions and treat the wound with ointment and poultice, and keep the head at an equal level; and feed the patient with dry bread containing little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
And there is another method of incision which considers the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of water, for sometimes it appears at the back of the head, or in front, or on the right or left side; so pay close attention to where the abscess and the accumulation of water appear, and act accordingly as best you can.
And observe that you do not incise the artery, and seek to drain blood and pus from the disease through that flow of pus during the evacuation of humidity.
**Chapter II** (or **Second Chapter**)
When there is an acute or severe pain in the ears or feet, and this condition is long-standing, and medical treatments do not help, then the final treatment involves the incision of those two arteries.
And thus you cover when you want to incise those that the disease has made its head, and then rub the place with a rough cloth so that the arterioles appear, and then tighten the collar of the patient with another cloth; and consider where the pulse of the vein is; and the places of each over the places that are appropriately depressed, and they remain hidden in some people.
Then you should focus on the artery with caution, and incise each one with the blade of each cut as it enters the bone, and this is according to the extent of the head.
If you wish, insert the blade between the artery and cut it at the points where the incisions are made on it.
And the length of the incision should be about two fingers wide, for when any vein is incised, the blood is immediately exposed to exit pulsating, which jumps out frequently.
If the arrow does not appear in the joint, then measure from the auricle the quantity of space equal to three fingers, and then carefully attempt to insert it into the bone.
And what you must get from the wound is a quantity of wine one ounce, and do not force it more or less, and all this depends on the amount that appears from the severity of the disease and the depth of the arrow in the bone.
And consider the infection, and if there remains on the bone some cause of decay, then sever it so that it does not spread gangrene.
Then strengthen the infection with poultices and bandages of linen cloth, and treat it with ointment until it heals.
Chapter III.
From the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When ancient or sudden migranes occur due to seasonal humidity and the state of the membranes in the temples, or sudden old age that resembles these, and it is not relieved by medical means, then we have resorted to the extraction of arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
And the method of the operation and extraction of those is to target the malady that affects the membranes in the temples; and understand the visible artery in the temple where it is indicated by its pulsation, and it is hidden from most people due to its intensity.
And if it is hidden, then tighten the collar of the malady with a cloth; and then rub the place with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with boiling water until the artery appears visibly to you. And then you take the sponge that has this form: And then, with your knife, you cut the thread as easily as possible to reach the arrow; and extract it completely from the flesh and remove it from the wound, taking care not to touch the threads that remain inside, from all parts.
If the artery is thin, you should wrap it with your finger at its end, and then cut through it in a single slice according to the amount by which its ends are spread apart and contracted, so that no blood flows out, for if they are not cut, the blood will not stop from flowing.
And then, empty the vein of blood within three cycles.
And if the artery is large, you should tie it in two places with a strong double thread of silk or string, and do not let it rot before the wound heals and the blood flows out.
And then incise the surplus which is between two ligaments; do this at that time or another time.
And if you wish, cauterize that with a hot iron within the bone, cauterizing the ends of it after they have been cut, and hold in place that precise work.
And it is better work if the patient has fever or a condition of heat; for cauterization is for those causes that help to end humidity, and therefore it is better in youth.
And then cover the extraction of the tendons that have been removed from their original place, and they should be placed over it properly prepared, and treat them with dry medicines to promote healing and alleviate pain within that it is cured.
And if while you are working another complication arises in the form of pus from the tendon, then you must restrict that pus, either with a cauterization or by filling the cavity with something, and tighten your hand over it until the pus is restricted. And if any cause of those is not present to you, then apply your finger over the area until the swelling is reduced, and drill the area with very cold water until the pain subsides, and tighten as necessary.
And what is more lightly extracted from archery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two edges, having already felt the two places to be tried, and then apply some fire, until it reaches the bone and cuts the vein in two places, so that what is between the extremities of it is elongated, as it is not consolidated by all this cauterization.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And the sharpness of both edges is an example. However, it may be better to have two edges of greater sharpness rather than just two, because if they are both sharp, they will not cut the flesh too quickly.
Therefore, when there is any swelling, the heat of the fire is held in them and the flesh is separated slightly.
And this work is better than all other works and is most gentle.
And the space between the two bones is such that it corresponds to the thickness of said bone.
Final chapter.
On the treatment of acute and acidic heart conditions in the eyes.
When the condition is acute and acidic, affecting those veins just above the temple on the head, and no medical cause can be identified for it, the patient's face becomes discolored and they experience a sensation in their forehead akin to walking on ants, and their eyes are exhausted, moistened to the point that their eyelashes become uncomfortably soft, and their eyelids are irritated by the intensity of the tears. Traditional remedies for this condition include thorough cleansing.
And it is that you command the patient to shave the hair which are on their forehead, and then inscribe on the forehead three incisions equally distant according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is two fingers: one incision should be equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle part of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little more than the movement of the eyelids which are at the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
And be careful with the incision of the arterioles which are in two layers, and extend your hand along the continuation of both jaws. And if the space of each incision is three fingers wide, adjust it accordingly.
And if you have a piece of sponge or dry cloth at hand with which to absorb the blood.
And then insert the knife between the two acute ends, which is the form of the incision. What is removed from the temples during the second incision. Excise all the cord that is between the two incisions on the phalanges, and then make this cut from the first incision to the second. And then strike with this knife in the first incision, and insert another instrument called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And hold the sharp edge against the flesh attached to the tendon, and press it into the bone, and use it to reach the middle fissure, and cut all vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
It may be continued the incision to this appears of the spine, and then make it in the middle fissure between the other fissures.
And as the flow of blood increases, press the locations of the frozen parts of the sanction.
And then place in each fissure a certain amount of warm wool, and place over those powdery substances mixed with wine and oil, and let it not develop an infection cautiously.
And on the third day, loosen the bandages and administer a great infusion of water mixed with nettle or rose oil, and carefully tend to it until the wounds are healed.
Conclusion.
On the treatment of wounds through catharsis and the flow of liquid from the openings in the head.
When acute purging and continuous vomiting occur, the patient's feet become exhausted from excessive urination, their sight is debilitated, the eyelids are ulcerated, and their hair falls out, causing severe pain in the head and subsequent exhaustion; then you will know that these accidents do not come from matter or purgation but from veins constricted within.
And the best treatment for these is this: order the patient to open their mouth wide, then make an incision in the middle of the front teeth at the most central location (and begin with the incision on the left temple towards the right temple; and cut through the bone; and extend your hand from the jaws of the teeth, which are best removed after mastication), so long as the bone is exposed.
Absorb all the discharge with a sponge or dry cloth, then gently fill between the two lips of the wound using warm compresses or bandages. And then apply to them a poultice soaked in wine and oil, so that they do not contract gangrene quickly.
And when you open it and see that the gangrene has already decreased, then you know to rub the bone that begins in the deepest part of the flesh, and soon after apply a dry cure that dries out the flesh, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and from this mixture make a paste and apply it to these wounds, both on the new flesh.
**Chapter VI.**
**On the Treatment of What Bites the Ears.**
All causes that bite the ears are one of four kinds: either it is a mineral or cause similar to a mineral, such as iron and copper, or it is from a plant, like rye or beans, or it is a fluid cause, such as water and wine mixed together and similar substances, or by some animal.
And therefore when a cat's paw touches the ear or any other cause resembling those that do not adhere to or swell in the ear, and the ear is pressed against the sun, and if the pain occurs, it will distill into that certain cause of violet oil or hyssop, then administer the extraction from it, and make it cough with a condition, and oppose the nose to prevent the coughing. And then place some pieces of cloth or wool around the circumference of the ear, and stretch the ear away from the affected area, as these causes are often forgotten to these remedies.
And if it is not forgotten, then administer the extraction from it using the instrument called the delicate epicyclic gear of which this is the form:
And if it is forgotten about the gear, then it is; otherwise, administer the extraction from it using a thin piece of cloth with a slight folding.
And therefore, if this is not forgotten, make a cannula of thread and insert the end of the cannula into the ear canal, sealing it around the cannula with melted wax and oil so that only the cannula is opened. And then extract the small wind with strong attraction, as we have seen with these cases.
If this method is not forgotten, take a piece of hot coals or some old cloth with which to hold the external part of the body, press it gently, and then wrap it around the affected area decently. And then insert it into the ear canal with ease, and carefully dry the ear from moisture.
And therefore, if all the causes we have seen are not forgotten, then tie off that which causes abscess or spasms.
And the method of dissection is that you begin by making an incision into the vein and extracting the blood according to its virtue, then close the opening between your fingers and turn the flap back to its original position, and make a small slit in the base of the flap where the darkness of the blood has pressed against it. And if the fracture is of a lunar shape that reaches the bone, and once the bone is exposed, you can use appropriate instruments; then act quickly with the fracture and treat it so that it heals.
And if the cause of the pain in the auricle is one of the inflammed fats that are swollen, then administer treatment and extraction; but if you do not obey these instructions, then take some gentle spatulum according to this form: and administer the removal of that fat which has fallen into the auricle.
And do not attempt this when you think the affected area is already moistened by the heat of the aura, and place it on heavy objects, or extract it with incisions or subtle movements, or through incision as we have said, for it eases the extraction.
In water into which the aura has entered, the disease uses sneezing as a means of beginning, and fills the aura with some very cold liquid, then throws itself over the aura in which the water is, and if it is thus expelled, it is good; otherwise, take a few hot stones and lions according to their length, heat them slightly in the fire, and the patient should insert one of these into the opening of his aura and jump on it with all his strength, striking another stone against the one next to the aura. So do not cease this until all the water is expelled.
So do not cease this until all the water is expelled. And already water has been drawn out in such a way that you use paper or cloth, and place one extremity of it on the ear and extend the other extremity towards the fire until the whole length of it is burned.
Then place another cloth and do this several times until all the water is drawn out, and remove that with a cannula as it is said of the stone extractor.
In the extraction of a stone from that ear, if it is small, it should be done with ease and similar methods as we have said in the previous division; however, if it is a large stone causing apparent pain in the sense of the word, then an extraction should be administered with care and precision, and the cause of the stone is often lighter than all other causes that affect the ear.
However, in the extraction of worms grown in the ear, when you treat it with water as we have said in the division and distillation treatments, and your care does not improve the condition, then guard the ear towards the sun.
And thus, if any cause of the worms appears here, then extract that with a gentle or subtle gesture, but if no cause appears, take a thin cannule and make it wide on one end, the shape of which is as follows: Then insert the extremely thin tip into the ear according to the amount of suffering caused by the disease; then suck it with a strong suction, and do this several times, until all worms are expelled.
If you do not adhere to the above instructions, then close and seal the opening of the cannule with wax as we have said; administer distilled liquids that have already been tested in ancient treatments for worm diseases, and you will find this described in the treatise on distilled liquids.
And your application of the oils with medicinal properties into the ear should be with this instrument, the shape of which is as follows: And make a small incision in it, leaving a narrow opening, and apply a plaster over it.
And thus it is to be used when it is in the cavity of the hernia here, it will be necessary. And if you wish, take a reed and wrap it around the end of it neatly, and then pour oil into the cavity of the hearing aid (or any herb or liquid from these medicines) — this is in the ear —, and insert the reed into the ear while applying gentle pressure with your hand to ensure that the oil is expelled into the concavity of the hearing aid and the patient feels relief inside.
And what is inserted into the ear should be heated slightly with fire beforehand. And be careful that the cause you are distilling into the ear is not too harsh, as the ear medications do not tolerate this.
Chapter .VII.
On the treatment of ear inflammation.
Sometimes, children have inflammation of the belly from their parents' stomachs that is not perforated; this occasionally happens to some men due to an infection or an external wound in the ear tissue. This inflammation can sometimes be felt in the region where the earlobe joins the head, a location often not noticed, and sometimes it occurs outside the body.
And those that occur in the region (of the ear) where one does not perceive the wound, are the most difficult to heal.
And in the case where one can perceive the wound, make sure you lift the patient's ear towards the light and examine it. And therefore, if there appears an excess, open the thin spatula from which this form comes:
If the extreme of the spatula where its width is narrow, with one edge acute and the other not; and the spatula itself has two sharp edges so as not to harm the auricle.
And therefore, if the pressure is due to flesh grown in the auricle or within the meat of the spatula, then use those fine scissors and cut with a sharp ease so that all the flesh is removed.
And if the pressure is on the edge of the auricle, take a thin blade and heat it slightly with fire, then carefully insert it into the flesh of the auricle.
And therefore, if you feel pressure as the patient describes it as easy to remove, due to urgency, exert pressure to relieve the oppression; and be careful not to harm the nerves of the auricle.
And then place the aromatic bandage over it according to the extent of the wound you have covered with Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are certain of the consolidation of the ulcer or until you take some and immerse it in water, sprinkle it on the affected area three times a day, and apply it; and if the ulcer has already formed a crust, be careful not to damage the liquid and replace it with another liquid that you cover with cerot made from oil or something similar, as long as the sore heals.
If bleeding occurs from an ulcer, immerse a clean cloth or bandage in hot water, wring it out, and place it on the wound; use another treatment that you know from the distillation tractate to stop the flow of blood.
**Chapter VIII.**
On the treatment of atherosclerosis affecting the eyelids.
Moisture that inadvertently gets into the eyelids of the eyes sometimes becomes cloudy, sometimes dry.
So understand that you must have these hot compresses or poultices, and remove the thick mucus from their roots, and then place your hand over the areas marked with a cross.
If sharp pain flows from a vein, then you use a fine, rounded cautery to treat it.
And the best cautery is to make incisions and carefully return them when there is no cause for their roots; and when cauterized with fire, those roots are burned away and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Treatment for severe inflammation of the eyelids.
Clumps visible on the eyelids of the eyes, caused by some underlying condition, are characterized by great strength and hardness, hence their designation as cataracts.
And a thick addition of moisture is observed on the lower and upper eyelids.
Therefore, the operation on them considers when the enlargement proceeds from within the part that appears from the eyelid and is painful throughout; and the cause of it is slight.
Therefore, open that small fissure with a knife, and extract it entirely with ease, and then suspend it from above and cut it off.
And if the wound is large, you will adjust it with a suture; and care for that until it is healed.
And if it is minor, you will not suffer greatly because the heat of the poultice restores and incarnates it.
And if the swelling is decreasing within the eyelid, you must explore the surface within, then lift the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a bandage, except as you initially judged necessary, and press on it from all sides. If the eyelid itself is enlarged for some reason, this should not be noticed in any case.
Then make the incision, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area with incarnated water until it is healed.
Chapter X.
Of the treatment of the inflammation above the eye.
Axcirnath is an inflammation that is generated in the layers of the upper eyelid, and it most often affects children, aggravating their eyes and leading to their clouding; and because of this, they cannot see the clarity of the sun due to tears forming at those places.
And so you apply those things to their faces all the time, and also while they sleep; and as a result, the eyebrows over their eyelids become moist, already covered in inflammation, and the imminent occurrence of catarrh is evident in the eye; and when you press that place with your fingers, you feel catarrh within them.
And there is a certain method of operation in which the patient holds their head on the thigh, and then drapes cloth over them, applying cold to it, and makes circles with it according to the amount that contains the discharge from every part, and also places that over the circle and presses with the fingers on all sides so that catarrh is added in the middle of the circle, and then ends in the middle of the other humidified areas by incidentally touching the fissures, so that the fissure does not become larger than the one made in flaubotomy.
Place the poultice over the wound until you reach the depth required, for in the most advanced stages, arternach (scab) forms through an opening in the white, grainy flesh.
Remove the cloth that you have wrapped around it and placed outside the openings, and twist with your left and right hands until it comes out.
And be careful not to press on the fissure so that the spatum (a medical instrument) does not reach the wound and tear it.
If your arternach (scab) does not appear at the beginning of the fissure, you may adjust the fissure with a little ease until it forms; then remove the cloth as we have said, and immerse it in water and vinegar, and apply it over the area, covering it with fresh poultices.
And so some who bleed stop it by placing that in the cavity of the fissure to prevent what comes from that moisture.
And then take care of that inside so it heals.
If it happens at the infected site, carefully cure it with plastered bandages until it heals.
Chapter XI.
On the ways of feeling pain.
When the eyes' eyelids are born with defects or have become antiquated, and these imperfections cause pain in the eye, one experiences various ailments, such as persistent tears, soft eyelids, and inflammation, which lead to the destruction of sight known as 'tactile blindness'. It is treated in four ways: either through cauterization with fire; or acute medicine as mentioned in the chapter on cautery; or by incision and stitching; or using canes, as explained earlier.
And therefore place the patient's head in a comfortable position; then turn the upper eyelid with your left hand, and if it turns, it is good; but if not, insert a needle into that place where the fold of the eyelid is attached, and make the needle penetrate through the fold onto the eyelid, close to the edge where the hairs are, and pull the thread from its attachment on the eyelid towards the fold.
Then open the gap within the eyelid, adjusting the hairs with a scalpel carefully; and afterwards extract the thread and place it outside the eyelid using small forceps or cloth, and then press over the eyelid with your finger, shaping it like a mitten.
However, it is important to consider that the shape should be adjusted according to the amount of swelling in the eyelid; for some individuals, a significant amount must be cut from the eyelid due to its softness.
And then cut open the spatula along the two lines you have marked, starting from the larger lacrimal to the smaller one. And if your fracture is near the natural hairs, it should be treated with the same thickness as the king's.
Then place the onion at one of the angles of the wound, remove all of it, and adjust the stitches to both lips with silk thread or fine wool, clean the discharge, and allow what is superfluous from the dyes to adhere above two eyebrows for certain reasons, if you wish, otherwise, do not treat it.
And then change the bandage of the dyes every three days or four, and take care of it.
And if you wish, leave the scar of the stitches and treat it with what dries and constricts, as the eyelid is raised due to the sealing of the wound and the addition of matter; closer stitching is better. And thus, these are the ancient practices of the taxanir.
Nevertheless, be careful in attending to the patient, for it is a delicate operation, and there should be no fear.
And there is another way to treat it, which is to notice on the eyelid a figure like a mint leaf, and then lift the eyelid with three precise movements, separating and gathering it according to this form.
But if this is not possible, having the needles, and it is not comparable, then take an agule with a thread and insert that into the middle of the figure, and then insert the other two threads close to the lacrimal glands, and adjust between your fingers so that the threads are equal, and then lift your hand at an equal angle, lifting the whole eyelid as we have recomposed.
And then adjust the two edges of the wound with stitches, and heal that which is cured.
If you encounter an abscess after your incision or opening, dress it with cerate and similar materials, and apply heat to it.
And in some cases, the eyelids themselves become converted, so you must use what we have mentioned about the incision; but stitching is more artificial in some.
Inserting tubes is done in this manner: and it is that you turn the eyelid and divide the substance inside as I have described; then, by art, insert two tubes or two fine needles whose length corresponds to the length of the eyelid and their width is measured according to the width of the space. And you have already made an incision at the ends of each severed part, where the threads are located.
Nearby, add some subtlety under what is superfluous of the eyelid, constrict the canals of any broken parts with strong tightness, and leave it for a few days, for the cord will die due to the tightness and become neglected until it falls by itself.
If it is delayed, break open the abscesses, and then treat the infection until it is healed.
So when it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not hurt.
And this is the way to make two canals according to this form: and it should have the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter .xii.
On the elevation of sharp hair points on the skin with an agule when the skin is hard.
When there are unnatural, hard, and sharp hairs in the skin, the operation on them requires that you take a subtle needle and apply it to those fine threads of silk and leather, and then adjust the limbs carefully and gently. And the length of the threads should be the amount of one palm.
And then you compose another subtle thread beneath it briefly, adjusting the limbs of that one if you wish.
And then place the patient's head in a small position, near the sun so that your work is declared, for it is a subtle and fine operation.
And then carefully insert the needle into the root of the hair, adjusting it as needed, and make it penetrate the eyelid swiftly until you extract it from its natural hair.
Then carefully pull the hair out from its root and insert that into the oil, taking care that it is one or two or three hairs and no more.
Then gently pull your hand away from the hair once it is completely removed from the oil and the eyelid, along with its natural hair.
If the oil is not removed along with the hair and it remains stuck to the eyelid, re-apply the ointment to the parts where it is stuck and let it heal over time.
And thus, when you have finished applying the ointment and bandage, gently massage the affected area, pressing slightly with your fingers, and leave the bandage for two or three days, so that the hair adheres to its place and grows back healthily.
And if the hair is too short, adjust a longer natural hair, raise it to that level, or cut it so that it stretches over some space, and then raise that one.
Chapter XIII
On the treatment of a condition that occurs on the eyelid above.
When you notice a condition on the eyelid, which is characterized by contraction of the eyelid when it becomes narrowed to the right or left side, due to poor healing from wounds, sections, or cauterization, and it is called leukocelia, this inflammation or eczema can be either natural or accidental, caused by the healing of wounds, sections, or cauterization, or similar conditions.
The manner of the operation on it is that you open up that consolidation and separate the edges of it, place in it a piece of lint fabric, and bind them together so that they heal.
And be aware that you must not treat it from the causes that dry out; for if you do so, it will only increase the pus and in no time at all there will be even more infection.
Use one of those causes that soften, as fennel, and immerse in water in which the seeds are boiled and mixed with vinegar, which should be liquified from some oil, and submerge the affected area in it, and cure it thereby.
And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate every engorged part that is not solidified according to its original shape as you find it at the beginning.
And this operation that we have mentioned is nothing but a correction of the excess of pus that does not return the original shape of the area as it was before.
Chapter XIII.
On the treatment of a condition affecting the eyelid.
This condition affecting the eyelid, which is commonly called "blepharitis" (though it is not truly blepharitis), is either of natural origin or accidental.
An accidental cause could be an infection, a cut, a cauterization, or other similar factors.
The method of operation is as follows: take a needle with a double thread and insert one end into the flesh, then pass the other from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, ensuring the thread passes through both ends of the flesh.
Then stretch the flesh apart using the needle and cut with a scalpel, making an ample incision. And thus, return the shape of the eyelid according to what it should be; if not, take a thread and hold that on the cut shape, and with that, turn the eyelid, and make two slits in the edge of the eyelid.
And the ends of the two slits should be at two angles of the incision you made, where they meet; and when these come together, their shape forms a figure.
And this figure is the Greek letter Lambda.
Then press the flesh with your thumb as much as the width of the eyelid allows, which is what closes the eyelid.
Then adjust the separated parts and bind them with a thread; and take care of those with the help of what we have mentioned about softening medicines and cold compresses, so that healing occurs.
And if you need to make an incision or suture or cauterize, be careful to create a flat incision on the skin of the eyelid as previously described. Then separate the calgue (or tissue) between two eyelids as we have said.
In the entire discourse on the treatment of incision when it is elevated or left open, let the operation proceed according to how the incision is prepared, and that varies in many ways.
And the skilled artificer always prepares a device in some way that allows him to return the figure to its natural form, or close to it, and treats that malady according to what is suitable for the operation and the instruments at his disposal.
Chapter .XV.
From the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this adhesion occurs in many people, it solidifies the eyelid so that it is no longer flexible and prevents its natural movements, making it necessary to insert the tip of your finger between the eyelid and the eyeball, and raise or extend the eyelid away from the eye.
Then you cut through the adhesion with a thin blade, which is not sharp enough to cause further damage, slightly blunting it so that the operation does not disturb the eye, and remove the blade that has lost its sharpness.
And your incision should cut through that adhesion with ease, allowing the eyelid to return to its natural position, and ensuring that all the adhesion is healed.
Then you should put salt water on the eye, or distill steam into it, dissolving in the water.
And then separate the eyelid from the eye with a warm compress, and place on the eye some wool soaked in egg albumen, and on the third day use consolidating remedies until it heals.
**Chapter XVI**
**On the Recognition of Inflammation and Protrusion of the Lacrimal Glands.**
You know that inflammation can occur in two ways: either as a nervous condition, resembling a subtle hard bump; or non-nervous, appearing as white moist ice, which when pricked becomes separated and the bump does not remain.
And both conditions do not begin until the larger lacrimal gland is involved, gradually covering the vision and preventing light and eye movement.
The manner of working in the incision of the hernia is that the patient holds their head in their hands, opens the hernia's orifices, raises the eyelid with one hand, and then grabs the edge of the hernia with the other, gently pulling it outward to separate the layers. Then take a needle and insert it into the hernia using the tip of a horsehair or similar fiber, gradually doubling the length of the needle, placing it in the middle of the nail, and then piercing the nail through with the needle; extend the needle to separate the layers above, and remove the hair that is blocking the pupil. And so you also remove the hair inside the hernia's opening.
Then you incise the membrane at the root of the tear duct using a fine spatula or small scissors, removing the natural tissue of the tear duct to prevent continuous bleeding during the incision.
And some times the ungual (nail) is stuck to the skin or to a string, as we have said, and then it should be carefully extracted with a sharp instrument of which this is the form.
And beware not to touch the corneal tunic with the instrument, lest it rupture and the pupil be perforated.
After the incision is made, apply a little salt or some suitable paste to it, and leave it for another day; then take care that everything inside heals properly.
If the nail is not infected and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it firmly attached to that part of the finger, then other attempts are made to cure this type of nail with medicines, and thus it is healed as well as it can be in that condition.
And if you wish to sever it, then open the wound of the patient and take a sharp instrument with a curved tip, according to this form: With subtlety. And if it happens that the swelling is hardened and twisted in that place, then it exudes from your skin in the form of clear liquid or foul-smelling pus, and you should apply the liquid to the wound every other day.
And then repeat the operation until everything that is infected is removed, otherwise, a foul odor will develop in the wound, and if you leave it, the infection will spread, so begin treatment at its onset until it heals.
And then repeat your operation on that wound until it heals.
The urgency of the lacrimal flesh, if noticed in the wound causing great pain, should be suspended immediately; incise it from that one side, and do not close the incision so that tears do not flow.
And then distil in the tear duct a strong and effective remedy until it is healed.
**Chapter XVII**
On the incision of scrofula and things that originate from flesh that has decayed in the wound.
Sometimes in the wounds of certain individuals, corrupt flesh is born, and it is so swollen that it covers the pupil or pushes close to the edges of the eyelids, causing great pain. It hardens like a bullet and presses against the openings of the eyelids, and it is assembled with rough scales like a battlement.
However, the operation on them is that the disease holds its head in the small spaces of the body; then open the wound of that person and collect all the flesh with scissors as is appropriate, and do this with forceps or baskets; then cut the flesh from the beginning until everything is finished with the knife, and be careful not to lacerate the wound that you should not spoil your operation.
And make your incision, which you incise those or remove the spatum we have discussed in the incision of the fingernail, or small forcps with which it is collected carefully according to the shape that comes next in this chapter.
Therefore, when your incision is complete and all that flesh is removed, fill the wound with salt trissa (a mixture of salt and herbs), or sprinkle it with a powder made from medicinal herbs that resemble corrosives, and place a bandage over the wound gently until it is certain there will be no infection.
And if any cause of inflammation is noticed and a hot wound becomes infected, and you fear an abscess, leave the wound and treat the abscess with what fits it, and then repeat this operation until it is healed, and make the flesh around it firm, which occurs in the wound of this particular kind.
You may nevertheless cover completely all treatment of the acute wound by natural or accidental means, using steel and do not place your hand on any of these operations until you see that the member is able to withstand this operation.
Chapter .xviii.
On the collection of swords in the vault.
Swords come with sharp edges that are protected over the vault and prevent access to their operation, and after some days, the vault opens on its own.
Therefore, at the beginning, you should consider whether the vault containing the swords is strong and has no other ailments besides the swords, then you collect those swords.
And it is that you command the patient to hold their head in a certain position and then suspend those veins with a pin or two, according to your discretion. And make that pin of subtle construction following this form:
or two pins gradually in the body following this form:
And then gently compress those veins with subtle force, at the right moment, until you see the veins filled with blood and pulsating.
And beware that you do not touch the pain in the edges of the wound; and if your operation is in the morning facing the sun, be very careful in your operation so that you only incise those veins.
And when you have finished, gently distill hot or cold water into the wound to clean and corrode what is left of the blood.
If it is not possible for you to collect all of that in the same time, then apply a poultice to everything that relieves the pain, and leave it for several days until the pain subsides and ensure it is free from infection.
And repeat this process according to the healing process until it is completely healed.
And this is the form of the shears:
**Capitol .xix.**  (Capital X in the Roman numeral system, representing the 19th chapter)
**On the Reduction of Swelling in the Nose.**
When treating swelling with a cautery or sharp medicine, as is preceded by the narration of its condition and it is not healed, then do not apply any treatment to it unless you make incisions over the affected area after assessing its severity, and extract all the moisture present within it, ensuring that the bones are exposed.
And therefore, when the bones are exposed and there is corruption or blackening in the tissue, then use the following instrument, whose form is as follows:
And it is named the sharp fork, and it should be made of iron, and the head should be rounded, so that a hole is made by piercing with a lime or aluminum point (thus, in the following shape).
And place that over the corrupt part of the bone, then return it between your fingers, and press your hand gently until you know that the corruption is removed.
And this is done at times, and then the place is restored using drying and astringent agents.
So if the place is consolidated and there is good flesh around it, and the body parts are separated from the sound and healthy ones for forty days, and it is not renewed or inflamed or affected by any accidents, then you know that it is healed.
If that is not the case, then it is not about widening the fissure but reducing it to its natural shape, and according to this manner: and it is that you expose the bone according to the cut or acute medicine, and once the bone is exposed, you take hold according to this form:
Let the end of the instrument be triangular, and the shaft of the instrument be first extended within the extremity thus with several turns.
Then place your hand over it, and that is the part of the lacrimal; extend your hand a little from the side, and then rotate your hand on the surface until it penetrates all the bone, and you will feel the pain as it seeks to escape from there when you remove your hand.
Therefore, you will now restore the area with astringent medicines that have been prepared.
Therefore, when the flesh is no longer infected and the place is hardened, the matter that had escaped from the openings returns to the body, so this is less severe on the illness.
Chapter XX.
For the reduction of the hernia's protrusion.
When the hernia protrudes completely and does not occur due to strain or discomfort, it is necessary to relax the patient, then continue with the following: make incisions in the neck for drainage and suction; apply a liniment to the hernia made of alder, aloe, yarrow, and snake root, and tighten the bandage over the hernia with powdered motes.
And the way of the powder is to take linen cloth with many threads, and each cloth should be folded in four parts; make these threads into powder.
And then arrange them one on top of the other according to the quantity needed for the hernia. And tighten them with a strong, hard cloth; repeat the suction through the incisions; then remove the ventoses and leave the hernia straight both day and night.
If, meanwhile, the ligament becomes softened, then make sure it is tightly bound.
And at night, as well as during the day, hold the ligament as we have said.
And if the hernia has already been reduced, that is good, and if not, repeat the application of poultices, compression, and suction cups until it heals.
Chapter .XXI.
On the incision of the prominence of the uvula.
When there is a disruption in the uvula tunic, and it is prominent, you should process the eyelids as if with a fine scalpel, and form the shape of a man for this purpose, and if you want to perform an incision, then the operation on it is as we have recommended: insert the needle at the root of the uvula, starting from below, and then insert another needle through which there is a double fold from the lacrimal part, and cause that one to penetrate and leave the first needle in its place; then make an incision at the point of the double fold and lift that part of the uvula around the needle, and tighten it.
And then extract the needle and place it over the humid wool soaked in lard, and wait until the thread falls off by itself.
And then apply the humid wool to that, which will provide comfort until the plague is healed.
And in some cases, from the entire circumference, cut a circular piece of cloth to fit tightly over the affected area, and then pierce it with a thin spatula that reaches the depth of the wound, allowing the white fluid to drain, and the bandage to be applied.
And hold it tight until it is healed.
**Chapter XXII**
**On the Healing of Alconati** (or "Eye Diseases")
This illness called alconati is not, as it seems, a sane condition that adjusts itself like water flowing downward and it is not that one.
The manner of working in this case is that you cease the illness upon its appearance on the affected part and right away, and then take hold of its head with both your hands from two different directions, and press it so that you prevent the health from spreading to other parts, and keep it thus, and stop the flow of liquid, and the illness will see its causes in this way as it observes.
And if it does not flow down, you know that it is water.
If the flow of health is not prepared for descent as we have said, then stop the illness between your hands and take a fine needle and pierce it into that surrounding the panniculus, just before the continuation of the conjunctiva with the tunica cornea in the crown (at the desired location), until the health is drained out.
Therefore, when it is removed, you will distill the warm water that you have mixed with honey or water in which fennel and honey have been boiled.
And then it is cured as the other causes are treated, so that it is healed.
**Capitol .xxii.** (Capital XXII)
On the treatment of water coming from the throat.
We have discussed the types of water in division and which ones are suitable for treatment, declaring that according to health, this or that should be chosen.
Now you must stop the patient's suffering between your hands on a pillow and bind their throat tightly.
And then place your hand near the patient's eye, if the water-bearing part is on the left, use your left hand; or if it is on the right, use your right hand.
And then hold your right hand up if the pain is on the left side; or hold your left hand up if the pain is on the right side.
And then place the tip of your thumb near the edge of the eyelid, according to the thickness of the swelling in the white part of the eye, close to the inner corner of the lacrimal gland, and gently press the eyelid with your thumb.
And then penetrate into the eyelid tissue, and feel that the swelling has already been affected due to the heat.
And observe that the measurement of the path of the swelling to the point where it meets the edge of the black circle (the pupil) within the white part of the eye, which is the coronet of the eyelid; for you will see the pupil clearly through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
And then place a maggic (or magical) substance into the area where the water is, and draw it down little by little, and thus as the water descends, you will observe the disease over which it casts its gaze immediately, and imbue it in its own essence.
And then rest for a moment; so if the water has descended, you will relax that other time before the maggic (or magical) substance is thrown out.
And when it is evaporated and does not descend, then you extract the maggic (or magical) substance with ease, and slowly turn your hand, and dissolve a small amount of pure salt gem in the water within, and wash the inside of the wound; and then place outside the wounded part a piece of cotton or stop or wool soaked in rose oil and white of egg and mix it with the water.
But those of our time do not use these things as they should be used with egg white.
And if you do not obey your magic in the treatment of the bone due to its hardness - for it is one of the men whose bones are hard -, then know that you must take the sponge which is called "alberid" whose shape this is:
And therefore pierce through that joint, and do not end your hand on the track, and it is not until you make a subtle space for the magic.
Then properly insert the magic according to what we have said.
And you must complete your work, prepared for the patient's sleeping place, decently made in which they sleep on their back at home in a dark room, and prohibited from all movements.
And focus on the nature of it so that its natural state is clear, and do not strain their head to the right or left from all.
And the ligament should be arranged according to its position within three days.
Then return to that place in that dark manner, and examine the affected area, and after observing its causes, return the ligament within seven days.
And it is not advisable to do this at the time of treatment or, perhaps, the infusion should be given instead. It has been observed that this can be achieved because the water is able to pass through slightly and violently due to careful observation.
If an abscess forms cautiously, then it is necessary to drain it after seven days, and straighten that which has bent due to the abscess.
Now examine the patient's mouth and place your hand over the affected area for several days, existing in the dark place.
And gradually, you should be guided by that powerful force, conversing about its causes.
And you should know that in alchemy the student is not excused from seeing certain things at times, and then you will be bold about the operation.
And we have already learned from some of those who are in the art, and one said that fire should be made in the air with a magnet through which water is sucked out.
Yet you may not have seen this in our land that has accomplished such a thing, nor is it written in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the ways of the spices of magic that one should know about those who ignore them.
And they are made of iron or bronze, and their ends have this triangular subtlety, the pointed end being like that shape.
**Chapter XXIV**
On the treatment of nasal flesh injuries.
When there are various attached flesh injuries in the nose, caused by some swelling of the muscles or polyps within it; this malady is called a polyp because it resembles that very same foot represented. And it is cancerous flesh, pale, of dark color; and that flesh is leon-like not of a dark color.
Therefore, in the case of this lion-like flesh that is neither fraudulent nor cancerous, you should cut into it between your fingers and expose it to the sun, then draw out the blood from the veins of it, and prick the tiny vessels in those meats. And then carefully extract it from the parts outside, and with a precise cut, divide what you have understood from them using a fine knife, knowing that all the flesh is held together; if any cause arises from which laceration is possible, then quickly do this with one of the subtle instruments at hand before some other cause ruptures it. But if it is a cancer or acute abscess that requires caution, then apply it to what it covers; or if it is of malignant abscesses, then cut and cauterize it until the cancer is divided and all cavities are sealed.
Then quickly immerse yourself in the nose with the incision, using either water or wine. If the nose is open and you feel humidity in the palate during the process, then know that it is healed.
If the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you know that inside there is flesh nothing over the bones of the nose to which no incision has been made.
Therefore, you will understand that insert the instrument precisely into him to whom there is some obstruction, and turn in it most gently, and between each nut, apply the amount of pressure that is appropriate or less, and by means of the illness, and insert one end of the instrument into the nose either through a wound or for other reasons that are possible.
And when this has been done, that it will have made its smell enter so that it reaches the nasal canals, and be held over their faces, for many times the children in school seem to like this action, and it is a minor cause for anyone who wants to do it.
Then hold both ends of the instrument, one end that comes out through the nose and the other that is inserted into the nose, and apply pressure with a meat lock to the nuts that are on the instrument, and do this until you know that the flesh has already reached the nuts of the instrument.
And then extract the gallbladder, place it in a container with salt water, and do this for three or more days until the pus corrodes everything that is broken in the flesh.
And finally, at the end of the treatment, place in the nose a silver tube for several days until it is healed.
If the cure ends, use this method.
And this is the form of the instrument, a purge-maker, which distills oils and medicines into the nose:
And make it of silver or brass, which is similar to a small open lamp with a small cavity, and attach it in such a way.
And if you want, make a closed tube as well with cane, and the tube of the purge-maker instrument should be flat, open; it should have a handle at the end of it, which you hold when you infuse oils or water that you want from the extracted juices and succedaneum.
It appears that your request is incomplete or lacking context. "Capitol .xxv." does not provide sufficient information for me to determine what text should be translated or analyzed. Please provide more details or the full text for assistance.
They grow on the tips of the nose.
Frequent sightings of a growth on the tips of the nose, which initially appears small but significantly grows over some days, warrant close observation to determine its nature.
And for this reason, you should pay close attention from the moment you notice its beginning appearance and eradicate it completely. And then apply the cautery or medicine that burns over the area where it is located.
If the operation takes too long, it should be hurried, considering whether it is enlarged, hard, of dark color and with little sensation, then do not touch that part which is infected with gangrene; for signs indicate that this gangrene brings great harm to whoever suffers from it.
And if the gangrene is of a bright red color and not dark, and it is possible to operate in all parts, then evacuate the infection and cut away the affected part without delay, and treat the area with something that draws out and constricts the pus until it heals.
Chapter .XXVI.
On the stitching of the nose, lips, and earlobe when continuity is broken due to a wound or similar.
You should know that when a rupture of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, it causes little effect on the operation in some people.
So, when you encounter any cause related to those, considering it a fresh wound or an old one, and then you adjust the two edges of the wound with stitches, and subsequently care for that area until it heals.
And if the edges of the rupture are already separated and each part is healthy, then you should extract any foreign body from its place ensuring that it doesn't cause infection. And then you adjust the two edges with stitches and strengthen them, and sprinkle dragon's blood and trissat on them, and place a piece of fine plaster or some other consolidative dressing over that powder, leaving it for two days or three, and then remove that and replace the plaster and leave it until the wounds are completely healed.
The technique of stitching is that you add the solution for continuity or use needles as we have recommended in the stitching of the abdomen, or add the solution for continuity with silk as it has been explained to you.
**Capitol XXVII.**
Regarding the extraction of those causes that occur in both lips during internal divisions.
You often observe various individuals in the internal divisions of their lips, some have hard apothems resembling the fat of errors, and others are smaller or larger.
Therefore, you should manipulate the lips and openings of each of those hard spots from every direction, and then remove the abscess by cleansing the area with a smooth tool while ensuring that the wound is closed, and afterward, wash it with wine and treat the spot with water that has been heated, so that it heals.
Chapter .xxviii.
On the incision of tissue attached to the gums.
Treatment of the attached gum tissue that ancient practitioners called "albulus": it should be suspended or cut with forceps and incised along its root, allowing the blood to flow or the pus to drain.
And then apply over the area a poultice or other stoppers or astringent powders.
If the tissue returns, then incise it again secondly and cauterize it, for the cautery should not return.
Chapter .xxix.
Because of the tooth's pain.
When on the surface of the teeth within and between the gums there are tight, rough, hard cuts, some blackened and some discolored, due to this corruption spreading to the gum, the nearby teeth become loose.
And therefore you must open the space between your legs and place the head of the patient in a suitable position, and extract the teeth in which these hard cuts appear, causing a similar feeling as sand, without any pain, and do this until they are all purified from their blackness, whiteness, and other colors.
Therefore, if this remains as in the beginning of the reason, then it is good; otherwise, you repeat the reasoning to the other parts on the following days and every other day until you reach your final statement regarding what you want.
And you should know that teeth require various types of precise cuts and shapes according to how they are prepared for your operation. For these reasons, the scissors used to extract a tooth from its socket are different from those used to cut between teeth, and these shapes of scissors must be prepared as you will see shortly:
Chapter XXX.
Eradication of teeth.
Understand that you cure the tooth from its pain using all means and take your time in the complete eradication of it, for there is no reason to delay the moment of its extraction, as it is a sublime substance whose excuse lies in the eradication of itself.
You may also understand that when the patient is compelled to have a tooth eradicated, you must be firmly certain which tooth is causing the pain, as the deceiving pain may come from the illness and not from the healthy teeth, and you eradicate that one, but the pain does not cease until the sick and painful tooth is eradicated, for we have seen this in the operation of the barbies.
Therefore, once you have determined which tooth is painful and know its location well, you will need to scrape the area around the tooth with a spatula, ensuring it has some virtue, until it is completely separated from the gums, and then apply pressure with your fingers or use small pliers gradually until it loosens.
Then apply a strong, firm grip using large pliers or similar tools for good manipulation or extraction, and hold the patient's jaw between your fingers so that it does not move, and treat the tooth according to its position in such a way as not to break it or cause the patient greater pain.
And if this is not forgotten, take one of those instruments, place it around the tooth from all sides with ease and effort, and attempt its removal as if it had just begun.
But if the tooth is broken or worn down, be careful to wrap cloth around it and stretch it with a fine, sharp wire so that it does not break off when you apply pressure with your pliers.
And be careful to perform the scarification precisely in the entire circumference of the gum and keep a firm grip so as not to break or tear it, and return to the patient for further treatment if the pain is greater than the first.
And beware that you do not perform what some ignorant barbers do in their hasty and aggressive attempts at extraction; for these often bring on great misfortunes for men, which are more difficult to treat, and the roots of their teeth become completely torn out or extracted by some bones from the jaw, as we have witnessed with our own eyes.
Then perform the extraction, washing the mouth with vinegar or salt water.
And if there is pus and it flows for some time, as is often the case with these experiences, scrape a little of this pus and sprinkle it on the wound, and if you do not remove that pus, cauterize it.
The design of the forceps should be fine and delicate, suitable for extracting a tooth from its beginning to the end, with a short handle and thick, so they do not bend when used as intended.
And if they have even thicker handles, the longer you use them, the less likely they are to bend, as their ends are shorter.
These are made of Indian steel with right-angled ends; at the tips of these forceps, some have teeth that mesh with one another and tighten strongly due to their curved shape, similar to the beak of a wood pigeon, which is very strong.
Capital XXXI.
On the removal of teeth and fragments of bone from the crushed jaws.
When you need to extract a tooth that is stuck for any reason, you must place your hand over the area with a border for one or two days until the area is softened; then insert pliers or tongs whose ends are assembled in the shape of a bird's beak called a ciconia or guanta, forming forceps.
The ends of them shall be done within thus with lime or alum.
And if you do not obey these instructions regarding the use of pliers or tongs, then you must lie down and expose all the flesh and insert the instrument whose name is a small lever with this shape:
And the long narrow end should be slightly curved, not too thick, so that it is not trapped.
Therefore, if the incision is incorrectly made, this is; otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments whose forms are as follows: the form of the first instrument is triangular at its end, with some thickness:
The shape of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a very fine pointed end.
And they help with this instrument, having two slopes, the appropriate form of which is as follows: and other instruments which are used for tooth extraction; because gently is done with this instrument resembling a large knife, and its form is:
from the triangular pointed end, either bent or straight, of any thickness, and not covered so that it is not curved.
And another thing, the extraction instruments for teeth are similar to other instruments.
The skilled and subtle artisans in this art, by observing the patient's condition and various ailments, can determine what is needed for treatment, as the ancient ones did not have a specific tool or form for all kinds of conditions.
If the bone of the jaw or any other bone in the mouth is broken, then its weight should be supported in its proper place using instruments and forceps, as we have described for the extraction of teeth, and aid yourself with the gesture that forms this:
And if there is any swelling, little by little, and it is tightened or held in the mouth so that it does not burst out or escape until all the bones are completely healed; then restore the area with appropriate medicines for this.
If there is a small fracture in the bone, then remove any debris from that fracture and clean it, and treat it until it heals.
**Chapter .XXXII.**
**On the Treatment of Prominent Teeth Among Others.**
When teeth are prominent beyond their natural shape, especially in women and particularly in the most sacred parts, then take care to consider: if one tooth is not properly aligned with another and cannot be corrected or treated, extract it; but if it is not joined to another tooth, then cut it using this instrument that resembles a pig's tusk, made of Indian steel with an extremely sharp point.
And this is your incision tool with which you cut that tooth, over many days due to the hardness of the tooth, and it should not be used on any other teeth.
And if the prominent tooth is exposed for filing, then file it with a file made of Indian steel that has this shape:
And it should be entirely made of Indian steel; the edge must be precisely; and it is in the form of needles, or the file should be like needles, with which the tooth is filed little by little over many days with ease, so that no other teeth are damaged. And then tie it at the end, and cut those away with a razor.
And if it is a tooth that is causing the pain and affects the tongue, you must then find a way to clean between the parts that are pressed together so that the tongue is not hurt or the words corrupted.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the restoration of lost teeth, it is recommended to use gold or silver wire.
When it happens to the front teeth due to a strong blow or removal, and the patient cannot bear it, having tried various medicines, if there is still no improvement, then consider using gold rather than silver wire for tying them together, because silver becomes brittle and may break apart over time, but gold remains unaltered.
And the thread should be of such fineness and thickness according to the amount that can fit between the teeth; the form of the filling is to take the thread and wrap it twice around two healthy teeth, and then make it curve in two places between two damaged teeth, or if one or several, until the fabric reaches the healthy tooth of the other side. Then repeat the stitching within the opening from which you began, and use your hand with ease and wisdom so as not to damage it further.
And the tension with which you hold the thread must be such that it does not tear the teeth.
Then cut the excess thread with forceps or scissors, and place them at various points with gestures, and turn them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth, so as not to injure the tongue. And then he should tie it up so tight like a Roman.
If it becomes loose or ruptures, tighten it or those parts with another firm hold in such a manner constantly.
And this is the form of teeth and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and two bad ones, thus when these ligatures are done:
And when it is done so that a tooth or two returns to their proper place in each location and they grow back as we have recommended, they remain firm.
And only skilled artisans and wise ones do this.
And sometimes a cause from the bones of a cow is shaped like a tooth and placed in the spot where the tooth is missing, it is tightened as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.
Regarding the incision of the ligament visible on the tongue, prevent its movement.
This ligament, which is visible on the tongue, sometimes occurs naturally or it may be a result of an accident due to a condition that has already become established.
And the operation on it is to open the mouth of the malunion, freeing its top from the lower jaw; then lift the tongue and make an incision in that nervous ligament according to its extent so that the tongue can be separated from its attachment.
If there is any hardness or resistance and this has become established due to a condition, then you apply oil and cut it according to its extent until the ligament is incised and the knot is dissolved.
And be careful not to cause a fissure in the flesh and cut here behind, allowing pus to flow out.
And then clean the incision site with warm water or wine or fricative water; and leave the tongue relaxed; it is beneficial for the patient to keep the tongue outside during the night so that it does not solidify again.
If a flow of pus occurs, apply vinegar to the site; if the pain is severe, use a cautery with a poisonous substance suitable for it. And then apply that treatment for the other causes as long as it heals.
Chapter XXXV.
On extraction of the ranula, leave the tongue aside.
Sometimes, the tongue becomes abscessed and resembles a small stone, preventing the tongue from performing its natural function; and when it swells greatly, it is magnified to such an extent that it fills the mouth.
And the operation on them is to open the mouth of the hernia, looking at it directly in front of the sun and considering the aperture.
And if you see that it is of a dark, hard color, from which the hernia does not feel pain, then do not touch that part which is cracking.
And if it turns to white, in which there is humidity, then insert your finger into it, and cut with a delicate spatula, and divide it entirely; and if you have strong wind during the time of your operation, then place a piece of cloth over it, tightly bound, as long as the pain persists.
And then return to your work until you have completely treated it, after having washed it with wine and salt; and take care of the other healing remedies for it until it is cured.
Chapter .xxxvi.
On the extraction of abscesses from two ears and that which is nothing in the throat, and other abscesses.
When an abscess forms in the throat, there are glands that are tightly packed together, which break outside and are called two ears, which, when you treat them as mentioned in the previous section, and they do not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, of a dark color, with little sensation, and do not touch it with a knife.
And if it is of a red color and the base is thick, then do not touch it with a knife due to the pus; instead, let it mature as it is, and either it will be drained on its own or it will break open by itself.
And if it is of a white color, soft, and the base is thin, then that needs to be cut into.
And the operation on it is that you consider, before your operation, if the abscess in him has rested with complete rest or has been reduced in any way; and then stop the disease before the sun, and let his head be in the low position, open his mouth, and the servant takes between his fingers the tongue of him gently with a noble instrument of which this is the shape.
And it should be made of silver or brass, and be subtle with a blade.
So when you press on the tongue and show the abscess to your patient, and see that his teeth are loose over that place, then take pliers and hold that in the amen (or groove) and pull that into the parts outside as much as possible. Another thing that you pull out is the cause of the tunic, and then you cut into it with an instrument of which this is the shape:
Another thing that you pull out is the cause of the tunic, and then you cut into it with an instrument of which this is the shape: It resembles a pair of pincers, yet its extremities are curved, so the sharp points of each are in the opposite direction, one on top of the other, both made of iron but coated.
If this instrument is not available, cut a blade with the shape of this: sharp on one side, blunt on the other side.
And having cut one slice, cut another in the same manner, and then close the wound with hot water.
But if there is a flow of blood, cleanse it with water from the decoction of chamomile or mistletoe and similar herbs until the flow of blood stops, and then treat that wound so that it heals.
And in some cases, there are other appendices close to those two ears, and you should cut them as you have said in the incision of two equal slices.
And you have already treated a woman with gangrene who was born in the sole of her foot, whose gangrene tended to a dark color, with little feeling, which had closed the sole of her foot, and the woman breathed heavily, and she had forbidden herself food and drinking water, and she would have died if more time had passed for one day or two.
And the gangrene had already infected so deeply that it had formed two abscesses, which would drain through two openings.
So you should listen to them fistula-wise and stay in one of their rooms, remove that one, and throw it away, take a large portion of them, and then you should incise the one from which you understood the other wound, and then you should press on its mouth, grasp its tongue, and then stay with the abscess.
And then you should remove a large piece of it, and there was little or no bleeding from it. Therefore, it is absolutely essential for that woman, and soon after drinking water, they should also take food, so you must not continue to cut those motas of the wound for a long time, and successive wounds in place of that one, which incision persists as long as it continues.
Therefore, you must wash and dress the wound, and thus add to it; and then you should walk and not know that God has done so much for that very person.
**Capitol .xxxvii.** (This indicates the title or heading of a specific chapter or section.)
On incision of the hernia when it becomes infected.
When catarrh occurs in the hernia, and it becomes infected and long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is at the opening thin and round, then it is called a bubble.
When the condition we described in the previous section has been cured and you do not observe any improvement, and it turns out that the abscess has already formed and is very small, then you should know that you need to incise those that are enlarged; but if it is of a considerable length, and is bloody, of a dark color or black, and does not give way to treatment, then be wary of making an incision, for there is great danger in this case.
And when you observe that according to the method I have described, in its whiteness and length, the disease is removed and you press the tongue of it with an instrument that shapes its form, then reduce the hernia, pull it down and make an incision with one of two instruments used for the operation of two incisions.
And be aware that you should not make an incision except in a place that is suitable according to the natural course of the disease, for if you make an incision too much, you will harm its healing.
And then make the incision, using what we have recommended in the incision of two wounds, and treat it until it is healed.
If the patient was frightened by the incision and saw the cautery as dangerous, know that the cautery is nothing but hot water, and this is how you should proceed: hold the patient's head firmly in place, press the tongue with the instrument we mentioned, take water as described in the chapter on cauterization, create a strong flow of live steam, and apply it not too thick or too thin, filling the concave shape of the instrument.
The end of the instrument should be concave, where the medicine is placed, just like a spoon's curve, and place the instrument with the medicine on top of the wound. The patient should lie on their back so that saliva or mucus from their mouth comes into contact with the intrinsic medicine, preventing any further damage to the throat and healing it.
And then apply your hand to the medicine, and extract it from the uvula by making a space of a moment until you see that it is degraded and soothed by the bite of the medicine.
And if you wish, take care and wrap that around the end of the ray, immerse the wrap in the medicine, insert the ray into the wrap through a channel above so that the wrap adheres to that channel, and do this several times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, then let it dry so that it falls off after three or four days.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and then clean the cauterization on the uvula by wiping it with a cloth soaked in the medicine, wash it thoroughly with warm water, apply an external embrocation, and use poultices until it is healed.
And this specific method of treatment is both safe and free from fear.
Sometimes the uvula is cured with something that is finer than a cautery and incision, as it is treated by sublimation in this manner: take calament, hyssop, origan, rue, scened arabic, chamomile, broad and similar herbs to those of the herbs, and adjust all those causes or some of them in one mixture, and submerge them with wine; let them bubble; and the wave should be well struck against a decently placed tray, on which a pointed instrument of wood or metal is placed according to this manner; it should be made of silver or brass.
And then the end of the instrument is inserted into the patient's mouth, allowing the vapor to rise to the uvula, until the uvula becomes significantly obscured.
And then repeat this process on the affected areas until they are dry, and be careful not to perform this treatment while food is present, as it might excessively irritate the hernia, and you should not do that unless a doctor has examined and declared the hernia.
If you do not have this tool at hand, take a cane and attach a ring of iron to its end, so that the opening of the wound is sealed, as the iron ring prevents vapors from burning the wound.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On removal of thorns and other substances adhering to the skin, and on other causes.
Various things adhere to the skin, or thorns from feet, or some other cause.
So then, when you have removed what is apparent from these things, upon which the eye looks, and pressed your tongue against the tool in front of you, so that what is in the mouth becomes clear to you.
And for what is hidden from your sight in the gullet, be sure to make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, for the strong cause annexed to the gullet will be forgotten through vomiting; or that the patient swallows a piece of nap or chopped lettuce or a bite of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sea sponge, tie it tightly with string, and make the patient swallow it, for when it reaches the place where there are thorns and it is extracted, then it will be forgotten. And you can take a eel and tie gallstones to it, then immerse it in hot water and extract them; or take a pear, peel it, and soak the seeds and extract them.
If these causes are not forgotten, then use an instrument of lead in the following manner:
And it should be sharp, thick, and slightly curved; at the tip, there is a hollow which you will insert into the patient's mouth with ease.
And he raises his head and be careful that you feel the touch of his bone in his throat, so that he may take in air and alleviate the pain caused by the bone or the spine, or what the doctor puts in his hand.
Although the illness may seem better, because of his knowledge of the place where the cause is attached and he drives it down and applies his hand with the instrument to it, according to the amount that has been prepared for him, until it is forgotten.
**Chapter XXXIX**
On the extraction of the blood clot attached to the throat.
When treating the blood clot as we have discussed in the division of treatment by medicines and not with surgery, consider the throat of the patient under the sun, since you will have to remove his tongue with the instrument that we recommended.
Therefore, if you examine the blood, extract that small or subtly shaped clot appropriately.
If it is not possible to extract the clot, then take a concave needle and insert it into the wound of the patient, and in the concavity of the needle, place a heated iron, and do this several times (as long as the blood stops flowing and the clot is removed from the wound) and keep the patient on water for the rest of the day.
Then take a vessel filled with water, apply its mouth to the wound, and wash the wound with it; do not spill any of the water and change it every hour for now until the blood stops absorbing the water.
If we have not forgotten what has been recommended, then fumigate the patient on the head or with an herb-infused smoke using the instruments designed for suffocating the uvula.
Do this, so it falls where it should.
And another method of operation through suffocation of that part is that you take a cloth in which there are ignited coals and cover it with a covering in the middle of which is an opening, and place the extremity of the instrument on that opening; then apply the suffocation to the patient; and have the patient open his mouth at the end of the tube, and close his lips so that the suffocation is not discharged until you know that the suffocation has reached the bloodstream, because the blood will soon come.
And if he does not eat, you repeat the suffocation with motive vapor again and forbid the patient from drinking, and eating salty foods, and drinking water, and it is also necessary that this regimen be followed until.
And this is the form of the instrument used to draw blood from the veins when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps as well, except that it has no curve in it. Which is placed in the throat, and its end resembles a cicada's beak, which is curved, and it sticks to anything it touches, that's why, when we encounter any cause, it does not let go.
Chapter XL.
In which the entire discourse is focused on the diagnosis and treatment of apoplexy.
Apoplexies are special symptoms, of various kinds, as we recall them from this book, each with its own characteristics.
And they are diverse in their perforation and section in two ways: one is for the specific type of apoplexy itself; and also for what we understand about humidity.
And the second method is specifically for the places where bodily accidents occur, because the apoplexy that occurs in the head is different from the apoplexy that occurs in the legs; and the apoplexy in the fleshy parts is different from the one in the joints; and each of them has its own treatment through operation.
And some ulcers are such that they do not need to be drained but rather the maturation of the wound in those or completion of their course.
Other types of ulcers are such that they need to be drained when they become crossed, and do not mature according to their course. Similarly, with ulcers that are inclined towards joints, an ulcer forms near a joint, the condition of it prolongs until you can observe something in the circulation of the blood, and its intensity corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, leading to contraction of that member; or if it is close to a major limb, and you delay the perforation beyond its maturation, it will affect the main limb; or it is near the buttocks, so you must perforate one that is not yet matured; and do not perforate it while still in its raw state, otherwise, it may cause the pus to escape and extend beyond the buttocks, creating a fistula, or something formed at the end of its course, which will not heal. It is also important to know the time for draining the ulcer, as it should be done when it has matured.
And you will know that recovery has begun when the pain ceases and fever abates, and there is a reduction in rigidity and pulse, and the redness of the affected area becomes less pronounced, as well as other symptoms.
And be aware that you should know how to make an incision in the location of the pus, left by the abscess, and also coming from the healing of the swelling.
This incision is always made through the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the thighs or feet, and in places of the glands, nerves' cords, arteries; and finally, in any location that does not reflect, for in those that do reflect, one should use incision according to that particular member.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, then it is better to avoid making the incision until the digestion of it is confirmed according to what we have said; for if you make the incision there before, it prolongs the course of the disease and increases the pain and hardness of its edges, and deepens its wound.
You may make some incisions in certain places through the thickness of the flesh or body parts as needed, or according to what the affected member requires.
And be aware that you should administer small incisions, and in large apothemas make deep and wide cuts or sections according to the diversity of the size of the apothemas.
And other types of apothemas where it is necessary to reduce and incise the swelling, when such a pain occurs as if it were in a pan and is made in such a way that it already stands firm, so with those who suffer from double or bubonic fever.
And regarding those who are incised in a section with three angles, and of those where it is incised just as the figure of a myrtle leaf, so too with the apothemas of the knees.
And regarding their type where a round section and lunar section are administered, they resemble those mentioned above.
May he who has no such issue with superficial wounds, be sure to pierce with a shallow or flat needle only.
And if the wound is deep and has already collected a lot of pus, do not pierce it at once; instead, extract some of the pus, then pack the wound tightly the next day, and extract more pus in subsequent visits, increasing the amount gradually as it is discharged.
And most especially if the patient is a frail woman, or an old person, or a young child, as the animal spirit's vital force tends to resolve towards the exit of the wound, and they often die from the operation.
Take great care with this chapter: when you perform the piercing for these wounds, be sure to cleanse them and consider whether the wound of the apostema is shallow or deep; if it is shallow, then administer the appropriate remedies; but if it is deep, and the openings from the piercing are wide, you must apply pressure to each opening until they close together.
If, in the abscess, a part of the cord or a concave space in the ring is separated, then cover it with a thin piece of cloth or thread from linen, as when you treat cuts or razor wounds, apply moisture; tighten that area within three days; and subsequently treat and cure it with poultices until it is healed.
If, during your operation, there is a flow of blood, you should administer clean water and mix it with cloth, and place that over the area where the bleeding occurs, pressing it gently.
If the bleeding persists, you must administer remedies and treatments, and apply powders recommended in various places of this our text and division.
If it is during winter, and the area of the abscess is full of nerves, you must wrap poultices in hot oil and place them on the affected areas.
And if it is summer and the parts are fleshy, then cover that you place powder soaked in water and oil or wine and oil, and all of this be rubbed until it is the third day, as we have said, and then cover that you loosen the blister and cleanse it and apply what is appropriate for its healing until it is cured.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the healing of blisters universally, more so according to the method of distinction I have already said about each blister in which way it is a path to its cure, by chapters separately.
Chapter .xl.
On the section of blisters which appear on the nape of the neck.
On the nape of the neck, there are small blisters, which are of various types with layers that are made of them; and these are called by different names.
And from these come drops, and those contain a humidity similar to lime. And those that contain humidity similar to sweat, and resemble them; and those that are rocky, hard.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those [humors], there is no fear, as the incision of those should not cause any hostility.
And the operation in section of those is that you expect those to be received by an instrument in the shape of which they are, which is called a trocar, as long as you know it contains.
For if what contains is humidity, then you split that as section according to length by sectioning superficially in this form:
And it begins in the section of the line B within the line G. Thus, as the moisture is evacuated, you scrape that through which that moisture passed, and do not leave any cause for it, for troops seen returning may indicate some cause.
Then immerse the affected area in hot Egyptian (possibly referring to a medicinal bath) or, if not available, in water and salt; fill it with that remedy and leave it for another day, as it corrodes all that is broken off from that skin.
Then you repeat the application of that remedy with hot Egyptian (medicinal) bath according to need, as long as you are confident there is no other cause for that skin condition; cure the affliction with the remedy until it is healed.
And if there is an abscess with fatty nodes, then you insert into it according to this form: I have a section without the shape of a cross, and make an incision between two folds of the section and tear it from top to bottom, and use your virtue to extract the tunic that contains it.
If it causes resistance in your arc (or instrument), then do what I have told you first.
And similarly, treat the abscess of the section with cauterization according to what I have told you; the incision over the abscess that has been cauterized is lighter, as it is of little pain and has little humidity.
And sometimes there are certain abscesses of these types that are in the head, on some men, where there is no humidity at all; which causes because you have incised an abscess on the head of an old woman and left it with a hard, sour, white stone that could not be drunk, and if anyone were to touch it, they would be infected.
In other cases of accidents on the head, except for these, this chapter does not apply, thus the section for all these should be a superficial one.
And stop the perforation of those in the lower part of their origin so that the matter of the disease is alleviated from the deeper parts.
Then apply care to those as it suits the treatment of that one.
Chapter .xlii.
On the section of scrofulas that occur on the collarbone.
Various cases of these abscesses occur on the collarbone, armpits, and angles; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And so those that occur in the gut, and so motes that are generated within them, and all scrofula of those comes from their own tunic, and thus also with the nodes and apoplexy of the head, as we have mentioned.
And the types of these scrofulas are motes; some are stone-like, others contain moisture, and those that do not obey treatment are malicious.
Therefore, in the case where you perceive a good disposition for treatment, of which the color is peculiar to that of the ulcer, and it is painful at all points, not attached to any nerves or veins or tendons, and not swollen, you must incise it along the dry surface of the wound from the edge of the body towards the center of the line G, beyond the line B, remove it entirely from the part, and extract the edges of the ulcer with tweezers, if necessary, as we have mentioned regarding the apoplexy of the head; you must do so little by little.
And it requires more caution that neither the vein nor nerve be cut.
And the knife should not be too sharp, nor should it suit your hand for cutting, or inquiet the patient, and you should not cut what is not necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery, it would prohibit your operation, then the disease would become more severe with vitriol or other powders that stop the flow of pus, and make the plague worse, and leave that which prevents the healing of the fistula and softens the plague, and begins to be putrefied. When the pus is drained.
Therefore, return to your operation until it is completed.
And then carefully examine the said indicated area if there is any cause of the other small scrofulas; therefore, cut and clean those.
And if it concerns a large vein in the region of the scrofula, you must be careful not to puncture that scrofula from its origin. Be careful not to force the broken thread, as it may fall out on its own.
And then fill the wound with fresh gauze that you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and tend to it.
If you puncture the scrofula completely, be careful to close both edges of the wound and apply a poultice immediately to prevent any excessive discharge of pus.
If you notice excessive discharge due to the size of the scrofula, be sure to understand where it originates, and carefully puncture its origin. Then drain it and apply a suture as well as the treatment mentioned above.
And for those scrofulas that contain humidity, make a superficial perforation at the place where you see the formation of it, and stop the perforation when the pus is drained from the lower parts of the body, as we have said.
And then administer the perforation, using some ointment and similar things to that which corrodes what is broken down by corruption. And then, when you see the wound has healed, you apply a treatment made from generative flesh ointment until it is completely cured.
Chapter XXXIII
On section of the pilon (bone) of an apoplexy (stroke or sudden loss of blood flow to the brain), take care during the operation.
The ancients performed this section in the pilon, and we have not seen anyone in our land who can do such a thing.
And this is the inscription of the speech of these ones.
In some men, there is a weakness, and the extraction of the stone must be avoided, because by doing so, all the veins and the major ones of the disease are here.
In those who have abscesses in the mouth or throat or both ears, when the illness is not in the teeth, it is necessary to avoid the extraction of stones to prevent loss, which is caused by perforation.
Therefore, when we want to do this, cut the stone below three circles of the circles of the stone, or four with a small section due to the thickness in that which is between two circles for quantity, and the section should be on the bone, not on the cartilage, and this location is suitable for cutting because it is devoid of flesh and the blood vessels of the stone are open.
And if the doctor is cautious, you must ensure that he extends the chain of the scalpel to an angle, and then cut the chain until it reaches the channel, but avoid the blood vessels if they get in the way for any reason.
And then, insert the blades according to our recommendation; this refers to the section of the channel for the flux that is caused by this condition, which is broken off and removed through the incision.
And leave the wound open for some time.
So when the hour arrives that the piercing is to be made, add two layers of the scalpel's edge to the wound, and with this single one, cut through the cartilage.
And then, administer medicines that promote healing of the flesh until it is cured.
And Albucasis says that the essence of our discourse, which we have collected, is to observe that some of these spots have already weighed down the patient's condition, and the disease has spread throughout the body, and its air is cut off, and some go to incise the epiglot so that the patient breathes on the spot of the wound through some respiration, and thus is saved from death.
And for this, I will order the wound to remain open until the evil of the disease is consumed; and the evil of it is for three days; and therefore, you shall command the wound thus, and heal it until it is sane.
And what I have seen for myself, is that a servant used a knife and scalpel to cut into the patient's chest, incising a part of the lung, and I was called to treat him, and I observed the breathing as if from a dying person, and I uncovered the wound, and treated the scar left by the wound.
Therefore, you must admit that he did not cut either a vein or an artery, and the breath still comes from the plague; he treated it with fire until it was healed.
And do not cut the servant unless it is necessary in your voice; after a few days, return to the improvement of their conditions.
And now I say that in the section of the epiglottis, there is no fear.
Chapter .xliv. (This appears to be a chapter number, indicating the beginning of a new section or topic in the medical treatise.)
Of the section concerning the abscess that occurs outside the throat, which is called a hernia of the throat.
This abscess, called hernia of the throat, is a great abscess according to the color of the body, and it occurs more in women.
And there are two manners of it, either natural or accidental.
And in the natural, it is not engendered for healing.
And the accidental is according to two manners; in one it is similar to gouty nodules, and the other manner is similar to apoplexy which is caused by the congestion of an artery, and that is fearful. And one should not make a diagnosis with haste except for one who is skilled. And then you should examine it and investigate it as he has said, and if it appears similar to gouty nodules, and is not suspended from any vein, you incise it thus with the nodules, and extract that which causes it from within the flesh and bursae; otherwise, you should scrutinize its whole being, and tend to the place in need of cure until it is healed.
Chapter .xlv.
On the section of nodes' species.
These nodes have various species, and I have already described all their kinds in the previous division.
And it is necessary that I explain here the difference between a node and an exit, with due consideration.
Therefore, I say that an exit is characterized by heat, fever, and intense pain, until the ebullition of excess liquid subsides; it is complete putrefaction when the fever, pain, and heat cease.
A node, however, does not exhibit heat, fever, or pain, and it is that change which indicates the moment for its extraction.
And according to the condition of the body, its beginning is like a cease and is done thus with void, either greater or lesser, and they are according to two kinds, or they are fat and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are spots, as I have said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a nodule, you must expel that and inquire into the beginning of the stirring which is called an "intrusion", according to how its form comes in the chapter which is appropriate to this.
This is also a method of inquiry for abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this stirring and insert it into the place most humid which you find in the abscess, and you will turn your hands about that little by little until you know that the stirring has already penetrated the wall.
And then you will close your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and you will extract the intrusion and consider what has remained in the trace of it.
And if the current humidity is forgotten, of any color it may be, then you incise it to the superficial section as I have said in the other posts.
And if there is no humidity from the wound, then you know it is fat.
And dry it over the section having no shape of a cross according to this form: Thus taught, raise it up and suspend it, remove the strings from all parts with ease, and inspect the skin or sac over that area, if possible, and extract the stone from its place.
If it is broken during the operation and it is not possible to extract the stone, apply compresses here and there, and wait until it comes out on its own without breaking for any reason.
If due to any cause, whether little or much, the pain returns, it should be treated according to its nature.
And if you notice that the pain from the roman (or foreign) body is in a small part, complete the plague with some sharp, corrosive powders and strengthen the plague, and place a cautionary bandage over it, and treat the other with whatever cure until it is healed.
And if it is not large, then you cut both lips of the hernia and treat it with this (method) that it incarnates.
If the vein is pulsatile or not, you should cut and knead the place of healing with a tri-sectioned zigzag that is vitriol (or a sharp tool), and leave this straight for two days or three until the pain subsides and the swelling of the sanction (or injury) decreases; then return to incise what is broken from the node.
Chapter .xlvi.
On the forms of tools necessary for incision and perforation.
Of these are the forms of the instruments, and they are of three kinds, of which one is larger, another is medium, and the other is smaller.
The form of the large instrument is this:
The form of the small instrument is this:
They are made of iron, aluminum, and have sharp points, so that they penetrate the spaces between the joints gracefully.
And these are the methods of those who have experience, and they are called alchemists, and one of them is known as the herbalist.
And of these three spices, one is great, another is milder, and the third is very little.
The form of the experienced one, great in knowledge:
The form of the experienced one, moderate in knowledge:
The form of the experienced one, little in knowledge:
So, it is imparted to those who deal with abscesses, ulcers, fistulas, andbuboes, so that among these are bone and other causes.
And thus are made round, thick, leathery bands, also with large needles sewn onto them, and they are prepared from citrus peel, or horn, or iron, or silver, and the best ones are when they are made from citrus peel.
And the experience of black crow feathers are used, which remember that through these openings in the hollows of which reflections are made, those reflections are reflected to their lightness on those reflections.
And there are three species, some of which are long, and others half-length, and others short, according to the extent of the fistula and the tightness of it.
Shape of the experienced large crow feather:
Shape of the experienced half-crow feather:
Shape of the experienced small crow feather:
The shapes of the incisions are of various species, some of which are simple curves, and they are of three types: large, few, and half.
And of their bodies' humors, there are three kinds.
And of these, there are two curvatures, which are of three kinds.
And they have three curvatures as well, which are of three kinds.
And all these are necessary in their place.
Shape of a single slight curve, shape of it:
A large wound with two curves: A smaller wound with two curves: A very small wound with two curves:
A large wound with three curves:
A smaller wound with three curves:
And these are the forms of scalpels that are used to cut and incise nodules and abscesses, and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small.
Form of the large scalpel:
Form of the medium scalpel:
Form of the small scalpel:
The ends of these have sharp blades, and the other ends are not sharp, but designed in such a way to make incisions without cutting into veins or nerves, so that treatment of the disease is facilitated and pain avoided by the adjustments necessary for the excorination of abscesses.
And these are the forms of maggots, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you can see.
They are made of an ery (scab or ulcer) and resemble a small worm, which is also called maggot.
And it is on the outer side with a hidden point (or knife), and as it flows within and without, at will, so it is.
The forms of the punctures, which are hidden between these spaces in the piercing of the joints and not perceived by the patient, are also of three kinds: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of wounds from which the flow of blood is obstructed, and there are three types; great, medium, and small; the forms of them:
They are made of citric erio, either round or of any length, and they are subtle.
And it is necessary that these types of wounds be great, medium, and small, so that they obstruct the flow of blood at the appropriate speed in case of need, and you will know when it is not the first treatment used for healing.
I do not recommend using those to obstruct blood flow throughout the body, but only in flesh wounds, as with the lacerations of the legs and thighs, and the injuries of the arms, and the mammary area, and the abdomen, and the groin, and similar to their soft tissue lacerations.
And some times these instruments are made of small blades resembling scalpels according to this form; by which the vein is cut off when it is done through phlebotomy, or incision of a vein or artery.
And some times these cuts are made round according to this form:
Chapter XLVII.
On the care of the mammary glands of men, which are assembled from women.
Some times the mammary glands of certain men are swollen due to sleep and begin to feel painful, then they become swollen, and the mammary glands of women are assembled and turn red.
And for those who wish to do this, they should incise those parts of the breast according to this form, from the line B to the line G, then remove all the grossness, and fill the wound with incarnate medicine, and adjust the two lips of the wound with stitching, and cure that which is healthy.
If the nipple recedes from its attachment and becomes softened by its magnitude, as is common in women, then it should be cut in two pieces, one above the other, resembling half-moons, each contained within the other, so that the main line contains the smaller according to this form of the B and G lines. Then remove the cord between the two lips of the wound, stop the discharge, and administer what has been said about sutures and powders, which are necessary for healing until it is cured.
And if you do not perform the incision that needs to be made due to the restlessness of the patient and the flow of pus, then fill the wound with a corrosive broth and leave it until it corrodes what is broken from the grime, and then treat it until it heals.
Chapter .xlviii.
About the perforation of abscesses that come from beneath the skin.
These abscesses that come from beneath the skin are caused by the species of scrofula, hard ones, which contain a puss that needs to be drained.
And of those some contain humidity; and those that contain humidity should be incised at the lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all that is in the abscess has been evacuated, then you complete it with a clean bandage and leave it for another day.
And keep the bandage clean and treat it with a suitable ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess of the lymphatic nodules and scrofula is, then you incise it as we have said about the scrofula in general.
If the plague has spread so much that it causes gangrene, then apply cautery to it as we have previously said.
**Chapter XLIX** (or 49) is the title of this section, though without additional context from the surrounding text, a precise translation or content guess is impossible. Typically, such capitols in medieval medical treatises detail specific ailments, treatments, or procedures.
On the sectioning of abscesses that occur through arrow wounds or veins.
When an arrow breaks through the skin and the wound is closed, you will observe abscesses forming at the site, and the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are caused by an artery or vein: for when an abscess is due to an arrow wound, a long accumulation occurs in the preceding part of the body; and if you touch the abscess, you feel a strange sound within it.
And that which is due to a vein returns to the visible sign of the body.
And the incision on this abscess is incorrect, especially in those located in the armpits, angles, collarbone, and many parts of the body; it is very large, so be careful that its treatment avoids iron, and one located at the extremities or head should be avoided.
Place a cloth soaked in a lotion over the affected area to relieve pain caused by inflammation of the tendons and joints, cut a long section on the back side of the limb; then incise the section and expose the tendon, severing it, and remove the skin covering until it is bare.
Then take the needle and make it penetrate between these two parts, and tighten the tendon with a double thread in two places, which will cause the patient to excrete from two tendons located in the temples.
Then apply the pressure to the area between two ligaments using a spatula until the pain disappears completely, and the swelling is dissolved.
Then administer treatment where pus is formed until the ligaments fall, and care for it with suitable ointments until it heals.
If the abscess is caused by a cut vein, then you must cover your hand over the area to your best ability near the abscess at the back of the limb, and insert the needle into the spot where you have placed your hand, penetrating it; then make it enter in a double thread until you extract it from the other side, and tie the abscess with a suitable ligament as I have previously mentioned regarding the uva4 ligament on both sides of the thread.
If you fear that the thread might break, insert the needle into the remaining aperture, following the path of the first cut, and tighten your threads in four places.
Then dry the aperture in the middle of it, while it is still fresh, and then incise the excess of the thread, leaving what is attached to it.
And then place a poultice on it which you have soaked in wine and oil, and administer the treatment which is necessary to heal it.
Cap the aperture which occurs due to the twisting of nerves.
Thus, when an aperture occurs in the rear and in the veins, and appears to be caused by nerve apertures when they are struck or occur due to excessive work, and similarly.
And the most of it is done in the places of the assistants or the foot, or in any place where the joints are afflicted.
It is a severe ulcer, resembling the color of another body, and it appears in its most vulnerable parts; when it is narrowed by intense violence, the patient feels a pain resembling stupor.
And it is not an ulcer that occurs in the front or back of the body; for this reason, the patient remains bound, and the pain afflicts the entire limb without moving to other parts.
Therefore, concerning those who have pain in the joints, it is not necessary to be cut with a knife, for they will naturally experience contraction.
One should bind those who have pain in the head or forehead with a cloth. If it is a small abscess, cut it open with scissors and sever that part from its root.
And if it is large, then open it with a knife, cut it out, and close it up; and secure the wound with stitches, and treat it until it heals.
Chapter.
On the section of the abscess that occurs from the skin down to the abdomen.
Even some people observe swelling in the bellies of others and in other parts of their bodies, which are called fungal because they resemble fungi; the root of these is subtle and the head of them is large; and already the lips of these are divided, and it is from these that a great number are produced.
And you have already seen one, and in their belly there were two parts which served as functions similar to each other, and there was no difference between those whites, of small size.
And the lips of those were turned inward and split open, and moisture flowed from them continuously.
Therefore, you should incise those and remove the larger one (18 units) from the foot, and the smaller one (6 units).
And the operation in the incision of them is that you consider when the disease is humid, and the color of the swelling is white, moist, of subtle size; then you make the incision with a broad spatula, and have hot cautery near you, for you must expel the pus from the section with great force; and if you feel the pus, cauterize that part.
And if the patient is fearful and anxious, be cautious with cutting instruments; then take a fresh piece of lead and make a strong knot on it, in the manner we have said, and leave it for two days.
And then adjust the tightness of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease to tighten the large lead afterward, until it is completely severed and falls out on its own.
If that part is of thick consistency, there is no cause for fear or anxiety in its incision, especially in the case of those in the stomach.
It is possible that you cut away the bulk of it, and then cauterize it to prevent its return.
And then take care of it until the disease is healed.
And be careful not to attempt to incise that which is of a dark color, with little feeling, and moved by the leg, for that is absolutely cancerous.
And now let us return to the remembrance of the cure.
Chapter II.
On the cure of hernia (or "eminence" of the navel).
The hernia (or eminence) of the navel is caused by various reasons: either due to fissures in the abdominal wall, from which emerges the intestine or hernia, as is the case with other ruptures; or because of a leak of blood or lymph fluid (sanct), as described above; or because of excessive flatulence confined within.
If it is due to an abdominal wall fissure and the protrusion of the hernia, then the appearance of the hernia is similar in color to that of the body; and it causes a sharp pain, and appears in various positions. And if it is for the exit of the hernia, you must pay attention to the position of that mass which we have described, with greater diversity, and when you press on that mass, it becomes concealed, then return; and it strongly pushes into its own place, and it is glorified by a great deal of heat and vigorous work.
If it is due to humidity, you will feel a warmth and not occlusion when pressing with your hand, nor constriction or pain.
And if it is due to infection, then these symptoms will appear as a black, declining abscess.
If it is not due to flesh, then the abscess is severe, thick and hard, and it accumulates according to a certain amount.
If it is due to windiness, then the touch of it feels hot.
And the operation on it is that you consider when the prominence of the navel is due to a hernia, or a vein, or from gas; then you must be prohibited from treating it, for there is fear and danger as it is taught in the chapter where I have discussed hernias by arteria and vena.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to an intestine or hernia, then you must order the patient to lie still, and gently apply pressure around the entire navel; then insert a thin instrument in the circle of the navel at the place where you have felt the indentation, and extend the extent of the hernia above it with a large finger; and then encircle the area with a strong thread or catgut, and tie it tightly.
Then, you should break the wall of the hernia over the ligament and insert your finger into that opening to explore the intestine; if it is stuck or held back by the ligament, then carefully extract it and push the intestine back inside the abdomen.
And if you have found the affected area, take some ointment; and cut away the excess.
If it is against your practice or vein, then circle that part and return to your operation; and take two needles and insert them into those two strong threads and pass two needles through the loop which you have made around the abscess in a crosswise manner, which will make them penetrate; and then tighten the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you wish, leave the needles and let the location heal until the flesh is extended and falls off by itself; or cut it when it has subsided and becomes curable, and then treat it with something that covers the wound until it heals.
And if the bulge of the navel is due to flesh or moisture, then cover the abscess as we have said and remove the pus or moisture which you find in it, and then treat it with something that covers and strengthens the area.
Chapter .liii.
On the cure of cracks.
In the previous section, we have discussed the types of cracks and the appropriate methods for their treatment using medicines, and it is wrong to treat them with iron so as not to ulcerate. We also spoke about the causes of cracks and precautions to be taken in their cure.
The ancient ones said that sometimes cracks appear in places where it is possible to completely eradicate them, such as the crack which is on the breasts or on the thigh, and similar ones on other parts of the body, by removing everything around it, especially when it has just begun and is small.
But when it is old and deep, it may not be curable on its own, for I have neither seen nor heard of any remedy that has succeeded in such cases.
And the operation on it is as we have said, you must precede and remove the disease and purge it of black cholera in several instances, and then drain that, if a manifest filling is found.
And then prepare the patient for the operation in the preparation that is placed there; and carefully cut around it, covering all parts with a good cloth for further protection so as not to cause any damage to the roots of it. And let the blood flow, but do not abruptly stop it; press on the spots, and with your hand or an instrument that is at your disposal from among the available tools, extract the thick blood.
If it is against your will to make a thick blood clot cut of a vein or an artery, cauterize that until the flow of blood stops, and then take care of it with the other remedies until it heals.
Chapter .liv.
On the cure of hydrops.
We have already discussed, in the previous section, the types of hydrops and the signs of each, as well as their treatment with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is only the species of altitis alone, and it is not approached with iron to the species of tympanitres or the species of yposarcha, for that is mortal.
And when you have already medicated this species of hydrops tympanitre with medicines and do not confirm your treatment, consider this, for if the patient's illness has been strengthened or it is another malady, other hydrops, just as in those cases or abdominal pains and similar ones, then be careful not to administer iron, for there is fear of that.
If you examine the disease of an exuberant growth, and it is nothing but hydropic only, not child or old, then the manner of operating on it is that you lift up the malady between your hands, and apply them properly to press the patient's belly, draw out the water at the opening left by the foreskin, and take a sharp spoon according to this form:
both of these parts should be sharp and long, with an acute end like the spoon; however, in performing the operation on it, do not make any sudden movements, so as not to let it enter the cavity, and take care of it.
And consider whether the generation of hydropics is from the intestines, for you will see that by cutting through them away from the navel towards the foreskin, they open up in three places.
If the generation of hydropics is due to a disease of the vein, then your cut should be on the left side of the navel towards three openings.
And if the generation of it is through the mesenteries, then your incision should be on the right side.
And be sure that your incision is on the side where the malady wishes to flow, so as not to cause excessive effusion at that place.
Then completely perforate the ring with the instrument, insert your finger into the opening, and raise your hand with the spatula between the ring and the anus, and extrude it; and if it is of the size of a thumb or smaller.
And then perforate the anus until the spatula reaches the desired location, which is the place of water. Then extract it, and insert an instrument of this form: It resembles a fine silver tube; it is made of silver or bronze or iron, and in its opening there is a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes: two from one side and one from the other; and its end is cut according to the shape of a pen, thus:
And at the end of it there is a ring, for when the instrument reaches the water, the ring will immediately adhere to the instrument, thus evacuating a considerable amount of water in one go; for if you evacuate less than necessary in one attempt, the patient's condition may worsen due to the resolution of their animal spirit, or they may suffer a heart attack that is close to death.
You should evacuate according to the amount that is necessary, based on your understanding of the patient's condition, the strength of their vital spirit, and the benevolence of the treatment.
And upon removing the instrument, retain the water that is caused, for it is often held back by the knot that holds the opening over the patient's chest, and it is recommended that you perforate it according to that manner.
And on the following days, if the patient tolerates it, repeat the procedure and extract a small amount of water each time, doing so for several days with caution, and avoid errors as not to empty all the water at once.
If you are concerned about the illness and drain a large amount of water, then treat it with a burial in sand, followed by a bath and exposure to the sun for a long time; and treat it with drying medicines as long as it is healed.
And apply a cautery to the stomach, and with ice and heat, return the water as previously described in what has been said above.
Chapter 25.
On the treatment of children whose places of urine are not perforated.
Some times a child is born from its mother's stomach, and the head of its mixture is not pierced (or it is too narrow or not in the right place).
Therefore, one should make an incision into it as soon as it is born with delicate, moist spurts in this manner:
And then, with a delicate lead pin, close the opening and bind it with tape, for three days or four.
And as for urination, let them pass urine gradually and slowly; then return to the previous state.
And if you do not close the lead, it is possible that the urine which flows over the area, will not be blocked by this closure.
But if the opening is narrow, it should be treated with a lead pin, as we have said, for too many days until it widens.
When those in whom the urinary tract is not in its proper place are mentioned, it is said that this condition arises because of those who are born with it, and they are called "born with an infection" and require the doctor to lift the penis over the opening to allow urine to flow; and it is not due to generation, so that sperm cannot reach the mother properly according to its rectitude, and it becomes a disease that causes pain.
The surgical procedure involves turning the patient's back, extending the penis with the left hand while applying strong traction, and incising the tip of the penis at the opening of the urethra using a sharp instrument, similar to cutting a quill, or any other device that creates a small opening, so that the semen flows from the middle part, resembling the shape of the penis, and the infection is expelled from its original location.
And be cautious in your operation to free the flow of urine, as you may encounter complications; stop when you cut the cord binding the bladder, and treat the infection until it is healed.
Chapter .LVI.
Of the albaster that occurs in the prepuce at the tip of the penis due to corrosion and blackness and adhesion of the prepuce to the tip of the penis.
Various spots (or pustules) occur on this albaster on the penis, and there is an emission of flesh that is raw.
And some are malignant, while others are not.
Not malignant, take a delicate unction and remove it entirely; then apply pressure to that part submerging in Egyptian (or some other) ointment; and afterwards, cure it with the ointment as it heals.
And if the albaster is malignant, it turns black, then you must administer cautery near its incision and ration it.
If the foreskin of an uncircumcised man has one split part inside and another outside, you must keep the inner part covered until it heals, for when you treat the outer part, there is a risk that the inner part may be torn.
And we have also observed accidents in the genitals and foreskin, black and swollen, so take care to clean everything that is already discolored and likely to corrupt or is corrupted; then apply a line of medicine to it, made with flour from ground millet and mixed with dried roses and crushed spices.
And treat it with the other remedies until it is healed.
If there is a need for bloodletting, administer cauteries monthly according to this form:
Where a cautery is beneficial for two purposes, it aids at once in the flow of blood and in the healing of a corrupt ulcer.
And if the head of the foreskin is corroded and destroyed completely at that moment, you must insert a platinum cannula into the inside of the foreskin so that the infection urinates through that opening.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion occurs only in those whose foreskin is its own, and no circumcision is required; and when adhesion occurs due to an ulcer or abscess), you must carefully cut away with an obtuse spatula until the adhesive substance is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely freed.
And if it is difficult to separate them skillfully, you must cut away gently with a spatula from the head of the foreskin and the prepucium itself; this is because when the prepucium is thin, its delicate nature makes it easily perforated.
And then carefully separate the prepuce from the head of the penis with a sharp instrument, having previously washed it in water to prevent adhesions in the future.
And then, once the fracture is healed, apply a stopping agent within it to ensure its consolidation.
Chapter VII.
On the purification of infants and the cure for what happens to those of circumcision.
Circumcision is not a solution for continence as with other ailments; however, when it is of our own making and done by our own will, and its practice is indeed beneficial for children, then we should assign to that better operation and method the mildest losses for health.
Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not practice circumcision in any of their free lands, since they do not write it in their laws, and only because we have acquired by experience the cause for which I have attributed to the greatest number of skilled practitioners and barbers using circumcision and purification with a new knife and with pliers; and they use lint from flax and incisions with a fingernail.
And you have already tried all these methods and do not find better relief than with scissors, lances, or thread that, when used to cut the foreskin, force it back, as the foreskin's edge is caught between two layers, and the inner layer is pulled away, requiring another incision and causing certain pain. And the circumcision that is performed by cutting, which surgeons use, is not safe for incising the end of the male member, as it easily enters the wound.
But when using the unglable (forceps), it may break off and corrupt your operation. And the foreskin of a child is naturally short, and in most cases, it does not require circumcision, and I have seen this myself.
On the preparation that is done with scissors and linen tape, I have discovered through experience its goodness, because the scissors are of proper incision size, for this reason the sharpness that is above is the same as the sharpness that is below; and therefore when you press your hand with the two sharps, make the cut according to a comparison in time; and it makes compression of the tape in a figure containing the knot of all pain, from which no error arises.
And the first manner of the operation is that you keep the child mostly calm if it is one of those who understand a little, do not make any but tie the tape to its hernia only, and let it enter into the other on the following day.
And then make him happy in all possible ways, according to what he understands. And then make him stay between your hands properly prepared, and do not let him see any scent; hide the scissors in your hand or place the foot so that the child does not see those or any other of the tools.
And then insert your hand into the patient's anus and blow into the rectum, pulling it until the tip of the instrument reaches the base of the anus, and clean that which is added to it due to impurity.
The form of the forceps used for cleaning, this is the form:
The extremities should not be of unequal length; the others should be so that the axis of the foot does not deviate from the axis of the leg, and both have the same curvature as two handles.
But the correction in purification is because the strong reading escapes the intrinsic code entirely, or part of it, and you must make an incision.
Therefore, consider extending that of your time to your finger in front of the location's aperture and make an incision according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then remove it with a pince and make an incision with that.
If three days have passed and it is believed that the swelling comes from an inflamed aperture, then leave it until the inflammation subsides, extract it with ease, and make an incision according to what you have prepared.
And pay attention to the head of the sore, as it will not allow you access.
And therefore, treat that part which the plague has solidified with powders, as we have described in the treatise on powders.
And if it cuts into the flesh deeply enough, and you adhere to the rules regarding it, this will not be noticed by him.
And apply treatment to that part as we have said for it to be healed.
Chapter LVIII.
On the cure for retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by swelling due to stone or congestion, or by a narrow opening or flesh, and similar to those we have mentioned in the methods of treatment in the previous section.
And if the condition we described above does not improve, then you should address the cause of the disease with a syringe, which is called 'siringua'. Its form resembles: both argent and subtle as a lion's claw, equipped with a needle made of fine wire in the shape of a long ray, similar to a palm and a half, with a thin cane at its tip.
And the method of urination through that is to take the urethra folded and tied at the end of a thread or string for proper tightening; and insert the ends of the urethra into the opening left by the catheter, and cut it with scissors if any cause for the string is superfluous, but rather insert it forcefully into the canal and then open the bladder with the edge and with urine albumin.
And apply a poultice over the pain on the skin, and drain the vesicle of the patient and the abscess with oils mixed, olive oil and water.
Then insert the catheter with ease until it reaches the root of the abscess; and fold the abscess towards the opening of the fistula; and push the catheter from inside; and push it until it reaches the bladder, and that the pain is driven to its origin, and not done according to this order, but rather the meat in which it has twisted.
And then carefully extend the lint in the wound little by little, as urine dries out the lint.
Then extract that one for the cure of urine, use a catheter, do not stop doing this and use a catheter until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
Chapter LIX.
On the quality of bladder cleansing with bladder stones and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose.
When it happens in the bladder, ulceration or abscess, or a severe fistula forms there, and you want to drain water and medicine from it, then use an instrument called a clampstone, and this is how it is done:
But if its beginning is silent, it is tightly closed. And there are three parts: two from one side, thus as often.
In the beginning, there is a vacuum, which is what drives it, and according to its quantity, it accumulates or disperses; whenever any cause throws it out of balance due to moisture, it is driven in, and when it is expelled, it is driven out, just as a ship's anchor is affected by the tides at sea.
Therefore, to prevent moisture in the bladder, insert the tip of the anchor into the moisture and drive it away from the openings, for the moisture is driven into the cavity of the anchor.
And then insert the tip of the anchor into the wound as we have mentioned in the treatment; and drive the moisture away from what you drive, for that moisture reaches the bladder soon enough, and the illness centers around it.
The shape of the delicate crystal through which the bladder is crystalized, and that shape is as follows:
Whether it is made of silver or lead, which looks like a small feather, and leave the stick inside the wound.
Then take the bladder of motion, and place it in the humidity that you want to crystalize in the bladder, and then tie it between two with strong double ligature, and heat that humidity over the fire.
And then insert the tip of the crystalizer into the urine.
Then apply your hand over the bladder with the humidity, in the manner that the disease requires that that humidity has already reached the bladder.
If you do not have a bladder at hand, take a piece of cloth and make a circle from it; then pierce that in all its roundness; and insert the thread very strongly into those channels, turning them around; and add to the circle as much moisture, urine, or water as you desire.
And then you insert this into the instrument and perform it as you have done with the bladder, expressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
**Chapter LXX (60)**
**On the Extraction of Stones**
We have already discussed the division of stone types and their treatments with medicines, as well as the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, and the signs of each.
And we have discussed the stone that requires surgical intervention by hand, or sectioning.
And the stone formed in the bladder specifically is the one that becomes lodged in the bladder.
And they tell you of that most manifest exposition and concise summary.
Therefore, it says that the disease originating in the bladder most often affects children; and among its signs, the urine expelled from the bladder is similar to water in its fineness, appearing sandy, and the illness causes itching, swelling, and pain, and this is how it becomes incurable.
And the healing of children from that condition becomes easier after they have reached 13 years old; and it is a difficult cure for the elderly. Among the young, it is more common because of what exists between them.
And of him whose stone is larger and healing is more difficult; and if it is small, it is the opposite of that one.
Therefore, to achieve the cure for this condition, we must begin by cleansing the malady with Christ, who extracts the entire opening present in their intestines; for that opening sometimes hinders the flow of urine due to its inspection.
Then, taking hold of the hernia near the patient's feet, it should be carefully manipulated and massaged so that the urine descends into the bladder or, sometimes, it may leave its position.
Then use the appropriate instrument between your fingers, prepared beforehand, and let go of the contents of the bladder, so that it completely empties into the parts below.
Then, carefully extract everything from that opening, both the solid and liquid matter.
Therefore, if you feel the urine in the space, then immediately cut it open with a knife.
And if you do not catch the slight touch of the tendon, cover it with oil the small indicated part of your left hand, whether the illness is a child or the little seed if it is a young person complete, and insert that into its place. And then, while the stone is inside, place your small finger there. And slowly turn that point, little by little, into the opening of the bladder.
Then press that place with your small finger, and expel the stone outside from the part you cut it off.
And command the assistant to press the bladder with his hand; and command another assistant to extend their legs with their right hand above them, and with the other hand hold the cord that is left over the legs in the part where the section is made.
And then carefully insert a spatulum through the opening which is the shape of it: It divides into what is between the buttocks and genitals, not in the middle place, first on the side of the left thigh; and the incision should be above that bone, and it is said to be in the buttock, and a transverse cut is made, so that the external cut is wide and internal narrow according to the amount that the stone projects from the buttock, not more, because strongly it comprehends the saying that when the stone is in the buttock, the incision should be there, and it is forgotten its disability.
And know that there is a stone with angles and edges, so the excretion of it is difficult because of this.
And from that, it is like a grain, round, and it is made of the lighter excretion.
Therefore, if it is that which has angles and margins, adjust it in the fissure.
And if it is not thus easily accessible, cover your hands over that part, or tighten it with a suitable gesture, the extremity of which is as sharp as a stone over which you tighten the bandage on the foot, and do not tear from it; or insert between them an instrument with a curved, fine tip.
If you cannot do that, then enlarge the wound a little, and if you see blood flow, cut and cauterize it with vitriol three times.
But if the foot is more than one, at the beginning, push your hand into the opening of the bladder, and cut into it; then push a little water in; and like this, if they seem to be more than two.
And if the pain is very great, ignorance is that you pierce this great section, because it causes the disease one of two ways: either it stops (the flow) or it promotes the discharge of continuous urine, which is why the location is not entirely consolidated.
If it is necessary to expel what is inside that is foreign, or to repair the fracture with pliers, extract those in pieces.
Therefore, after you have completed your operation, fill the wound with aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it tightly. And place over that cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in warm oil and water, to ensure the poultice gives way gently.
Then return the patient to their bed, and do not loosen the bandages for three days.
And when that is loosened, moisten the area with water and oil, and then apply a mixture of fine-ground salt and a base of oil until it heals.
If, in the case of this plague, there is a risk of gangrene, clean and dress the wound, and it resembles a stone frozen in the bladder (and urination is thus hindered), then insert what I am about to say into the plague and extract that pus, for if it causes the bladder to corrupt and putrefy.
Then wash the wound with wine, water, and salt, and oppose all kinds of things that are suitable for its cure until it is healed.
And during all stages of treatment, ensure that you bind and adjust both things and apply the medicines that are placed on the area.
And if the stone is small and located in the urethra, and it gets stuck there, and urination is blocked, then treat it with something you have recommended before it causes dissection, because the forces used in this treatment are often blamed for causing dissection; take a sharp-pointed iron probe, which is the shape of this one:
with a triangular, pointed end, sharp, stuck in the wood.
Then take a thread, and tie it to the urethra, leaving the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the iron into the urethra, penetrating with ease until the probe reaches the stone. And turn the probe with your hand on the stone, slowly and carefully, and continue drilling until you make a hole from one side to allow urine to flow out; for soon enough the bladder will be emptied.
And then apply your hand to what is broken off from the stone of the kidney, outside the urethra, as it is squeezed and expelled with urine, and the disease is healed.
If this treatment is not suitable for any reason due to that condition, then tie a thread around the stone and another thread on top of it. Then tightly compress the stone in that urethra between two closures. And then extract that one. And then release the adhesion and clean the infected gangrenous flesh, which is formed in the ulcer.
And it is not necessary to leave a thread around the stone, but only so that it does not return to the bladder; and the other thread on top of it, for when the thread is loosened, the stone is expelled from the urethra, and the infection returns to its place and the disease worsens.
And for this, it is necessary when you tie the bandage over them, that you raise the edge to the parts above, or that you return to its proper place, and secure the pain thus as we have said.
Chapter LXI.
On the extraction of stones from women.
Stones in women are rarely generated.
If you see a stone in any of those places, the cure is then difficult, and it is forbidden by many ways.
One of them is that women with strong bodies become weary.
And the second is that you should not find a woman more wise than herself, who would disclose to the doctor when she is pregnant, or whether she is married to a man.
The third statement translates as: "The surgeon is he who does not hesitate to perform this art, especially the operation with his hands.
And the fourth states: "And in women, the place of incision over the stone is far from the location of the stone, so a deep incision is needed, and there is fear there.
If it is necessary to do so, you should seek help from a skilled female surgeon, and they are not easily found.
If you are lacking in those skills, seek out a surgeon with sharp and subtle tools, or a female midwife well-versed in women's health, or a woman who has herself undergone this procedure.
So, command this present one, and tell him to do everything you instruct, from examining the stone to its removal. This is because he must first determine if the woman is a virgin, and ensure that he whispers his words into her ear and asks for the stone.
Therefore, if you find it, cut it off, leave its root, and then command him to incise on that.
If it is not ripe, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's urinary tract and feel around on the stone, for she places her left hand on the bladder and extracts it at a good price.
Therefore, when you find it, slowly extract it from the orifice of the bladder to the outside, at the same time using your strength so that it reaches the root of the matter.
And then make an incision at the appropriate place of the urinary tract, from the root of the thigh to some other part, stopping the flow of urine through it and cutting off the stone. His finger should not be withdrawn from the urethra.
And make the incision small at first; then insert the blade into the wound, and if pressure is felt, adjust the incision according to the amount, knowing that the pain will be released from that point.
And you should know that the parts of the kidney are like dots: some are small and sharp, others large and bitter, some long and round, and they have spikes.
Therefore, you know the number of parts (or types) of kidney pain, in accordance with what you have described regarding what you want to address.
If you wish to stop the flow of blood, apply vitriol (a caustic substance) to the site in three layers and let it sit for an hour until the pain is severed, then return to your operation to ensure that the kidney pain has been released.
And prepare for yourself, from the instruments mentioned in the extraction of kidney stones in men, so that you are aided by them in your operation.
And if you wish to stop the flow of blood and know that its expulsion is from the arterioles that are cut, then place powder on the area, apply those anti-fever pills and stricture gently, and do not repeat this; leave the stone and do not extract it, for thus the illness will die out. And then treat the plague.
Therefore, once the intensity of the bloodletting subsides, after several days, the area may heal. Then you return to your operation until the stone is removed.
Chapter LXII.
On the section about hernia removal.
A hernia of the abdomen is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white chest cavity, which leaves the opening of the vessels containing the bowels, and it is called the chest.
And sometimes it is found in the natural fat that surrounds the liver, which is another organ; and it is the end of the generative power between the white gallbladder that we have spoken of, and this is not true.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the organs, which causes this material to be released, and sometimes it happens due to a blow struck against the organs.
And this humidity does not have distinct colors, for the color of it may be declining to citron or bloody, or red, or black and putrid, or white and watery, and it is this that is most important.
And the signs by which it is recognized that this addition of water has occurred are as follows: for if it is in the white gallbladder that we have spoken of, then the appendage becomes round and slightly elongated in length with a shape like a pear, and the organ appears, because the humidity surrounds it from all sides.
If the humidity is in the own panicle, then the abscess becomes red from the wound and thus man thinks it is another wound.
And if the humidity is between the legs of the genitals and the white ciphas (testes), then a burning sensation occurs.
And to determine the color of the humidity, you should observe the color of the abscess as it appears from the wound's edge; and according to what is seen in the track of the wound, judge what is within.
Therefore, when we come to the treatment of it with iron, you should know that you command the patient to be fleabitten if possible, and clean the wound thoroughly.
Then, lie the patient on their back for some time due to any cause and place clean cloth under them.
And then place yourself on the patient's left side, and instruct the assistant to follow his right side, who should stretch his leg from one to two spans from the knee to the buttocks and to the opening of the abdomen.
Then take a long, sharp knife and cut the inguinal ligament in the middle of its length near the penis.
And make the incision according to the direction of the hair growth, at a distance from the line that you must follow with the knife, so as to reach the white bone inside.
And then extract it, observe, and pay attention so that you do not incise; your incision should be made with precision, carefully examining the amount of extraction at every step.
Then punch the white bone with a wide puncture and extract all the water.
And then separate the two lips of the incision with scissors, extend the blade along the edges; do not touch the wound with your fingers, and cut the blade in that way that is within your ability. And cut through it completely or in pieces, especially its thin edges, for if you do not examine the incision of it carefully, there is a risk that the water does not drain out.
But if you process it from outside the wound during your operation, then once you have completed the incision of the blade, return inside and adjust the two lips of the wound of the genitals with sutures, and then treat it just as you do with other injuries, as long as it heals.
And if you find that it is corrupted by another illness, then grasp the vessels that are above the suspension, extract the water, and treat it as we have said.
If water is added in two parts equally, you will know that both are hernias; therefore, incise that part as you did the other in contrast; and if it seems to be an operation to you, then do it.
And then you should clean the wound, and enter into the sections of the infected skin immersed in oil or rose oil; place another piece of cloth immersed in wine and oil, expanding it over both genitals and the miracle of the belly; and place them on folded sheets and poultices, and bind these with the bandage according to this form:
Then take two sheets of cloth and make them humid with warm water; press the extremities where it is held by the cord or damp wool, add them to the structure in the crotch of the pants, one extremity taking the place of the anus between the two, and the second touching the fold of the thigh, and all the tightness should be adjusted in the crotch of the pants.
And in some cases, this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of cutting with iron; so you take a delicate cut-wound cautery and incise at the root of the intestines, and light it according to what we have recommended until the white cips containing the water becomes uncovered, and then you take the cautery in this manner: and it resembles Greek script.
And then perforate that cips, and light it until all the moisture is drained out.
And then extend the cips with cuts, and scrape it with delicate cautery lit, incising it according to your ability until everything is eradicated, and be careful that the fire does not touch you.
And you know that this operation is much safer and further from the flow of pus compared to cutting.
If it causes you discomfort to use cautery during incision or heating, or if there is bleeding, then be sure to treat the difficulty that afflicts you with a cure appropriate for it as described above.
If the patient is in great pain and there is no hope for a second operation due to its terrible nature, then perforation should be administered as we have recommended; and it is at this point, as we have mentioned regarding the meanings, that you will know that this hernia is watery.
Now you know that you must cut the malady on a raised spot, then perforate the abscess at the lowest part of it with a wide spatula, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
And it should be wide enough to let all the water flow out.
Then place your hand over the area to seal it, tie that off, and leave it open to allow the water to drain. And then attend to that internal area until the plague is healed.
If there is any contraindication to the discharge of water at that time when you perforate it: this should only be done if the white pannicle in the orifice of the plague causes discomfort and prevents the emission of water, then know that you must insert into the plague a needle or instrument with which the water is extracted from the dropsy, whose form is preceded; or apply a small amount to the size of the plague.
And you should know that the water returns and is retained for about five or seven months; and when it is added, then it should be perforated in the same manner as before, so that the disease will also pass its days.
Chapter LXIII. (No translation needed as per the context provided.)
On Hernia (Fatty) and its Treatment.
Know that in the incision above this hernia, there is great danger of losing the best dispositions; for it seems to me that its discharge and being saved is through that better way.
And you should remember the operation on that one and the use of the poultices.
Therefore, it is said that the apostemas appear in the bodies of those whose genera are composed in such a way, and this is done for various reasons: either due to an acute excess of humors that overflow into the genera, or through percussion.
And the color of the apostema is according to the color of the body, and it does not cause pain in it, and it is a serious apostema.
Very rare is the dried-up apostema, of which the color is dark, and it does not hurt.
And some times this is caused by the contraction of the arteries, and by the inflammation of those parts which have already been perceived as painful, or by the inflammation of veins.
It may be that what is due to the inflammation of arteries is known as the discharge of the abscess when you press on those parts; and it does not matter if that touches you.
What is caused by the inflammation of veins does not discharge from it for any reason except compression on those parts.
And it is also possible that in this case a section is made and on the other meats; and you insert the knife into the openings of the genitals, and then take hold of the parts of their roots, and extract the white chyle from them, and cut the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, and tie them, and insulate the suspensory ligament that you cut from all the divisions of the root of the testicle.
Therefore, if the bone has already been consolidated in those flesh parts, then you must extract the bone and cut into that.
And if there is an adhesion due to any cause in the fracture or between what is between the bones, then you must dissolve all that adhesion and cut it with a round incision.
If there is a growth of flesh in the location of the adhesion behind, then you must cut everything that belongs to it and extract the bone as we have said.
Therefore, after your operation is complete, fill the wound with a mixture of wool and rosin oil; then take care of it with other remedies until it heals.
Chapter LXIV
On the treatment of hernias that are internal.
It is an abscess that has been enveloped by some similar growth, causing softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult the movement and walking of the patient.
And in the treatment of this illness, one must be cautious regarding what preceded it, for that is where remembrance comes into play.
However, I say that operation should be done according to what I have mentioned first.
And it is said that you should sever the ailment over a raised pillow; then stretch the suspensory of the testicles towards each side; and take hold of the chain of the genitals with your hand, as it is proven to be effective on the burning pain; and use other means that you have, and extend them with vigor.
And then incise with a sharp knife, using a transverse cut, along the direction of the vessels while they are exposed.
And then carefully extract from all parts, as we have said regarding the extraction of arrows embedded in the temples.
And then take a needle with a double thread, and pass it through the first place where the pain occurs, and then pass it again at the end of their course. And then make incisions in the middle part with a right cut according to the length of the body, and extract what is added due to foul humidity and corruption.
And then treat the disease with remedies for other diseases in which you wish to prevent further generation, so that vessels do not remain one of two kinds, as it is not harmful for this.
If a vital force affects all the veins, then you must know if the testicles are extracted or pressed by them, so that they are deprived of all nutrition due to the cutting of the veins, and become atrophied, or pressed in such a way that it is no longer beneficial to those.
It appears that your request is incomplete or lacking context. The text you've provided seems to be a reference to "Capitol .lxv." but without additional information, I am unable to determine what specific translation or interpretation is needed. If this is part of a larger text, please provide more context so I can offer the most accurate assistance.
# On the Treatment of Intestinal Hernia
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a tear in the abdominal wall extending from the openings of the abdomen, so that the intestines protrude through that rupture into other parts of the body.
And this rupture can be of the abdominal wall or an excrescence of it, and these two types occur due to various causes: a blow, a cut, a cry, a sudden elevation of some heavy cause, or similar.
The sign of this, when it is an extension of the abdominal wall, is that it occurs gradually over a long time, and not suddenly, and it is a protrusion of the abdomen towards the back due to the abdominal wall pushing against the intestine.
And the sign of it being a tear in the abdominal wall is that it causes a sudden and violent pain at the onset; it is a protrusion appearing below the affected ribcage, due to the intestine pushing out from inside the abdomen.
And in some cases, the intestine's sac is forgotten, and this condition is called intestinal hernial protrusion.
And in some cases, it is found as a swelling, and in some cases, it runs in the hernia gap, and here it is retained, which greatly impedes the patient's condition, and in some cases, it causes severe pain and especially when pressed.
In the treatment of this illness with herbs, one must be careful, for it is important to avoid the wrong ingredients in that process.
The manner of performing the operation is that you command the hernia to return the intestine to its cavity with your hand inside it, if it obeys its movement, and then turn yourself over so that you lie on its chest between your hands, and raise his legs.
And then narrow the cord which is the cord of the testicles at their attachment, and incise the cord of the testicles entirely through the long; and then fix in two folds of the section cut as you need to open the section with these.
And if the section is according to the quantity that it is possible for you to forget from that,
And then excise those bodies which are left by the cord of the testicles, as long as the white hard body of each part is discovered.
Then insert your finger into what is the testicle, where it is between white body, which is left by the cord of him, and between the second body, and loosen from that adhesion which is behind the testicle.
And then hold with your hand the cord of the testicles at its attachment, and thus extend the white body on it with your left hand, and raise the testicle to the part of the section; and command the assistant to stretch the testicle above, and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with a complete solution.
And seek out the threads that show there is no cause for the intestine wrapped in the hard white stone. If you find no cause for it within the body, then you should turn your attention to the abdomen.
And then cut into the opening left beside the cord of the testicles, in order to drain the fluid and cleanliness as we have recommended in what we have said above.
And then apply the wool soaked in oil to the ulcer; leave it on the wound; and apply the poultice as recommended (and sometimes a white cautery is used, as we have said should be done after incision to prevent discharge of pus, as this has been seen to cause problems); and leave the poultice until it falls off by itself.
If the case is severe and prolonged, then hot water should be applied, and it should be left on until the poultice falls off as we have said above.
And then attend to the wound with other remedies for internal ailments until it is healed.
**Capitol LXVI**
About hernias that protrude.
In this hernia, nothing has been seen that suggests it was difficult to treat.
And the first method they say is done as we have recommended for hernias that are visible; which is to cut open the canal close to the hernia with ease; and then dry the middle part around it carefully so that the vessels do not fall.
And treat the infection as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LXVII.
About the dislocation that occurs in the fingers.
Sometimes, when the angles break as we have said, they open the area.
And do not mention any genetic cause of hernias to the patient; and if they do, it is rare; and return to it at all times.
If the condition persists, a suitable fissure should be made in the skin before the hernia descends into the skin; this happens due to the expansion of the skin as mentioned before, which causes it to become thin and protruding.
And the cure for it is with cautery, as was mentioned before.
And sometimes it is cured by binding as follows: the patient lies on their back between two cushions, and the broken area is dried with a section of cloth according to its size, three digits in length.
And then tighten the white strap that is below the knee until it is uncovered.
Then take the needle and place it over the prominent part of the joint, and press it against the abdomen.
Then locate the two prominent points on the end of the joint's ray and adjust the suture between these two points.
Then gently extract the end of the joint, without pressing on the intestine or causing pain, as you must be well aware when treating intestinal hernias.
Then attend to the treatment of abscesses, and when you drain the pus, cleanse it and restore the affected area until it is consolidated; for the joint is contracted and the prominent rupture point is not adjusted.
And cautery is better at this location, as it is closer to health.
**Capitol .lxviii.** (Capitol 68)
On the softening of the cord of the testes.
In some men, the cord of the testes becomes softened due to the softening of the tissues surrounding it, and this is noted in its careful observation.
Therefore, it is necessary for the one who is tasked with the treatment of this condition to have the patient lie on their back and expose all the softened cord, which should be elevated above its natural position; and then carefully stitch together the two lips that are separated by the suture.
And if you wish, at the beginning, remove the excess of the softened cord with three or four stitches and a secure suture.
Then, cut between the sutures; and carefully tend to other ailments within, ensuring their healing and the falling out of the filth.
Chapter .lxix.
On castration.
You know that castration is forbidden in our law, but for the sake of remembering it in this book, I will speak of it; and the remembrance of it is necessary only in two ways: one is so that when questioned about it by a doctor, he may know the cure for it; and the other way is that we ourselves may at times have need to castrate other animals for our breeding stock, as with horses, dogs, pigs, and similar creatures.
And therefore it is said that castration is performed in two ways: either by tying or by cutting an opening with a section.
In the case where it is performed by tying, the method of operation is that we cut off the animal while still alive, so long as its genitals remain pliable and relaxed and hang. And then carefully take those wounds in your hand so that they heal and the touch does not remain visible.
Castration is performed by incising and cutting, ensuring you hold the animal and press the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
Then attach the ligatures, and incise each one with a cut between two hooks.
And then incise those pustules that you have lanced. And do not leave any of those in the head, but the subtle phlegm that is on the vessels.
This method of castration is better, which is done by cauterization, because it leaves no cause for the testicles, so the animal does not desire to mate.
And then attend to the wound until it is healed.
Chapter LXX.
On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two manners: one where there is an abnormality or appearance of a space in the scrotum where testicles should be, and another where there is tissue resembling female genitalia present.
And in some cases, it causes urine to flow from the scrotum where the testicles should be.
In women, it is a bit different: in that the female organ above the vulva resembles two male testicles, albeit slightly smaller outside and with two ovaries as well.
And the treatment is of three kinds: two from men and one from women. And it is that you must incise those tight meats within which the emission of that matter takes place, and then cure them with the treatment for other ailments.
And in the second kind of men from whom urine is expelled from the scrotum, there is neither cure nor operation for them.
Chapter XXI.
Of cold and flesh prominent due to causes of women.
The hard cold is too tight due to natural causes, and it is necessary to pay attention and make a mark with regard to it; sometimes it becomes magnified in some women just as it is spread out like in men and interferes during coitus.
Then take some lint or wool with your hand or tweezers and scrape.
And do not finish with scraping, especially on the wound's edge, to prevent blood flow.
Then carefully tend to that part of the cure for the plague until it is healed.
May be new flesh is flesh that has not been scarred by the mother's horror until it fills in, and strong pain persists outside as a result, according to appearance of the (and for this reason some first call it "tailed malady"); therefore, you must scrape it just as you scrape lint, and tend to it until it is healed.
Chapter .lxxii. (This seems to be a heading or reference, not part of the medical text itself.)
On the treatment of arthritis.
Arthritis is when the woman's knee joint is not perforated or has a small tear. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to disease that has preceded it, and it is caused by improperly adjusted flesh or subtle and dense buildup.
It is felt in the knee joint or in the patient's sides, or under their armpit, or in the lower part of their body, and it prevents movement and engagement and childbearing, and severely prohibits menstruation.
And the diagnosis of this is made by examining the patient's knee, if the swelling is apparent, then it is treated immediately; but if it is not apparent, you should inquire about the pain in the patient's words or according to their feeling.
If the ingestion is by subtle poison, particularly affecting both lips, then cut and tear it apart.
And it is that it holds over the two soft lips, and then pulls them, indicating the most intense pain on both sides.
And the woman lies on her back, her legs extended, and then extends the two lips with force until that subtle poison is broken and the ingestion is opened.
Then take wool and cloth, dip them in oil, and place that over the area; apply heat to the site so that the incision does not heal.
If the poison is thick and dense, then cut it with a sharp knife or with a leaf of mint.
If the operation is for a tumor, then suspend it from a hook, and cut it.
And these are the medicines that stop the flow of blood from bites, as well as pain and dragon's blood, and herbs, adjusted to the patient's condition.
And then administer a wide lead cannula so that the plague does not become deeply embedded.
Keep it for several days and administer water from the dry source.
And it is healed with the other treatment of consolidation until it is cured.
Sometimes accidents occur in the mother's womb from other meats, and then you must cut according to this manner. If it is so for gangrene of the limbs, to the gangrene of the limb which is in the greatest part, no contrariness should be caused by any means.
**Capitol .lxxiii.**
On the treatment of hemorrhoids, tail, and red botch that occur in the vagina of women.
Hemorrhoids appear from the openings of dilated veins, especially when they have been long-standing and dried up.
And we have already discussed the classification of these hemorrhoids and their signs, and to say thus which receive treatment and which do not receive treatment.
Therefore, it is said that hemorrhoids and tails when they are in the prostration of the old age and do not appear on the surface, then in these there is no cure to be done with fire.
Those that are within the orifices of the anus upon which sensation occurs, these are those that are cured.
And be sure to place the woman in a warm bath and then extend her legs, either with forks or a rough cloth, and cut those at the roots.
And then sprinkle over those areas the flow of holy water from one of the sacred powders, in the same way as basil and others similar to them.
And then massage their feet for an hour, and then place them in cold water.
If the flow of holy water persists, then make a decoction with an abundance of spices and extracts from milky grains and stones and similar things.
And then take flour of wheat and comforting herbs, mix them with honey and wine, and make a plaster from this over the back of the patient.
And if the abscess bursts, it is good; otherwise, adhere two bandages and perform scarification on the nipples.
Then take wool and immerse it in the juice of colander or the juice of arugula or the juice of plantain, mix with wine and apply to the area; then treat the area with a poultice until it heals.
And cure that until it is healed.
Chapter LXXIV
On the perforation of the eardrum accidentally in the mother.
Various types of abscesses occur in the body, as well as cracking and abscesses that cause ulcers, inflammation, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhaging, tumors, and other abscesses. And you have already described these ailments and their specific types, the signs of those, and the treatments for them in detail.
And you mentioned in this treatise on abscesses that when they occur in the body, especially those that are dangerous, and if you want to know the manner in which the operation is performed to remove them.
Then consider whether the pain of the abscess in its beginning is sharp, with inflammation and fever, and whether there is any swelling or discomfort, if so, do not pierce it immediately, but cure it using something that aids in the maturation until the acute symptoms subside.
And then place the woman on her side on a bed that has two beds; recline over her back and position her feet towards the opening below the abdomen, so that her thighs are spread apart, and place your hands behind her knees, and bind her with some bandage as appropriate.
Then the midwife should follow the direction of the wound and administer the instrument that opens the orifice of the mother, the form of which will come into those cases that are about to be done properly.
And be aware when administering this instrument that you remain in the right position over the opening of the mother of the woman, and whatever enters from the instrument into the mother should not be greater than the mother's opening and damage the illness. If the instrument is larger than the mother's opening, then be aware that you should place pillows over the texture of the mother's opening so that the entrance of any instrument into the mother's opening is prevented.
And take care that you hold the angle that runs in the instrument of the knife above and that the minister holds the instrument and turns the angle until the opening of the main orifice is opened.
And when the excitation appears and it is hot and moist, then take care to immediately dry that part with a wide spatula.
And after the sanie (faeces) is evacuated, then take care to place in the wound a pack soaked in warm oil or olive oil containing some astringent, and apply pressure in the section near the anus of the patient.
And remove the pad from the anus and place on it clean wool soaked in water containing alum.
And the treatment is completed within two days with a poultice that suits it until it is healed.
And in some cases, the mother and the plague are washed with water and honey, and then added to water in which a lint or a long piece of fabric has been boiled, and finally return to the mixture.
And if the plague is deeply embedded in the infected mother, you must be cautious about treating it with fire, instead focusing on the treatments we have mentioned in the previous section.
Chapter .lxxv. (This indicates the beginning of a new chapter in the medical treatise.)
To teach midwives the manner in which embrioic (fetal) substances should be treated when they present abnormally.
A necessary cause is that the midwife knows the commencement of the natural birth process by signs, and this is when you see the woman exerting herself in labor and desires to smell the air; she is drawn away from these things because of what is upon her during childbirth, and she hastens the emission of the embryo. At this point, you will know that this birth is according to natural form, and it is the emission of the child over its head, or suspended or hanging from the umbilical cord.
Therefore, when you observe those signs, you will know that the mother's belly is compressed so that the embryo loosens slightly as it moves over its head, it feels the second pain, and it is cleaned of those superfluities with good cleansing.
Anyone who deviates from this practice in this part is unnatural and unworthy, for when the embryo is situated over its feet and its body is positioned in front of its head and its legs, or its hand is on its foot or at its side, or its head and hand are above it, or its belly is pressed against its back, and it strongly twists around its spine, resembling unworthy figures.
For this reason, it is necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in all these matters, and that she guard against mistakes and disappointments.
And she will show all the signs of these, and what understanding is in them so that their meaning be known and established over them.
When the fever is located on the head due to its natural heat, and it is strong in women and affects them in a difficult part, and sometimes its virtue is already weakened, then do that stop it, which women have, and evaporate the congestion of it with fennel seed and humid oils.
And then insert the meter between their split and narrow spaces, or rather, that second one into her finger, so that it touches what is inside of her filled with humidity. And press the woman's belly as the child descends.
If it does not descend, then cover the woman with a poultice of chickpea flour and fennel seed dust.
Then command him, remove the poultice, which should be changed and do that make him sneeze with the condition; and close his mouth and nose for an hour, so that the child is not forgotten soon.
And if two of the limbs are asleep at the beginning, then you must reduce them with ease, little by little. If you do not follow the procedure, then place the woman on a cushion and lift her legs up, then gently lower the cushion onto the ground; the woman should be held so that she does not fall due to the impact.
And if the limbs are not quickly returned and the fetus dies, then incise them and remove the rupture from the fetus or tie the body to the mother's hand with a bandage and extract it with equal force, as it will be forgotten.
When the fetus is on its feet, then you must push them up, and gently turn the fetus, then stretch it little by little and take one of its legs and extend it gradually.
When they are situated between the thighs, then command them to relax and make them vomit in this condition, for it will be expelled if God wills it.
And if it is not expelled with what we have recommended, then return the small movement little by little until it reaches that second natural position, for that will be the time when it is expelled through vomiting.
And if it is forbidden to do what we have recommended, then take a mixture of alder and dissolved gum, and grind it well in a mortar with good percussion, and apply the liquid to the hernia of the woman, near the base of her stomach. And then make those cuts in boiled water, until the symptoms disappear.
And when the cuts have stopped bleeding, then do the fumigation of myrrh and apply it to him. And after the fumigation for an hour, you then stop it on a hot pad, make him sneeze and expel the phlegm from his mouth, take it away from him, and press the lower part of his belly with a light compression, as the condition will soon be relieved.
The fetus is delivered longitudinally through one of the fingers. Use skill to reduce the woman's hand, but if that cannot be done, raise the woman and do it that way.
And if it cannot be done that way, then make the woman lie down, and strike the parts of her with a violent blow, and then apply oils and ointments that you have ready at hand.
And if childbirth occurs, then perform a cesarean section, and then study the reduction of the hand, and insert the fetus back into its natural position, and make the woman sneeze, and order her to contract until the fetus is delivered.
The expansion of the condition over the body causes its muscles and fascia to be twice as large as normal. The midwife should have her hand on the fetus and then slowly turn it, making sure this is easy.
And when it is as long and wide as desired, then stop over the hernia where we have recommended oil and mucus.
Then command the patient to breathe deeply and slowly, and when you have done this, make them lie on their side and command them to bend it, then ask them to switch sides; and cause them to sneeze in this condition. Prepare for the exit of the fetus on its side.
When you encounter a severe case of fever according to this manner, consider and then insert the second needle with your finger until it is free from moisture.
And if the object is suspended over the face and neck, then insert the needle through the object so that it is not retained and causes delay.
Then force the object apart inside until it stops moving, and instruct the woman to buy some lighter materials, and then they will extract it easily, if God wills.
Double delivery of twins or many fetuses. You know that twin births are common, and sometimes three or four, which is strange and hard to comprehend; however, their causes may be natural, and not alive.
And among these, if they increase in number, a second one appears, and they are separated by measurement, distinguishing those that enter the ligament in each person's navel; and sometimes they are forgotten as if it were a natural fact, and at times they are detected by an unclean measure, as we have explained.
And if they are difficult to deliver due to their position, and it comes to what we have said about non-natural positions, then you should treat them as we have explained.
And if the midwife is skilled and does what facilitates and simplifies delivery, even at a late hour, and is ingenious according to every figure as she prepares the body for labor, leading to health.
A reminder that it is formed in the womb from embryos and some are aborted.
Some times are formed in the order one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and many more, and it is necessary to have already verified that a woman who has had several miscarriages does not get pregnant again, and another who is completely formed causes great harm due to the measurement of the wise sages.
And all of this I include in the science of midwifery so that they understand how powerful it is for that young woman similar to this, and therefore they should pay close attention to it.
Chapter .LXXVI.
On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you care for the dead fetus as we have mentioned in the section on treatment and it does not come out, and you are forced to use manual operation, then consider whether the woman is of healthy constitution and free from any conditions that could lead to her loss.
Now place the woman on her side, with her head inclined downwards and her legs elevated.
The midwife should hold both parts or be lying on the side to prevent the contents from spilling out during delivery.
Then moisten the mother's mouth with oils and mucilage of althae and fenugreek and fennel seeds.
Then the midwife places her hand, anointed with these oils and mucilage, inside the mother, and with ease, she finds the location where the cuts in the fetus are located.
And the appropriate place for this: Consider whether the fetus is ready to be delivered headfirst, and then place your attention on the cuts in its heels, or neck, or mouth, or palate, or leave it with its beard, or in the fork of its spine, or in places near its ribs, or below its hipbones.
If the onset of pain is in the feet of the patient, then it occurs in the instep or in the middle of the back.
And you should hold it with your right thumb, and bend the patient's hand at that place between the fingers of your left hand, and insert your right hand easily and position the thumb as needed to reach the affected area.
Then hold and position another thumb, or the third if necessary, in the opposite location to draw it equally, without stretching it excessively according to its natural state.
And it is beneficial at every step, so that the condition of it is alleviated as is done in cases where the removal of a tooth is necessary.
And pay attention to what is between them, where the stretching should be softened; and if any part of it gets stuck, then the midwife should apply her fingers with oil and skillfully insert and turn those parts that are stuck.
Therefore, if the position of the fetus is overlooked, then the incisions should be changed to where it is easier; and do so until the entire fetus is delivered.
If the hand is positioned against the other and cannot be reduced due to the tightness of the hernia, then a cloth should be wrapped around it; and once everything is delivered, cut it either at the joint of the hand or in the groin.
And likewise, do the same for the other hand and both feet.
If the head of the fetus is large, or there is compression during delivery, or it is in a position where water cannot flow out, then you should insert between the sharp edges and cut the head, and extract the water, or use an instrument called "alundat," whose shape will be similar to other instruments described in the relevant chapters.
And apparently, the making of this is of great importance by nature: and now you will see that it cuts into that inflamed swelling, or takes up that swollen part as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is solidified and compressed, then you must cut with a fork, then split it open so that the moisture in the foot can be drained.
If it is not complicated and does not require special attention, then you should cut off the head as soon as possible.
And if the part from the belly is abscessed or contains water, then you must perforate that place to drain the moisture that is within it.
If the process is above their feet, then the movement of it should be gentle and the direction towards the opening of the wound should also be light.
If the bowels are blocked and the foot is affected, then you must cut open the abdomen and the foot, remove the cloth that you have wrapped around your hand, and pierce the bowels until something comes out.
If other members are restrained and the head is turned, then insert your left hand; if the opening of the mother (womb) is blocked, then insert your hand into the opening of the womb, seek for a child's head, and pull it out to the mouth of the mother, and insert one, or two fingers, and turn it until it comes out.
And if the opening of the mother (womb) is blocked by an abscess that occurs in the ovary, then do not force it; instead, first administer a flow of moist, greasy causes. And apply poultices, and keep the patient in water that softens and moistens.
And if the condition is on their side, as far as possible, use a blade: and administer what we have said about the living body.
And if that is not possible, then incise in the bones, and extract it.
And be sure not to leave any cause inside the second time.
And when you have completed all your operations, administer what we have said about the treatment of the wounds that occur from the main cause.
And if bleeding occurs from the wound, stop it with strict waters and administer the other treatment.
And you have already seen a woman whose womb was filled with dead children, and then another time on that same fire, she became pregnant again, and the other child was also dead. It has happened that after a long time an abscess opens up in his body; and it swells until it opens like fire, and begins to give off heat.
And you have been called to treat them, and medicated for a long time, but the plague is not healed.
Then you should consider the patient from various causes and apply strong attraction plasters, and extract an oss (bone), and after a few days, another bone will come out; and you will be too amazed when there is no oss in the belly.
And then you will realize that they were the bones of a dead fetus.
So you will continue to treat the disease, extracting many bones from them, as the woman in her various dispositions has been doing for a long time, barely saving her life with these methods.
And do not be surprised that this is a strange thing, but because there is knowledge and aid to it, the doctor uses his art with his hand for its healing administration.
On the forms of instruments that are necessary to extract the hernia.
Form of the turn which opens the main part:
This is the form of a strapper in which the limbs are locked, with two turns on two ends of two feet. However, this turn should be made to be more subtle than the stranglehold, and it can be done with a rope of hemp or a stick of wood.
And the width of each stick should be such that two fingers can fit between them, and the margin on both sides of each stick should be one finger's length; and the length of each should be a palm and a half. In the middle space between the two sticks, there should be two adjustments made from the same side of the stick, whose length is the greatest part of a palm with a slight difference, and the width of each should be such that two fingers can fit easily, or slightly less.
And these two additional elements are inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it is opened for you to turn over the two prescribed virtues.
Another form, similar to that subtle and light pus:
It is made of wooden sticks or bones according to the appearance of tongs. However, at the extreme end of it, there are also two additional elements, each with a length of about a palm and a width of approximately two fingers.
And when you want to open the mother up, you lay the woman down on her side, opening what is between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument resembling scissors according to the amount you wish, within the limits of the mother's mouth so that the metal does as you want.
The way of vertigo that the ancients spoke of:
The method of pushing that which is pushed:
The method of healing as it contains the great cure:
And it is made like a pair of pincers with teeth at the end, also when using, and sometimes it is done long as if with other pincers according to this form, also when using, which have teeth as if with teeth of shears with which it cuts and contains. Method of healing little:
Form of a needle without a spine:
Form of a needle with two spines:
A form of spatula with two extremities, one of which is used to incise the head.
A form of two spatulas wide.
All those instruments are practiced, and when more varieties of them are multiplied and properly prepared by the artisans, they become easier to use and more useful for people due to their quantity.
And do not neglect those instruments that are already available to you, for the need for others is not an excuse.
From the extraction of the secondine (a medical term for a specific type of tissue or structure, possibly referring to a second layer or aspect).
When the second stage of childbirth begins, you must command the patient to hold their breath, then make them sneeze in that position, and place your hand over their mouth and nose, and if they breathe freely, so be it.
And if that happens, take a hot compress and make a hole in the covering, then place it over the open mouth of the mother, also using warm herbs such as calamine, rue, and black cohosh, as well as licorice root and sweet flag. All these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the hot compress, and then that one is placed over the fire.
And then place a canvas tube in the mother's mouth, and hold it there until the steam reaches the concave part of the mother's body.
And then perform that sneezing as we have said, and the second one is expelled quickly.
If this treatment does not work and is not effective, then command the nurse to dip her left hand in warm oil or a mixture of elderberry, and then carefully insert that into the patient's anus and search for the second one, and when she has found it, slowly extract it little by little, according to the method we have indicated, so that the mother does not suffer from violent attraction. Then change the position of the sides right and left as necessary.
And if the mother's mouth is constricted, we have already recommended the treatment with sneezing and with medicines made from herbs.
If all the causes we have mentioned are not forgotten, then take care not to do anything in the process of abstraction, but know that what comes out of him into the mother's mouth lies in the woman's matter, and immediately anoint it with a discovery and tetracycle; for this will soon putrefy, dissolve, and be forgotten.
When it appears, there is a high evil sound in the head and stomach, which causes the patient pain; and then know that fumigations and appropriate remedies should be administered to it.
Some of the ancients already used fumigation with fennel and dried figs.
The form of the instrument used to fumigate women for the retention of menstruation and the secondine (postpartum bleeding):
It is necessary to make an incision or a tear.
And the fine tip of the instrument should be placed in the cavity and the broader end over the fire, and the smoking should be controlled over the arms of the fire.
And hold that until the smoke is consumed, and repeat another.
On the treatment of the unpierced navel of an infant.
Many infants have navels that are not pierced, which become slightly swollen and raised. Then instruct the midwife to pierce it as she has said, and if not, use a sharp instrument to pierce it, and be careful not to touch the nerve.
And then apply pressure over that cloth soaked in wine and oil; and carefully treat that wound until it heals.
If there is a risk of infection, apply pressure on the wound for several days, and stop when the child's condition improves.
And it also happens that the infection of the anus occurs for the consolidation of a ulcer or abscess; then, once that consolidation is incised, it should be treated with the same remedies we have mentioned for healing and cleansing.
On the treatment of fistulas that tend to form.
Fistulas that form in the perineum, filled with purulent discharge, are usually narrow and thick, occurring either near the anus externally or in the space between the legs.
And it is a fistula or a mass.
And when that condition is chronic and due to the flow of excessive moist white pus or subtle corruption, sometimes these fistulas penetrate.
And those that penetrate are known for the substance that comes out of them due to the exit and pressure; and sometimes the patient suffers from the difficulty of exit, and often a strong odor emanates from these wounds.
And some of these fistulas are found in the spaces penetrating into the bladder, and into the flesh of the penis; and others penetrate into the joint space and into the root of the testicle.
And in the case where a fistula is found penetrating into the anus but not fully, you should insert a thin, pointed instrument into the anus and attempt to gently erode or cut through the fistula when it is not inflamed.
If there is stiffness in that place, then insert a subtle attempt of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the tentation or hair in its proper place.
And if you do not feel that at all or if you do not find any cause of expulsion such as worms or flatulence, as we have said, then you know it is non-penetrant, and now you must limit yourself to treatment.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the tissue of the penis, then the meaning of it is the emission of urine from that place and its prohibition until that location is strengthened with medicine.
If it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the area, then its sign is that the tentation has entered here if there is no stiffness within the bone, and it causes pain in the passage; and it will be sore forever; and it does not respond to treatment, nor is it solidified with ointment.
And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is no complete cure, and the healing of them requires work and patience on the part of skilled physicians over whom they are held captive.
But in those that are not penetrating or recent, healing with fer (perhaps iron) is hoped for according to what you have been advised and proven before.
And indeed, the illness moves between the patient's legs over their sides, raising their legs inside, the parts lean towards their belly, and then it attempts to penetrate with lead, or iron if in a narrow fistula, into the place where you know the attempt originates.
And if that feels like the illness is around the heart, then you must insert your little finger directly into the chest.
And if you feel in your little finger the attempt already started and discovered to penetrate, or another thing that feels between the little finger and that, it is certain that it is penetrating; and therefore do not work on that, for there is no cure in that, as we have said.
Nevertheless, they say that it heals certain men quickly.
And regarding the treatment by which one hopes for rapid improvement in the patient, it is that you make subtle cauterizations according to the extent of the fistula, as previously described, and insert that hot iron into the fistula until it reaches around the inside; and then repeat this process two or three times until you know that all the flesh around the fistula, which is similar to a reed pen tip, has adhered together.
Then take care of those wounds wrapped in bandages until all the flesh that is adhered together has healed, and then apply medicines that promote healing and consolidation to the flesh; if it heals well, it is cured; otherwise, it will not be cured in any time through other treatments.
And if the tent (or probe) does not enter deeply and stops in the area where there is only a thin layer of flesh or bone, and sometimes the fistula is on the surface of the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and as the drying progresses, you will see the tent (or probe) being pulled out, and thus it is freed and removed.
And then clean those fistulated meats that are assembled like a quill of a pen and not torn for any reason.
If there is a flow of pus that comes between you and your operation when you inspect those meats, then the best thing to do is use a sharp instrument cauterized with fire or acute medicine, because cauterization with fire closes the two wounds properly: it adjusts those meats attached and removes the pus by drying the humidity.
And then care for those wrapped in bandages or tightly bound within that area, and at the same time, treat the plague with hot, hard flesh-generating and consolidating care.
And so these medicines which involve stopping and cutting off; when the treatment is restored, it is healed and you do not fear recurrence.
If the fistula has already penetrated into the perineum and is elongated from the surface of the body, then insert the finger into the anus and explore it carefully.
And so if you sense the attempt and between you and it is clearly a foreign body or flesh, and it is prone to penetration, then it is not an operation on it but rather through a path of trust and hope.
The treatment for this condition involves one of three methods: either cauterizing it as we have mentioned; or drying it out, reaching into the cavity when possible to administer the cure; and not using any incision because you do not want to damage the surrounding tissue or alter the patient's desire; and take care with that as we have said so that the healing is strong. Or elongate that membrane and clean the pus that has formed inside it near the anus, as we have said, either through probing or another instrument of great sharpness, and then excise the infected flesh in the opening made during the section, using cauterization if necessary. Finally, strive to restore the whole wound through incision, and if the orifice does not heal properly, and the fistula remains open at the anus, let it be less severe for the patient. And in some cases, the fistula is ended in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, it is on the side of the anus around the surface of the body with the cord and on the margin of the anus, then take the attempt to pierce the extreme end, which is thus prepared with a needle according to this form:
and insert yourself into that vein wrapped in your fields or around those; then, insert the attempt into the vein within the fistula until you reach its cavity.
If it is inserted into the margin of the anus very close, then you extract the vein from that path as you insert the tip into the anus; you extract the end of the vein and align both ends, then open each one, and leave it for a day or two, and when you again insert the vein into the flesh, open it between those pieces of flesh that are between the two ends of the vein and that fit together.
And then treat the wound until it is healed and consolidated.
If the opening of the fistula is not deep enough, make it penetrate in some way as you are prepared, either with force or gently, because it is not for you to cause injury; and then treat it until it is healed.
The shape of the spatula with which the fistula is incised: its curvature is sharp at one end and the other end is not sharp, so as not to cause unnecessary injury when you cut.
On the stitching of hemorrhoids where pus runs from the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids are said to be of two kinds; either they appear between the buttocks resembling coal, or those are swollen with the grease of inflammation. And they are small and large, and the sanch (vein) runs from them at that time, it is one, it is mobile, it comes out of the anus, and in the extremities of it.
However, those that are purely anal, according to the few moistures of citrus water or a little vein with continuous flow, are according to the color of the body.
And the treatment for those that are within the anus is that you command the patient to be placed in a certain position so that when the anus contracts and hemorrhoids appear before you, you can express them. Then you take care and suspend them with pins or what you have at your disposal, and then cut those veins at their roots.
If the pins are not held in those because of their moisture and softening, then take a coarse cloth or a napkin or a woolen thread, pull out those with your fingers, and then cut them and sprinkle some powders over them after the incision, so that they adhere to that place instead of cauterization; or cauterize them as mentioned previously in the chapter on cauterization. And then attend to those and other treatments until they are healed.
If the hernia does not yield to treatment, then lacerate the malady with incisions in the areas of pressure, wash those parts in water that aids in expelling the hernia more easily when the malady is squeezed.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, their cause is often slight, and you should apply those with your finger or those with ointment, make incisions in them, and then attend to their healing as we have said above.
For those who perform incisions, here is how you should administer sutures according to this method: take a length of thread wrapped around the finger and use an needle to extract the hemorrhoids from the splits above, then make the needle penetrate into the root on the other side, and wrap both ends of the thread around the split below the needle, perpendicular; stretch the hemorrhoid with strong tension, tighten the thread, and withdraw the needle.
And do this continuously, leaving them untouched, so that the excess of blood flow leaves that part.
Then place a warm, oil-soaked cloth or wax over the affected area and rest it, commanding the patient to do the same. Then remove that cloth and, when it becomes clean, treat the wound with ointment or other remedies until it heals.
And when they have been long-standing and no longer respond to those medicines, you should open them with a sharp instrument or with your finger, making sure that the punctures remain moist and are not allowed to form scar tissue, which prevents their healing; and then treat them until they are healed.
Now hold those with a strong reason, more violent than the first that enter, and ensure they are healed.
You know that hernias are crucial, and not only do they appear according to the color of the skin resembling a nail head, but they occur throughout the body, especially in the groin and sides, and by those pains you should address them.
And so it is incised what is in the ring of the hernia, and held with forceps or a hook, and eradicated from its root; and then care should be taken of that.
And if you wish, cauterize according to what is mentioned in the preceding chapter.
A wart is a small, rough, rounded ulceration on the surface of the body, often seen in children.
And the treatment for it is that you extend and incise that, or open it with a sharp instrument within the wound. And if you wish, cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine, as we have said.
A mosquito is a small, pierced or ulcerated eminence on the surface of the body, often accompanied by itching, and when it bites, it feels similar to a sting from a mosquito, and it is done around the body.
And the treatment for it is to take a thin needle of goose or duck feathers, strong and sharp, and place it gently over the swelling within the affected area until it contains the circle of the swelling; then turn your hand over the needle as you inscribe what is in the circuit of the swelling, and place it on the pressure point of the flesh, and you will remove the swelling from its root.
And if you want, make this as a needle of iron or bronze in this form:
The departure from the needle should be subtle, silent (not piercing), wrapped around itself so that upon touching the said swelling, it is not affected by its rotation.
And if you want to cauterize the swelling, as described in the cauterization of iron in the chapter on cautery.
In the form of instruments that are administered to give heat.
Sometimes heat is given with silver or copper or iron that has been melted or shaped; and sometimes it is given with small or large instruments according to those used in the treatment of small children, which should be small; and for those whose buttocks are frail or painful, the heat from such instruments should be small.
The shape of large and small heat applications:
The end of the tube above which the bag is placed should be wide according to this manner; and it should be distinguished where the bag is attached as well.
And the lower end of it, which is inserted into the anus, should be blunt (not pointed), bent slightly, and thin; and on one side of its length are two channels, and on the other side a single channel, whose width should correspond to the thickness of the rays and, for small ones, somewhat thinner.
And let the bag be filled with animal bladder or sheepskin medicines, and its length be a palm.
And it should be perforated through many parts like this when it is twisted, and if the space between the parts is as wide as said.
And then insert into those parts a strong fiber of raw silk, or surround them; adjust the bag to those parts; and when the bag is positioned on it, tighten it firmly at the base of the patient's genitalia between two distinct points of firm pressure, and properly cauterize each part: but the quality of cauterizing those parts is that you fill the bag with medicine that is warmed according to the amount of the patient's tolerance; and be careful not to make it too tight or too loose.
Then have the patient lie on their back, raise their legs up and place under them a cushion or a lance; and apply the end of the cautery to oil or egg white or mucilage of fenugreek or similar substances; and insert it into the anus with ease, and have the assistant take the bag and squeeze it twice hard, and with force, until everything in the genital area is evacuated; then remove the cautery and have the patient raise their legs against the wall.
And if the medicine forces him to vomit, take as much as you can; and if he sleeps through the whole night, it is more beneficial for healing.
If you believe that applying heat to the pain of stomach ulcers and vomiting helps, then use cautery until it is healed.
And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus that hurt, then use a gentle and subtle heat, as the childlike cautery whose tips are cut off.
**Curation of Plagues**
You have already stated in the division of the cure for plague what is suitable for the body, and you have thus given the cure for those afflicted with great care and according to medicine's capabilities.
Therefore, it says that plagues are diversified according to where they are made and according to the place where the plague strikes.
And the causes for which plagues occur are also due to heat, or an incision of space or of metal, or striking with a lance, or with a staff, or with an arrow, or similar to those causes that bring on sudden illness.
The plagues that are in the places of the body can also be like the plague which strikes on the head, or the neck, or the foot, or the belly, or the back, and similar to those of the members.
And it is often recommended for the cure of certain plagues that it stops that reasoning and regulates the others.
And one should begin with the simple plagues of the head, since the recollection of the composite ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, when a simple headache occurs and it is not a fracture, consider: if it is due to the pressure of stone or something similar, and the patient has already taken the necessary medication but the pain is severe and you fear that the condition might progress to apoplexy, then immediately perform a craniotomy and flebotomy, and do not delay; extract the blood from the vein according to the amount of virtue in it, unless there is any other contraindicating cause for flebotomy, especially if the headache that has resulted from the illness is slight.
And flebotomy should be performed opposite the affected area; and pay attention to the patient's rest, diet, and avoid heavy meals.
If any contraindicating cause exists due to the patient's size, then reduce the diet and do not provide meat or wine.
And regarding the illness, if it is a severe apoplexy, apply a hot compress soaked in olive oil or wine that has been strained.
If you are certain of the infection's severity, apply your treatment to the affected area, if it is fresh and the air has not changed the powder that I will describe in detail later.
And if the air has changed that powder, then apply some ointment until it is healed.
If the wound is large or due to a laceration and the edges of it are not aligned for proper healing, then adjust them with stitches as I will describe regarding their suture.
If the wound has exposed the bone and tendon, and it is not a deep gash but a small suspensory one, then incise it and apply medicine to the wound, restoring the flesh appropriately in place of the damaged area, and instruct the patient to avoid foods that are coarse: caps, hard bread, and similar items, until it heals.
And if you find gangrene in the leg that does not adhere to the bone, you should cut off all the rotted parts and remove them, and then take care of it.
If these plagues are caused by an artery or vein from which pus flows and it is not incised by medicines, then you should inquire about the artery, and if you find one that is not incised, you should cut it with a scalpel or tie it off; and if cauterization needs to be done after the pus has been drained.
And if these plagues are simple and small, their cause is considered minor; so that you sprinkle over them this powder, as it hardens against the air's change.
The method of the powder is this: take equal parts of olive oil from crushed sesame seeds, dragon's blood, and non-extinguishable coals; mix it all well, fill the plague with it, and tightly bind it with a good bandage so that the poultice adheres to it, and it coagulates with the pus.
And then tighten it over the poultice and leave it, without loosening it while it is in that state so that the medicine does not escape until it is healed.
And at other times, it is treated solely with cautery, when there is no fever or dragon's blood present.
And this surgical procedure is also done for large plagues when it is appropriate to pause them and tighten them, and they are fresh with their own blood, the air of which has not been altered.
And if the air has altered them, especially in summer, then one does not understand the position of this poultice, but rather treats them with what we have said: either by placing hot compresses on the inflamed spots or by applying cold compresses to the joints of the sick with water and honey until they get better; and similarly, treat them with other remedies until they are healed.
If a fracture of the bone occurs in a small place, then you extract it with a gesture.
And tell the cure for skull fractures where it is dangerous.
Of the ailments of the collarbone.
If the ailment occurs in the collarbone, its treatment is not different; nor is it distinct from the ailment of the skull when it is simple.
If the nerves or arteries of the collarbone are cut, then if it is a nerve, treatment should not be forced but rather the pain should be alleviated through methods that cause less irritation; similarly, as with venom and similar substances, they should be avoided since they can cause further damage to the nerves and contraction. And do not attribute any specific cause to the pain, for the substance of the nerves is affected and their continuity is connected to the brain, which is the source of all members' sensations.
And if it is treated with lighter medicines, it is also washed with two types of water, sometimes mixed with perfumed or unperfumed oil, and then dried with hot water and other substances according to this method, and moistened with humidity.
But if the pain is severe, then a stitch is administered, or the edges of the wound are closed, and then it is treated with poultices until it heals.
But if the wound is deep or caused by an acute impact in a low-lying part of the body, then it should be pierced at the most sensitive point.
If an artery is already incised in the plague and blood flow results, then separate or dry it, or tie it, or cauterize it if necessity demands it.
If the spine of the ribcage or all of it has been incised and the veins in the neck have been saved, then adjust the edges of the wound with sutures on the rib bone and do not touch that area; equalize that and return it to its natural shape, and tighten it decently, leaving it for some days; and then care for it with poultices where there is stiffness and excitement until it heals.
If the plague has already made an impression in the bone, then probe it, and if there are fragments of pus within it, extract as many as you can; leave what is not suitable for you, until the plague has dissipated, and it is separated and removed from him.
And if the affliction is recent, sprinkle that powder which has been recommended on it. If the affliction involves a fistula, then treat it with the water of which the memory will come in its chapter.
If it is a percussion of a lance or a rib, and the depth of the wound is great, then consider more carefully if the affliction has air (puss) when the malady turns; then know that the affliction is deadly.
And if it is not deep and the affliction is recent with its own pus, then you should apply to it in the first hour powder, and do not squeeze it so that the pus is not retained in the depth of the wound and returns to the body, and causes more harm; instead, apply to it a more attractive ointment, and clean it twice a day.
And if the ointment is not at hand, you should stop at the infected wound's edge with a clean cloth to draw out what it has absorbed from moisture; and make the patient rest on the affected area so that what is within runs out properly.
If after three days the wound is healing without incident to the patient—no spasms or tremors of the heart, no constriction of the arteries—and other signs indicate a good prognosis, then you know the illness is in remission; and from that point, apply treatment for pain and any other lingering ailments until complete recovery.
If the healing of the wound is accelerated and it remains open for a long time, then know that a fistula has formed; treat it accordingly.
And if the wound is from a sharp object or blade, and it's superficial on the foot or back, treat it with the method previously described for joint pain, whether it's a large wound requiring stitching or a small one treated with powder.
If a valuable bone has already been broken and you have already extracted the pieces, then twist and cut the plague to extract those pieces if they are separated. If the pieces are not separated, leave them inside so that the plague does not spread, as extracting them would be difficult.
And for other accidents of the same kind in other parts of the body, the treatment should be the same as that which we have mentioned.
On the stomach plagues.
The condition that occurs in the stomach can be great, small, or moderate.
And when a small disruption is caused, it is difficult to repair in another manner, and I know that the reduction of them is even more difficult if you do not quickly prevent their intrusion into their place, as they open and thicken, making it difficult for the instrument to enter.
Therefore, the best disruption is to shift it, because in that case the reduction of the hernia is not difficult, as it is in both aforementioned species.
And you know that the suture of the abdomen is done in four ways, but two sutures are common and suitable for sutures of other diseases of the body.
And the other two sutures, proper to themselves, communicate with other diseases, but nevertheless they are more proper for the suture of the abdomen.
And I recommend to each of you the exposition and declaration.
Therefore, it says that when the hernia is small and there is no apparent cause from within the body, and it is difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of two ways: either due to the fragility of the rupture as we have said, or when the hernia experiences inflation because of the coldness of the air.
And so when it is thus, then you should wrap that in a way that you immerse a sponge or cloth moistened in hot water, or take water with vinegar, and turmeric, and spices, and wrap it around the hernia until the inflammation is resolved.
And in some cases, they use wine for this, which has a cauterizing effect and is better than just water alone in resolving inflammation.
And so when you have determined that the inflammation is resolved, then you should moisten the hernia in water with high levels of salt and mallows, for it thus alleviates the pain caused to it by a slight injury.
If it is permissible to insert this treatment, then divide the disruption with a small, sharp instrument that incises hemorrhoids.
And the first treatment is better when it is appropriate not to cut, and there is no need to dry excessively or deprive of nutrition.
Regarding the instrument, consider its form:
One part of the instrument is curved sharply, and the other part is not acute, but rather slightly blunt, not too thin like a spatula, but more obtuse.
And thus, when the disease is aggravated and the intestine protrudes, it should be returned to its natural position in its proper place, if possible, as this is better.
When the disruption is wide, and it is in the lower part of the belly, you must make the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; but if it is in the upper part of the belly, you should keep their head lower and their legs higher than the pain points.
And seemingly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, you must pause your intention and your consideration towards it for a while so that the part where the pain is located becomes higher than the other.
And thus, you must also manage this in both great and minor pains.
And in minor pains, you should do what you have prepared, and then make the minister be between your most sensitive parts, where the disruption is located, with your hand adjusting the lips of it, and uncovering from one to another until any cause of the suture becomes apparent elsewhere.
And this is the common method of suturing: take the needle, or count one according to the amount of the width of the wound; then place it near the end of the tear in the finger, and tighten the needle, making sure not to push through both ends of the cord, but only pushing through from within the knot, until you have added the two ends of the cord and the two ends of the phalanx, thus creating four orders.
Then tighten the thread double around the needle, and in some cases, join two parts together, and add the two lips and the wound through proper addition; take the thickness of the finger and insert another needle into it, just as you did with the first one; do not stop doing this with the needles until you have completely closed the contraction of the wound.
And the needles should be in varying thicknesses, ranging from coarse to fine, as the thin needles cut into the flesh lightly; the thick ones are difficult to insert into the cord, so it is necessary that they be medium in both fineness and thickness.
And it is important that the needle be inserted into both ends of the affected leg at once, so that the flesh is not cut too deeply and the hernia heals before its closure.
And do not extend the stitches, so that the hernia is not blocked from healing.
Then cut the ends of the needles, so they do not puncture the patient again during their sleep; and place over the stitches loose poultices from all sides, which cover the ends of the needles; and leave them there until you know that the hernia is healed.
These types of stitches use needles in any way most suitable for small hernias, as they are sufficient to close one or two stitches or those around them.
But the second stitch is different: you must close the four ends—the leg and two ends of the abdomen—in one go, with a needle carefully wrapped in thread both thin and thick.
And then, when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, withdraw the needle from that middle part where it began, so that the thread retracts and pulls up the pus from the wound, so that the stitching is like a stitch of cloth which is tightly bound.
And between each stitch, leave the thickness of the tip of the finger.
And this suture teaches men.
And with this type of suture, I have treated a wound that had occurred in a man's belly, which was caused by a blade, and it was a rupture of the wound that was about the size of a palm, and there was an opening around two palms from the middle of the intestinal cavity; and then I had reduced that tissue that the wound had opened in the middle of the member after twenty-four hours.
And the disease is consolidated in the space of 15 days or so, and you treat it and heal it; and after that, it recurs periodically for many years, and changes its manifestations.
And other physicians had judged that it was not curable; and by a miracle of fire, for you found no cure for that pain where the fire did not burn or any medicine help, he stopped the plague with frequent applications of hot compresses and constant washing with honey water until the fire cured it.
But I will tell of two kinds of stitching according to the narrative of the Word.
And indeed, you begin with stitching the wound, and insert the needle from outside to inside.
And thus, when the needle penetrates the wound and reaches the other side according to its right place and length throughout the body, and leaves the end of the thread in which you have inserted the needle; then make the other end of the thread penetrate from inside to outside in the other end of the member.
And when you have done that, repeat the process in the other direction at the opposite end of the wound from outside to inside; then lift the edge of the flesh on this side and insert the needle into the other end of the wound from inside to outside.
And insert the needle in the penetration that you make, which allows penetration of the flesh at the end of the wound where everything has been penetrated.
Then begin from this side and carefully extract the needle from the wound, taking care not to damage it, and return it to the same sheath, pressing against the edge of the flesh on the other side, which is opposite to this opening; then remove the needle from the sheath that is part of the patient.
Do this a few times and continue in the same way until you have removed everything that is outside according to this example.
And the essence of this method of stitching is that you sew with a skin stitch, which sews the skin together, so you stitch the flesh once from the end of the tendon, and then again when you have completed the task.
Now, the second type of stitch, which is truly the hallmark of the guild, and this one is spoken of and used for repairing, is that you sew with a second-tier stitch, which some doctors also use, adding to it according to what is appropriate for the nature of the wound; then you apply the edge of one part to the other edge, forming a complete seal as you see fit.
Ensure that you keep the needle at the edge of the fabric on your side of the tear, and make it penetrate the tear from inside out, passing through both edges of the fabric; then, turn the needle around and make it penetrate from outside in, passing through the two edges of the fabric again.
And then carefully turn those folds, and make some of the cut openings penetrate from within to without at both ends of the mirror, other than on the opposite side.
And this method of stitching is better than common lightweight stitching, and it is a stitch of which we have previously spoken.
This is the speech of Gaul.
And they might say that the stomach stitch is made with two needles, so you must insert a thread into some of them, and begin to introduce the needle from this one, making it penetrate into the other side according to the stitching of those which hold the skin together.
And you should know that when there is disruption in the middle part of the stomach, the stitching there is more difficult than in other parts of the stomach.
The treatment of one disease should be judged according to other diseases.
The cause of which is when you recognize the recent disease by its itch in front of the wound that the air alters it, return the intestine to its place and sew it up and treat it properly, then place your hand over that flesh-colored powder.
And if the air has already altered the disease, then place your hand over that ash which you have prepared in front of them until they cause severe pain and the pus is discharged, and they become hardened and heal; and treat it thus as with other diseases until it is healed.
If you do not have the medicines at hand, then apply this treatment as soon as possible, since it begins to cause pain in the joints, fingers, and toes, and change these measures every two days, just as I have taught you, until it is healed, for you should not need other medicines due to your careful planning regarding simple diseases.
If you fear that the contagion may spread to the vital members, then immerse the affected part in a bath of oil of good quality, or warm oil, and place it on the areas between the angles and leave it there.
And if pain or putrefaction is felt in their bowels, as often happens, you should apply a black, astringent vinegar, especially if the ulcer has penetrated into the cavity of the bowels.
And know that the one affecting the thicker bowels has a lighter cure than the one affecting the thinner bowels.
And its cure is difficult because the bowels called "jejunal" do not receive a cure for the plague that strikes in them from anywhere; and this is due to the great number of veins that are in it, and to the magnitude of those, and to the subtlety of the body of that, and to the proximity of that to the nature of nerves.
If what you process from the disease is the fabric, and you achieve a fresh one, reduce it according to your instructions, which reduces hernias equally.
If it has been passed into the space and is already turned red or black, then tighten the thread over the area affected by it, so that pus flows, for in the fabric there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is another part of the ligament, and place both ends of the thread on either side of the wound, so that by moving it away from you, the attraction of it should be removed, and the fabric's collapse and discharge of the plague's arm should cease.
Remembrance of the plagues when they occur in the intestine.
When there is a rupture in the intestine and it is small, it may be possible to restore it in some people, so that you see him who was once plagued in his belly by the stab of a lance, and had the plague on the right side of his stomach, an old plague with fistulas, and from him came management and ventilation.
Then pursue the treatment of the patient, even if it was not confirmed in their healing; rather, continue to apply heat to that area until the pain subsides and the location is consolidated.
And if you see that the location is consolidated, pay attention to the illness that engulfs them due to an accident in their belly; do not encourage any further such accidents and break their usual habits of eating and drinking, and then immerse them in water and exercise according to their condition.
And some experienced people say that when a hernia in the belly is small, it should be tied according to this manner: take large needles; then adjust both edges of the hernia and place a needle from those that keep the mouth open on both edges of the hernia; so when they hold onto those and tighten their mouth, cut off the cap, for it adheres and does not dissolve.
And then place another needle close to the first one, and do not stop doing this until you have used enough needles for the entire hernia.
And then return it [the intestine] to its place and press it firmly until the hernia is healed; and sever those attached parts inside the cavity until the hernia is cured, so as not to cause any harm to the patient.
And it is possible that the hernia appears as a fine thread coming from the hernia of an animal, thinner than a hair; so take the end of these hernia threads, quite bare, and with a needle wrap it around, and then insert that thread through the opening of the hernia, and return it to its place.
And this method of sewing with catgut is nothing but a second way of trust and hope.
If the hernia is large and wide, especially in one of the delicate cavities, then it requires not only reduction but also a delicate operation, for it is not completely cured.
On the treatment of ulcers and fistulas.
You know that every ulcer and abscess that forms as a result of aging and inactivity becomes an ulcer, and if it is not consolidated and persists for a long time without being incised, it is generally called a fistula and we refer to it as such.
And fistulas, in truth, are open wounds, hard, white, and painless, to which the body becomes concave just as it does with any other pain; and for this reason they are called rhiza, that is, the root of the pain.
These are wounds that become moist, which fester; and if the moisture is drained away in a few hours, it is good. And sometimes this moisture is excessive, and sometimes it is scarce, and sometimes it is thin, and sometimes it is thick.
You have already described all those causes and the signs of them, and in the division, you have mentioned the remedies for them.
And so it is also important to make known to you the cure for fistula, which is made through surgery with the hand.
And you should know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; those are fistulas that reach great veins and arteries, or nerves, or the brain, or the belly, or the bladder, or any of the ribs, or any of the spinal joints composed as the hand and foot, and similar ones.
And therefore, among these types of fistulas, those following this manner are from difficult-to-heal illnesses and do not receive treatment, and their occupation is labor and ignorance.
And if it is any of these fistulas whose depth does not reach these places mentioned, and you hope and trust in its healing, and wish to come to an understanding of it, then take care or a saw, and if the fistula is according to rectitude, and you examine it carefully.
If the fistula is twisted, then examine it carefully with a delicate probe, for lead with the lightness of its body is removed and deviates the curvature of the twist.
And if the fistula has an extremely horrifying appearance, it is not within your power to attempt treatment on it.
Then christen the orifices for their horror, for the humidity by which you cleanse those orifices must also affect the others and flow from them.
And then, carefully inquire according to the manner in which you can know if here there are bones or nerves, and whether the concavity of the fistula is distant or close, or it is a fistula with only horrifying appearances that lies entirely within your control, where with all your strength, through your questioning, you explore the illness, and through your compression with your hand over the area, and by similar signs and accidental causes at the abscess.
And when you have considered all those causes with due care, then turn to the treatment according to your confidence: for you must consider whether it is a fistula that appears close or in a clean place, far from joints, or nerves, or arteries, or veins, or one of the places that are dear to you and say.
Then you dry the fistula as is mentioned in its description, stop what is in that flow and from corrupted flesh, and what has formed in the openings of the flesh, or from parts and similar, and treat it until it is healed.
If the fistula is of great depth and according to the rule, then you should incise it in the place as deeply as possible with your knife, and then cleanse it from all its corrupted flesh; and then apply some wrapped up hot compresses, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula which you have comprehended with your finger.
And do this until the hot medicine has corrupted everything that is soft in the cavity of the fistula from its corruption.
And then restore it with bandages which generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
If it does not heal from this, then you cauterize it as we have recommended.
If the cause of the fistula is bone and it is necessary for you to become certified in this, then examine and dry it as we have recommended; if you do not forbid any cause from veins or nerves or from a main member, as we have said.
If the bone is exposed and there is no corruption or blackening, then clean that part where the corruption is present; and care for it with water until it is healed.
And if it does not heal and the gangrenes remain as they were, then you know that you have not achieved the complete eradication of corruption; and then you examine it again with greater care, make a diagnosis of it, and thoroughly clean it with the last strength you have, and then restore it.
And so if it is healthy, good; otherwise, you will know that this corruption is in the distant depths of the body, which cannot be reached, and therefore your endeavor in that place is not to cure but to extract it.
And if the corrupt bone is small, it may be removed with your hands; otherwise, use delicate forceps designed for such tasks.
And if there are many bones, carefully extract all of them, and under no circumstances allow any to remain due to the strength of your grip.
If it causes you any difficulty due to moisture, and in their examination there is no fear or error, then cut through those ligaments or flesh if they are present, and carefully dislodge the bones.
If you do not have the preparation to remove the bones from your patient, then place your hands over the affected area where the pain is most severe, and leave it there until the pain eases; ensure that it does not become lodged between the bones, flesh, and ligaments, and beware of any pain that may indicate that the section you have cut into during the operation has healed.
Staying, if you fear, apply to the affected area a mixture of olive oil or Egyptian vinegar or any other green ointment, for when these bindings are removed, the bones will be separated from their adhesions and that attraction will be alleviated.
If it is a large bone, such as those of the thigh or groin or similar, and what is corrupted from it is only the surface, then at once apply that remedy as quickly as possible before the darkness and corruption spread, and thus restore the illness.
If what is corrupted from it is a severe fracture, and the corruption has already reached the medulla of the bone, then it becomes necessary to close that wound completely by cutting into the area where the corruption has occurred, and thus cure it as soon as it is consolidated.
And I advise you to attend to a man in his thigh, so that he supports you simply and assists with your operation.
A young man aged around 30 experiences pain in his thigh; the pain arises from swelling within the body until the matter reaches the thigh, which is caused by an abscess or a great abscess, and not an external cause.
And so, the condition worsens over time due to the error of doctors, as the abscess swells and causes hot, painful matter to accumulate. Treatment is delayed until the limb becomes fistulated, resulting in severe pain and destruction of tissue and body humors.
After this, many doctors for two years focus not on the wisdom of the body but on its arteries, as they are called.
They examined the limb and the matter draining from its orifices, which flowed throughout the body. The condition of the patient was completely stable, and his skin color was citron-like.
And then insert the needle into one of those openings and penetrate the needle through the bone.
Then carefully examine all the openings and find those that lead to all parts of the leg.
And then you will cut and incise over one of those openings until you discover an opening in the bone, and find that it is hardened, corrupted, and already filled with pus; and a part of the leg within which you had penetrated was already corrupt.
And then you will secure what I had discovered and prepared the exposed bone.
And I realized that it was not in the bone but that corruption which I had extracted and secured, for I had already drained it.
And then I will pause the restoration of the disease with consolidating medicines for a long time, and it is not consolidated.
And then I will iterate and expose again regarding the second bone following the initial discovery, and seek to continue the correction of the bone's deformation.
And I will secure what appears to be the cause of that deformation, and then I will make small perforations to treat it, but it is not restored.
And then I will discover it again and carefully incise the bone in small fragments, making perforations to restore it, but it is not restored until I cut around a palm of it, extract the marrow, and then restore it with medicines; it is slightly consolidated and healed.
And no further iteration in the operation is necessary unless for the arrangement of the frailness of it and due to its poor tolerance and fear of death, as it experiences fainting at all times due to excessive evacuation.
And thus it is healed entirely by treatment, and nothing is in place of the hard bone; its disposition in the body is done well and returns its virtue; it is adjusted to its dispositions and does not cause contrariety in walking or discomfort from any cause.
If a bone protrudes from the body, you should act as follows: take a linen strip and stretch it around the end of the protruding bone, and ask someone to extend that on the patient's body; then attach the coarser linen cloth over the flesh left behind, and extend the edge of the cloth onto the area where you want to make the incision so that you uncover the flesh in the desired location without damaging it.
And place a stake or table beneath the bone appropriately, for when you do this, the saw should not cut into the healthy flesh.
And be sure to make the incision over the corrupted area slowly, for if it is in the concave part of the corrupted bone and does not appear in the patient's sensation, you may need to repeat the process with the saw.
And if the bone is corrupt and not prominent, it forms a continuous gap with another, and the corruption is in the middle or at a gap within it, then you uncover the flesh from all parts; and apply heat to it, and close the gap of the first opening where the corruption entered until the locking of the other gap continues.
And the locking, according to the location of the corruption, should be small, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, cut that corrupted joint, and close the bone where it continues from the other side.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in a straight line but twisted.
And if the corruption is in the chest or foot of the hand, it is very difficult; nevertheless, you must inquire about the corruption how it appears to you, and open that up, and remove it according to some possible disposition that is suitable for you, and in a twisted way, rectify it where it does not cause any harm to the veins or nerves.
And you should know which saws and chisels are best suited to cut these bones, depending on the position of the bone, their preparation, thickness, fineness, size, hardness, and rarity; so that you choose the appropriate instrument for any operation.
And you should know that this operation indicates to you the specific instrument you need; when you have great study, length, and knowledge of the techniques of this art, and experience with various ailments, then you will already have for yourself what is appropriate for each ailment among these instruments.
And in the end of this chapter, you will be taught the number of instruments which you will use with examples as you proceed to your training, the very same tools that you will apply to your practice and experience with others. Form of saw:
Another form of lock:
Form of a larger alternative lock.
Form of a ray. The head of this ray should be according to the form of a keyhead with stars, and its points are according to the shape of points on a spear.
And it is not suitable for these to be inserted into the joints when they are corrupted, or if the mouth is widely opened.
Form of a smaller scalpel:
Form of a long scalpel:
Form of a saw or other appropriately shaped tool: it should be curved and have the sharpness of steel, and the part that holds the blade should be made of wood. Shape of it:
Shape of the scalpel with a concave curve:
Shape of another very thin scalpel:
Shape of another scalpel with an extremely curved end:
Shape of a small scalpel resembling a knife:
Another type of scalpel, smaller in size:
Another type of scalpel; this one resembling a ray, with its end curved like a saw, and it is used in various places for the reason of bones.
A scalpel shaped like a ray, suitable for the removal of bone splinters.
And the end of it is triangular with a sharp point.
And it is made of Indian steel, resembling a cover that encompasses all the causes we have mentioned regarding razors, scissors, and saws.
On the incision of extremities and the opening of bone joints.
Extremities may be affected either by intrinsic or extrinsic causes, and if the corruption is not healed through those medicines, and the cure does not bring relief, you should consider incising that member where the corruption originated, so as to remove the disease and prevent it from causing death or further harm to the member.
And the sign of him to whom this happens is that the affected member becomes black where it was incised, as fire had burned it, or you may notice the darkness extending from the area of the incision into the entire limb; hence you must consider incising it.
And similarly, if the corruption is caused by some venomous creature such as a sea scorpion or a viper or a rattlesnake and others of that kind.
And if the corruption or impact is on the end of the finger, you cut the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter the hand.
And similarly, if you access the hand, cut those at the root of the finger, and do not give space to the corruption until it takes hold in the socket of the arm.
And if that does not work, cut the arm at the elbow within the joint.
And if the corruption passes to another joint and changes around the elbow, then it is the end of the patient's suffering; and to treat another cause for this in healing is a matter of virtue.
Similarly, if the corruption is in the foot, cut the digit of the foot at its joint; then you insert it into one of the joints.
And if you take hold of the foot's edge, you will incise the entire foot. If it is possible to enter within the joint, then you will incise the leg within the joint of the toe.
And if the corruption has already spread to the toe, then in it there is not left room for treatment, and you should leave the patient to die.
The method of incising or cutting off a member is that you tighten the ligament at the point where you want to make the incision, and then tighten another ligament over the area; extend the instrument one ligament away from the point of incision, and extend the surgeon's other hand another ligament onto it; separate the flesh which is between the two ligaments without breaking them, so that all the flesh is exposed; and then make the incision or cut.
And cover that all openings be sealed with cloth so as not to touch the area, and bring the patient's injury back to a state of harmony and proper cauterization.
If a blood flow occurs while working, cauterize the affected area carefully, or apply some powders that constrict the flow; and then return to your treatment until it is complete.
And then properly bind the affected member with appropriate bandages and treat it until it is healed.
And I recommend to you that you attend to a man on his foot, this person has met with an accident which you and I have recommended, which occurred to him due to a dark stain on his foot from the adjustments that were similar to fire burn injuries.
And that corruption occurred first in his toes before it spread throughout the foot.
And so that man prepared himself for the pain and the urgency of treatment as he saw the progress of healing in the member affected by the severity of the pain and the heat from the wound, and he incised the foot at the joint, and it healed with fire.
Long time exposed to that corrosive disease in the hand's finger indicated.
And then it conquers me, and I have pierced to reflect that superfluity to the water that stops over the hand of medicine, then I apply the purification of the body; and the superfluity is not reflected and I begin to go to the other finger as soon as I begin on the hand.
And he urged me to cut the hand of him, and I do not wish to do this hoping on the reflection of that superfluity, and rather I must persist in the incision of the hand of him dead, for the virtue of the disease was at its peak.
And when he left me, he returned to his land and cured me that man who had prepared and cut off his hand entirely, and he is healed.
And I have not finished this narration but to be of assistance regarding those who suffer from this disease, and that it may signify what is meant and according to which it is done.
On the treatment of sins and the quality of enema administration with medications.
When an abscess occurs in some fleshy parts of the body and the space of the abscess is prolonged, forming a collection of pus, then it breaks and perforates itself, and the pus drains out, leaving the area empty as if it had been cut away, and the skin over it remains intact, without any corruption reaching behind it, nor does it affect the bones or nerves or connective tissue. It is called a sinus, and is not named fistula.
However, if the space is prolonged to such an extent that corruption completely envelops a member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
And the treatment for it is to cut through that skin entirely as it is rolled up, especially when it is subtilized and made into a wound with cloth, and ensure that it does not stick to the area due to its corruption.
If you hope that the constipation adheres and that that corruption does not result from a subsequent consequence, and in the intestine it has passed forward, then treat it with a clean enema.
And consider the condition of the sinus; if it is severe and the arm that it affects has a bad odor, then use an Egyptian enema medicine made with oil, wine, and zingiber in equal parts, place them in a vessel, heat it over fire until the medicine becomes hot and effective.
Then take from it what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; enema the sinus with that, tighten its openings, and leave the medicine inside for a duration of two hours.
Then remove that impure substance; do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the pain is alleviated.
And in some cases, enemas are prepared with ash water, when this remedy is not available; take the ashes of vinegar, and put them into water; then mix them together and prepare an enema with it until you feel that the pain has subsided.
If the patient does not tolerate Egyptian medicine or ash water, then an enema should be prepared with honey and a third of triacetin mixed together, and another with wine and honey mixed, for honey has purifying and cleansing properties, and wine helps to adhere to the intestines, especially when the wine is deficient in astringency and dryness.
And when you perform this process a few times and feel that the intestines have been cleansed, then an enema should be made with water that promotes the growth of flesh in it.
It is because you take a mixture of dyaphinic oil and dissolve it with wine that has astringent properties; or you prepare an enema with certain medicines and apply others that have the properties I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
And if the openings of the sinus are narrow, through which the catheter of the enema cannot pass, then you gradually widen them with a small iron, and apply hot water wrapped in Egyptian or basilicum ointment until they are enlarged.
And if the opening appears to be wide, then you should close it with stitches and add only enough quantity of the enema that is necessary.
And if the opening through which the arm flows is elevated towards the upper parts, then dry it in the lower part where it is located so that the arm flows inside, because when the arm is constricted within the thickness of the sinus, flesh can be generated there.
And if it is not possible to dry the sinus within the surrounding bone, then you should perforate and prepare the member in such a way that the arm can flow lightly according to your convenience, so that there is no retention of causes in the arm.
One should be placed over the orifice of the sinus, which you should change at all times to ensure it stays open, preventing any obstruction from what is adjusted on the arm. And so that you may know if what flows from the arm is much or little, or digested or undigested.
And so you consider the location of that sinus, if the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is in an abscess.
And when your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the matter being discharged from the sinus opening has adhered, or a strong adhesion formed, then on the third day, you free it, or loosen it, and when you free the infection, change the bandage and renew the ointment.
If the sinus has formed a narrow space and there is a subtle infection, do not be anxious about the adhesion, for healing will occur of its own accord, as some people have experienced slow generation of flesh in their wounds, and others the opposite.
And if a foul-smelling discharge has been coming from the sinus for several days, you should know that there is no adhesion; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and its condition prolonged, then adjust the treatment with dry medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and virtue, they should be dried just as well as poultices when excess moisture must be eliminated.
And the last sentence to translate is: The most effective remedy for this condition is to take a decoction of nettle and dissolve it in rose oil, then apply it externally on the affected part, and hold it there until it takes effect.
And it resembles this action, when there is no heat, take nettle decoction, honey while it's still warm, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe vera, boil them, crush everything and turn it into a powder over the honey while it's on the fire, then apply it to cloth and press that onto the sore area; and apply the honey you've noticed has become thick, and sprinkle that over cloth and press it.
Sometimes, they administer to the patient long slices of aromatic lily root (which is a type of lily) and ermine flour and centaury, and use these simples either fresh or powdered, crush them and sprinkle over the honey previously mentioned; and apply it.
And if the condition persists and does not improve with this treatment, you will know that the corruption is in the sinew of the limb, and it has affected the bones or other hard members or their connections; then you treat it with a fistent cure, as it is said.
On the treatment of wounds, inflamed nails, and the addition of a cut to the finger, and sectioning.
A wound is an apostema that leaves the nail of the finger or toe weakened, and it can also affect other fingers, and as it progresses and its treatment is delayed, it becomes either an apostematic cauterization or corruption, discharging pus that corrodes the root of the nail, weakening it entirely, and spreading its corruption to the bones within, causing a putrid odor. The end of the finger appears damaged, and its color turns dark.
And so when you have examined as we have said in the previous division and do not agree with your treatment, then you must remove all surplus matter adhering to the nail, and cauterize the wound nearby, for heat helps in such cases.
If the bone is sound and the joint healthy, and the additional pressure of the joint has already stretched the flesh within, then begin to prick and injure that joint, then cover it with a fine ray from the angle of the joint you are pricking, push it forward and cut into the flesh easily, and place something over that area until the flesh is completely healed; and take care to apply poultices until it is cured.
If the corruption has already taken hold within the bone, then you must drill into the bone and extract it, for no time is there health where there is corrupt bone.
And if the corrosion and corruption has spread to the mentioned area, then drill into it in one of the joints according to its recall, and take care of it until it is healed.
If there is a joint with severe percussion or laceration and it causes intense pain, then you must begin by cauterizing the affected area, and carefully cut through the malformation using an acute, transverse section above it, but ensure the section does not reach into the flesh remaining on the joint, for you may cause the malformation to spread and lead to additional unnecessary tissue growth at the site; and treat that area as necessary.
Many say this adjustment, which is natural in the bodies of many men, is that they are entirely fleshy, or mostly flesh with few bones, or entirely bone and little flesh.
Some of them originate in the formation of the joint, or it is the nature of them in some places of the body. One who is born with conditions in certain parts of the body does not become ill, but one whose condition is formed in the joints suffers greatly.
And as for those who are born fleshy, the incision is light, and you must insert a blade at a slight angle to their origin.
For one who is born with conditions in the joints, treatment is difficult; so be wary of removing them.
Place the knife in the place where the person was born with this disease, make an incision at the beginning of their flesh with a round cut through the bone, and then use one of those suitable saws to carefully clean it so that healing occurs.
This consolidation which occurs between the joints may be due to various factors such as age, or the nature of the individual who has not experienced it before, or due to infection or fire, or similar causes; therefore, it is necessary to remove that consolidation so that the joints return to their natural form.
And then place between their bandages a thin layer of warm oil to prevent them from becoming solidified too quickly, and separate them, or place between them a thin sheet of lead until the consolidation occurs as necessary.
And similarly, if consolidation occurs in certain joints of the hand, then remove that consolidation according to what is suitable and appropriate for the shape of the member.
Of the incision of veins, they are varicose.
Varicose veins are thick, rolled-up veins filled with excessive melancholic fluid that appear in various parts of the body, most commonly in the legs, especially in those who lead active lifestyles or work physically, and in travelers.
Therefore, you should administer a purge to the body to expel black cholecyst sometimes with strong expulsion, and draw blood from the patient's basil vein.
The treatment for them is by iron according to two methods: one is through incision and extraction of that black blood, and the other method is by elevating the vein and extracting all of it.
The incision is made as follows: first, inject hot water into the vein until the thick blood is resolved, which is foul from the leg, then tightly hold the patient's thigh with a bandage above the affected area, and cut the vein at one or two or three points along its length. Then raise the black blood using the upper part of the bandage below the leg, and from there into a jug, until the desired quantity is extracted, as much as the patient can tolerate.
And then approach her, and command her to abstain from cold foods that generate it.
And repeat the treatment through phlebotomy when the veins are filled and this causes pain to the patient.
The elevation of them should be according to this manner: You who tighten the garment of the patient, if it has much hair, and then place him in water and soak the garment of him with lukewarm water until it is soaked and the veins are dilated; or if it is through strong exercise, if a bath is not available, until that member is scalded.
And then cut the rope at the right of the vein by sectioning it in the middle or at the last part of it, or at the lowest part of it.
And then open the rope with scissors and extract the vein from all parts until it appears black, and it is necessary for you to assess that patient who suffers from that disease decreasing its intensity.
And therefore when you have freed yourself from the chains, you will see that white thing which is a string.
Then carefully insert that lever within which is elevated and released from the chains, and suspend all the heavy weights.
Then make another cut nearby, passing through the three parts, and carefully extract the chain from the vein until it appears.
Then elevate that one and incise it in the rear section, after the talus, and extract that one and elevate it until it passes through the second section, and extract that from the section above it.
And do this until you extract that from the section which is most superior or highest of all sections, while it is completely released; and then incise it.
And if you do not succeed in extracting and elevating it, insert a needle with a strong thread double-knotted and pull it out, or leave the edge of it inside and turn your hand over the entire area where it was inserted. And be careful not to cut it; for if it breaks, it is difficult to lift that part and it will cause further harm to the patient.
And once that is completely removed, place your attention on the infected area, immersing it in wine and applying both warm and cold oils, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted without twist, and not in the right position as we have said, then you should cut through that on all sides of its torsion and at the places where it is wrapped up, and suspend it with stitches until you lift it entirely.
And be careful that you do not pierce the vein and cause pain to it, for it will be difficult for you to raise it up; use your prudence in this matter.
The form of the injury that is dried out:
It is not acute as with ulcers, nor does it have extreme sharpness so as to not harm the vein; on the contrary, it has great flexibility, because if it were too subtle, it would pierce the vein due to its subtlety; we have said this regarding its superfluous thickness on the surface.
Extraction of the vein of the thigh.
This vein is generated in the legs, in hot regions, as well as in the areas of Arabia and in the rear regions of India, where there is little moisture and no grass or trees.
And severe pain is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And the growth of the hernia is putrid, as snakes and worms and parasites come from within the body, winding and growing between the intestine and flesh.
And the sign of the impending occurrence of hernia is this vein that happens in the leg, a violent inflammation; then the area becomes irritated; and soon after, the vein begins to leave from the location of that irritation, as if it were pulled by roots.
And when the hernia begins to appear, you will know that you must wrap around it a piece of lead as heavy as a dragon's weight. Inside, there is a dragon, and you should observe it and leave the lead suspended from the leg.
And many times when it occurs from any cause outside, wrap it in lead and observe that. And if the swelling persists, you cut a gap in it and wrap the bandage; do not cut into the red part until it has come out, for if you cut that part, it contracts and goes into the flesh, causing abscesses and pus in the area and a bad ulcer.
For the swelling that requires additional treatment and needs to be extracted little by little, until it has completely come out from the back of it, ensuring that no part remains in the body.
And from this vein, it is observed in some individuals that its length reaches the palm and fingers, and I have personally witnessed it reaching a length of 10 palms.
And if it is cut during treatment, insert the ray into its track and perforate that long track in the flesh, until everything inside is evacuated, then apply poultices to the area for several days as a remedy; and carefully care for it for the healing of abscesses.
And this vein is sometimes seen to have great swellings, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot itself, and comes with much painful inflammation, and is issued from each swelling.
And therefore treat that as we have said in the division and refer to what has been said above.
From the section about worms generated under the skin, and it is called bovine inflammation.
This disease is called bovine inflammation in some countries because it causes great pain in the limbs and throughout the body, and it pushes and breaks the sinew until it comes out.
And the generation of this disease is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, which cause worms and serpents and roundworms and ascariasis in the belly.
And it is feared by the evil of it, for when it enters the body and rises to the head, and reaches the joints, its strong grip in them crushes and destroys the joint, and from there it should be observed closely.
And therefore, when you want to cure it and extract it, it should not be done unless you understand its movement and appearance in the body, and then grasp what is above it and what is left below it with strong compression and constriction, and then dry it and extract that.
And if it is embedded in the flesh and does not cause harm, then place a hot cautery over the spot where it resides, and the main reason it is feared is the corruption of it which also corrupts the place as we have said.
If it affects the head near the joint, then tighten the upper eyelid with strong compression, and dry it, and extract that; and beware that the disease uses purification of the body with medications to evacuate corrupt putrid bad humors, and be careful of foods causing putrefaction.
From the incision above the disease.
This disease is called nafir in our land, and it is a pain that appears in some members, and then changes from one member to another.
And you have already seen that second one that I will recommend to you. You were called to a woman with malady in a village, and you discovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein at the wrist, which you broke by pricking it, and as you looked, that inflammation seemed to go away on its own, almost like living silver as it flowed from one place to another.
And then he removed the pain from that place and put pressure on the muscle, and held it for an hour.
And then correct in the other body until reaching the other arm.
And then I realized that I had to turn myself around in every direction as if my sight was all-encompassing; and it was too wondrous to behold the permutations of it and the speed with which members change place. And I had already witnessed this in my feet according to that manner; however, I have seen many which cause profound pain to be shuffled from member to member. I have never seen this in the feet thus as in women.
And I do not think that this is anything but that the woman was old, with brittle limbs and exposed veins, and in this state, the sensation of that altered wind appears.
And it is necessary that this retrograde treatment does not appear in those who are delicate and have a moist body with constricted veins.
And if you want to cure it and the patient feels that pain, then do not appear to be doing something as we have said, but tighten over that area, leave it slightly open, and dry it, pressing on that place until that airiness is reduced, and cauterize the area.
If you do not find them in your feet, then cure that by relieving the body and that which expels airiness, and bind those with foul-smelling pills and pills of fire and similar things.
From the extraction of arrows.
Arrows vary in type according to species and the places in the body where they are shot, for their diversity lies in that some have sharp points, others small, concave, or blunt tips, and solid shafts; some have three edges, others have barbs, and others have wings.
And among the signs of the servant, when an arrow strikes in it and pierces the bone, and it is from the base of the skull, which occurs due to violent heat, and scotoma, and vertigo, and pain in the legs, and inflammation and pain of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of speech, and vomiting of bile, and so great is the loss of words and voice destroyed, and there arises from the place of the disease a white humidity resembling powder, and spots like those of flesh.
And if these signs appear to you, then abstain from treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is protruding.
However, the signs of an arrow lodged in the heart include feeling a sudden, sharp pain on the left side near the breast, with no visible cause; a strong, irregular pulse; rapid flow of black pus; chills; cold sweats; and fainting; thus knowing that death is at hand.
And the signs when the arrow has pierced the lung include sputum of pus from the plague, veins close to the collarbone appear engorged, a change in the patient's appearance, heavy breathing, and great anxiety for air.
And if the arrow pierces the peritoneum (velament) in the lower abdomen, the pain is felt primarily in the lower ribs, accompanied by severe, intense pain and deep breathing, and all the muscles are weakened.
And if an arrow pierces the stomach, it will immediately alleviate the pain of the harmful food poisoning.
And if an arrow pierces the abdomen and becomes lodged there, it causes a tear in the plague (or wound or hernia), and there is no hope of recovery unless the arrow is extracted.
And if the arrow pierces the bladder and allows urine to leak out, it causes severe pain in the patient, and you should know that this is fatal.
The other parts of the body, such as the face, neck, chest, shoulders, hips, spine, and limbs, can also be saved according to proper arrangements when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a poisoned arrow.
And I will tell you what I have observed about these arrows, so that you can understand their use in treatment.
The cause is that when an arrow strikes the lacrimal duct of a man in the root of his nose, and it is extracted from him on another occasion, leaving the grays of his eyelid intact, he recovers, and there is no further damage to his eye.
And another arrow was extracted from a Jew, which had struck him in the eyelid, leaving the upper eyelid intact, and the arrow was hidden and could only be removed with a small tip to which it clung, and it was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, capable of penetrating a lion without causing any harm.
And the Jew recovered, and there was no further harm to his eye.
And extract another arrow from a Christian man who had fallen into the gutter, which was an Arabic arrow, and it is that one to which only ears are attached; and then I incised it between two guides, and it was already submerged in the gutter of the patient; and then I carefully removed it, and thus healed the Christian.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who had fallen into his belly, and I realized that he was dying from it; so, after passing thirty days and finding no change in his condition due to any of his dispositions, I incised the arrow and manipulated it, and thus healed him, causing no further harm.
And I saw a man in whom an arrow had become embedded in his back, and the wound was deeply embedded, and after setting fire nearby, I extracted the arrow at the root of the injury.
And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had become embedded in her belly, and the wound was deeply embedded within her, and it did not change in her dispositions, and the woman did not suffer distress from any of her natural operations.
And he sees another man whose face is pierced by an arrow, the wound consolidated and the arrow broken, not causing much pain but much resembling these.
And he extracted the arrow from the man of the king's princes who was pierced in the middle part of his nose and had already inclined to the right side a little, and hidden was all the arrow.
And you were called for the treatment of him, soon after the piercing of the arrow within three days.
Then he closely examined the wound of the arrow; then he inquired about that attempt subtly, and did not feel it; but he felt a sharp pain leaving the right ear, and then he hoped that that pain was because of the end of the arrow.
And he applied the place with an ointment that is attractive and digestive, trusting that the location would heal for me to discover the place of the arrow, so that it dries over that.
And do not be concerned about the significant place where the arrow has reached; continue applying the plaster to it for many days and no further accidents occur; as time passes, the plague solidifies and you remove the malady of extraction through intervals of many days until on one day you feel the arrow in its own nostril and reconnect to me.
And then you should stop on the acute corrosive plague for many days until a fire opens up, and with gentle attempts, you should ease it, and cauterize the end of the arrow, which adheres to the wood.
Then you should adjust the opening of the plague according to that acute medicine until I visibly see the end of the arrow, and I dedicate myself to this for intervals of time over four months.
And then, since the plague has grown, and I can insert scissors into it, I persist in that, and do not be distracted by other things, when one day I begin to extract it with these devices according to what will come in the form of those at the end of this chapter, until I extract it; and I restore that plague.
And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose would not be restored, but they have restored it and the affliction is consolidated, and the malady is healed entirely, without any pain in it for any reason.
And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some arrows so that it gives this rule and meaning regarding what I have not mentioned, for the parts of this art and the definitions of those others are not understood from the narrative nor do those comprehend the book.
And the skilled artisans compare a little about what is said and pay attention to what is presented regarding what is absent; they seek new operations and new instruments for the descent of foreign causes in the art when accidents occur.
Therefore, you say that arrows are not forced out of the members in which they are embedded but according to two manners: either by attraction of the place where they enter, or by the opposite of the other part.
And that which is discharged from the place where it enters, or is an arrow proceeding through fleshy parts, and is thrown out and discharged.
And if you do not adhere to the timing of when to eat, you will find that you leave it for some days until the flesh around it becomes weakened and the attraction of it and its discharge are alleviated.
And seemingly if it becomes stuck in the bones and you do not adhere to your diet, leave it for some days, then repeat the process of discharge and movement on another day, and it will be discharged.
And if you do not adhere to your diet for some days, you will find that you pierce through the path of the arrow in that bone, starting from a subtle movement until the location is amplified by the arrow, and then extract it.
If the arrow is already lodged in the body and affects a nerve, then examine that area, and if you feel any sensation, apply certain stimulants to draw it out.
And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow, here there are neither nerves nor veins, then you must puncture the wound until it is enlarged and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
And if there are auricles attached to it, which must be removed entirely, then cut the flesh in which they are embedded using all possible tools; and devise a way, if you cannot remove the flesh from the fracture of the auricles and their torsion, until they become obtuse.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any location, use torsion of your hand with forceps at all times to make it bend; and employ every subtlety to ensure that the arrow is not broken and that it can be extracted with great difficulty from both the patient and the wound.
And if you cannot reach it with your own effort, then wait for a few days until the swelling in the course of the arrow subsides, and then repeat the procedure when it is alleviated. If you experience discomfort due to bleeding, then administer what we have mentioned for treatment in its chapter.
And observe your skill in incising veins or nerves, or string, and administer remedies in every possible way to facilitate the escape of the arrow; do this with ease and tranquility, delay and firmness as much as you can and as recommended by yourself.
And therefore, contract the arrow so that the malady is according to the figure by which you must aim the point of the arrow into it, for this is more beneficial. If this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
And the arrows that are shot in the opposite direction of the other party, or which already process any part from outside, or make the end of the arrow flexible due to the sensation of the force applied above the designated cord, then you should focus on it; and cut it according to the quantity in which the forceps grasp it; and then shoot it, for it is made light for departure.
If it is retained in the bone, cut with your knife according to the direction of the arrow that penetrates into the bone, and amplify the cut, then extract it.
And if that does not work, leave it for a few days and then repeat the process as often as necessary.
And if the arrowhead is embedded in that area, then push it towards the inside.
If the arrowhead has fallen and you want to provide impulse, then insert your finger, if it is soft, push it vigorously into the hollow of the bone in the area of the arrowhead and then push it towards the inside.
If the arrowhead is concave, then push it strongly towards the inside, as the arrowhead will be forced away by that movement.
If the arrow is deeply embedded, press down all your concave flesh where it truly is, if you can do so, and treat that area as seems best.
If the arrow strikes the foot, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side, and it is close enough that you can feel it upon touching, and it is possible to remove it without causing harm to veins or nerves, then do so and treat the wound as necessary, and use whatever remedies are at hand until healing occurs.
Design of forceps for removing arrows:
Their ends should be shaped like a bird's beak, made with a sawtooth design, so that they do not release the arrow.
And these are made in various sizes, large and small, according to the quantity of the arrow's length and thickness, and the extent of the wound, and the tightness of the area affected.
so that the arrowhead's intrusion into the concave area is removed and it is pushed out.
On venipuncture (phlebotomy) of veins.
The veins suitable for phlebotomy, of which there are sixteen in total: two pulsatile veins near the ears, called the temporal arteries; two located on both temples; and two in the two lacrimal bones, known as the aspicient veins; a vein in the middle part of the forehead, and one at the tip of the nose; two jugular veins at the neck; two veins on the upper lip; two on the lower lip; these are called the alae; and finally, two veins beneath the tongue. But the veins that are flebotomized in the arms, one is cefalic and must be treated with wild latz; the people call it "the vein of the head", it is deep, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica and another branch of the cefalic; they call it the people "vein of all the body", the basilica is the vein that is located in the domestic arm, and it is called "citillar", while the common ones call it "the stomach vein"; the funis of the arm, which is paused on the fossa, is the one where flebotomy is performed, and it is the one that appears on the ear for clear manifestation; and the parotida, which is the vein located between the said auricular and the smaller one below, only in its two branches.
And on the foot and the leg, there are three veins; one of them is left at the curvature of the end of the wild latz; the second is sophena, and its location is left by the domestic arm of the latz; and the sciatic vein, its place is left by the wild arm of the latz; and on the leg there are other veins similar to those.
The treatment of veins that are close to the ears is an ancient cure for migraines, emigrations, and ulcers on the head, old afflictions.
And the method of bleeding them is as follows: it should be done by shaving the patient's head, and rubbing the patient's head on the occipital area where both veins are located, close to the ears, with firm friction; then tighten the bandage around the head so that the two areas appear squeezed and the ears are located in two prominent spots on the head; and if you wish, as they say, and if you feel the pulse of those veins as they say, here is how you should try.
Now take the scalpel, which is sharp, and insert it into the vein in the neck until the incision reaches the bone. And then raise your hand over the vein and bone, and incise the vein with a sharp incision. And the length of the incision should be about two fingers wide, or as needed; and make the cut as deep as you wish.
Then, tighten the bandages and leave it until it is healed.
And it has already been preceded at the beginning of this book with the incision of those and their cauterization.
However, of the two veins and arteries that are near the temples, the jugular vein is an ancient and serious evil, causing frequent blindness and acute overflows in the legs.
And the quality of performing flebotomy on those is as follows: restrict the patient's breathing until two veins appear palpable for a clear perception, and demonstrate their pulse while leaving the small finger aside; and then you will be successful.
And then lift the cord over the vein at its stated point, and insert the sharp phlebotomy instrument therein, and raise up the vein; and cut likewise in the other two veins; and make the blood flow as much as your need requires.
Then carefully isolate the patient's hernia, and place the stated pressure on the vein for an hour, and then press upon that spot and apply poultices and tighten it with firm constriction, and leave it thus until it is healed.
And having thus recalled them, and made the incisions, and drawn them in at the beginning of the opening.
And thus the application of phlebotomy to the vein of the forehead is appropriate phlebotomy of the cephalic vein to ancient malformations of the face, and migraines, and bleeding, and foul ulcers.
And the technique of the flebotomy is according to what you have learned; so that the illness tightens its collar with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument called the 'digger', whose form it has.
Stop the point at the prominent part of the digger on that vein and strike it with a gentle or other maneuver according to its nature, and let the blood flow as much as you wish; then remove the perforation from the patient's illness and tighten it until it is healed.
And sometimes the vein is opened by a lateral flebotomy, but it is not appropriate that the flebotomy be of acute extremity as with the other flebotomies, but rather from a distant extremity, and open that vein according to its direction, for the bone is very close and strong, and would break in the flebotomy if it were too delicate.
But the opening of the two veins that are the tears of the eyes due to itching and tearing in the eyes, and to the illnesses of the face.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the illness tightens the vein in a particular area, and then you make a phlebotomy cut there, standing over the patient's head.
And the phlebotomy should be made according to the transverse direction along a little bit of phlebotomy, especially in places where there is no flesh; and if the phlebotomy is slight, then only a small part of its end should be cut.
Then allow the blood to flow as much as necessary, press over that part, tighten it for a night, and then release it.
Phlebotomy of the nasal vein is effective for high fever and violent sweating, and it helps with facial illnesses and migraines and redness that occurs on the face, especially when it is long-standing.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is that it tightens the patient's vein and then you take their nose with your left hand, and make a thin long phlebotomy cut in the middle part of the nose according to its straightness, because the vein does not hurt here, and because the blood begins to flow soon.
Ensure that you complete the incision with your small instrument little by little and let the blood flow as needed; then close it up after a night, since it is restored more easily.
The closure of the incision from both sides should lead to the restriction of swelling, the commencement of healing, and the alleviation of various diseases and acute conditions, as well as corrosive and malicious ulcers.
And the quality of the incision on those parts is that the disease tightens itself in each one near its root with adhesions; and the surgeon should be at the head of the patient, and the patient should lie on their side.
Then make a small incision in the vein with a wide incision; and take out blood as needed, according to time or as much as necessary for that purpose; and then do the same with the other veins.
And then apply a ligature to the ligament and tighten both veins with gentle pressure so that the pain is not aggravated, and place a poultice within the wound until the disease is healed.
And regarding the healing of phlebotomy on the veins, it compares to small abscesses and pustules in the mouth and the decay of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, as well as bad ulcers located in the nose and around the anus.
And the quality of phlebotomy for these cases is to cease the illness in front of you, tighten the collar of the wound with a bandage, then carefully turn back the lips of the wound, and observe two veins of which one is on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; and the indication of each is due to the darkness of both, and this happens more often in the area surrounding those parts where small black veins are found; and then incise each with a precise cut.
If there is doubt left, and you do not know which one it is, then enter into the incision of the greatest one among them, and take note of the most apparent pus from among them.
And make it resemble the two veins that are on their lips.
For the two veins that are left open in the tongue, the proper procedure is phlebotomy of the cephalic vein at its proximal portions, which are found in the throat, to the malignancy of the uvula, and to mouth maladies.
And the quality of phlebotomy for those is that it follows the disease among your fingers before the sun, lifts the tongue, and observes under the tongue, from one side the vein and from another side the other vein, and the color of each is inclining towards blackness.
And then make a flap in each one; be careful not to cut off your hand while making the flaps, as those are arteries.
And your veins, which are also flap-cut in the groin, are those through which blood usually flows in all humans. The flap-cutting of them is done according to two methods: either by using a milled or olive cautery with subtlety decreasing; or cutting with a flap-knife, and this one is called arteriotomy, and this is the form of it.
both the length of it and the thickness, and it is used to open the concave veins full of thick, hard clots.
And this phlebotomy is of smaller extent and involves the subtler ends, and it is appropriate for phlebotomy of subtle veins that contain delicate blood.
However, the phlebotomy of the basil vein, which is one of three veins, should be performed with caution as it removes blood from areas that support the head and neck, and also from the feet and abdomen.
And it is important for the phlebotomist, when performing this phlebotomy, to be very careful and cautious, as he must protect that area, and if he erringly pierces the vein during phlebotomy, he will cut the artery and cause a flow of blood, so he should not perform phlebotomy on that part with a sharp needle until he has carefully examined it.
If the cause of the pain is not apparent through manifest signs, you must recognize that you should remove it and change to another, or seek some root; or cut into the flesh in its final part on the arm, for that is manifest; and thus remove it with a flebotomy as we have said.
If you wish to perform a flebotomy, recognize the tightness of the arm at the site where you will touch it, and place your hand over it tightly; then bend the arm and cut the vein with a concave section as we have said; and be careful not to hit the artery in any part of the location.
And when you feel, with tension, an inflation at the site where you have placed your hand, that inflation is due to the artery, and therefore avoid it.
And if you feel the flow of blood in the flebotomy as with a bell, and the flow is subtle, you will know that it is from the artery's flow; then cut and tie off the vessel for a long time; and if the clotting occurs, since the visible clots are broken up, tighten the arm and release it.
And observe the patient from the discharge of their moisture, and be extremely careful of them, and do not cause harm to them for some days until they are healed.
If the gangrenes do not separate, and it is not appropriate to apply medicine to it, then you cut into the artery if it appears to you; for the end of it is contracted, and the gangrene is separated; or take a piece of raw flesh, and make an incision there, and take one portion and tighten it over the place of the vein with bindings and poultices within the next day.
And if the gangrene is separated, then it is good; but if not, treat it with the water mentioned previously to remember the place of the powder that separates the flow of gangrene.
And the removal of the gangrene from him is difficult due to the position of the location of the plague and the possibility of binding of the arm.
From the dark vein, phlebotomy is useful to extract blood from the upper part of the head and leave it from the lower parts of the body; for this reason, it is composed of branches of the basilic vein and branches of the cephalica, as we have said.
And be cautious in phlebotomy to those who have fear of it, for there is a nerve; and then, when you reach the point of phlebotomy and find the nerve, stupor will occur, and healing will be difficult, and often not completely successful. This nerve causes sensitivity; and if it is hidden from some men and is subtle and not shown, you must pause in performing phlebotomy that you make a cut with the phlebotomist's instrument, and avoid the nerve with all your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein along its length.
The advantage of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and provides relief for ailments of the feet.
And in this case, if you want the phlebotomy to be performed with a olive phlebotome or a myrtle phlebotome; for it is the safest of all veins, as it does not leave any artery or nerve.
However, in some cases, when the apoplem (or hematoma) does not form during the first percussion, do not notice it again regarding that apoplem.
The first sentence translated into English is:
And perform a flebotomy at the third or first pulse, three hours after passing the morning.
Flebotomy can be performed at any time of day or night, whenever it proves convenient and necessary.
And remember that children should not be subjected to flebotomy before the age of 13, women who are pregnant should not be flebotomized except in the fourth month of pregnancy, and the elderly, those who have already passed 60 years, should not undergo flebotomy.
And if anyone wishes to undergo flebotomy in any way, let him purify his bowels with a lion's clister beforehand, if there is much fissure retained, so that the veins do not expel excess blood during the flebotomy of the bowels, which are pure, and do not burden the main members.
And let the patients not be subjected to painful surgery and excessive eating, nor should they escape from illness or intoxication until this matter is thoroughly investigated regarding their condition, nor should illness come from hydropic conditions, and more than fluotomy should be feared during colic, vomiting, abdominal pain, multiplication of urine, labor, exertion in meals or vigils, or any cause that debilitates the virtue, either physical or animal.
And it is appropriate to consider the subtle movement of humors in this regard if the swelling is due to heavy foods, drinks, and medications, if it is possible for them to affect it.
And it is appropriate to immerse oneself in water if any cause does not prohibit, or some exercise for the purpose of subtilizing the swelling.
And perform the fluotomy on the leg of the patient at around noon, as it is said to be the third hour.
And therefore it is to be known that the foot of that person must be guarded from all animal misfortunes, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and also from all physical accidents, such as excessive work and strain, sudden movements, or anything similar to these.
And to his side, let the causes be presented of which cor (perhaps referring to a specific ailment or condition) is often experienced by men, characterized by aromatics, fragrances, balms, and similar elements according to the amount of possibility.
And then follow the flebotomator (a medical instrument for drawing blood) over a cushion that is placed on the thigh of the person who should have been flebotomated.
And then extract the person's arm, and with the flebotomator in your hand, make two or three strikes on it; then tighten the ligature with a belt and wrap it twice around it.
And if the obstruction is firm, for an obstruction that is not equal, or the obstruction becomes excessive, then prevent the flow of semen; or if it is for loosening and relaxing, then prevent the complete withdrawal of the semen.
And then, for the obstruction, note that he who has suffered from a faintness should rub his hands together between their fingers until the veins become swollen and are felt to be pulsating.
And then, for the flebotomist, apply a small amount of ancient oil to their flebotomy tool; place the index finger of their left hand over the vein, leaving the location where the flebotomy should be performed so that the vein protrudes slightly, and the pressure is reduced. When performing the flebotomy on veins that are full of air, and as you pause the flebotomy on those locations, the vein contracts due to the flebotomy, and it becomes clear to the flebotomist; and if the vein is not cut by the flebotomy, it will be narrow.
And thus, it is important that the phlebotomist be skilled and experienced in all these cases.
And after the phlebotomy, if the vein is swollen at once, then it is good; otherwise, you repeat this another time, leaving that place a little, or apply compression over it if the location is not apopthematic.
If the location is apopthematic or the illness worsens, then leave it for a day or two and do not strain the ligament; for suddenly applying heat will cause severe apoplexy, nor should it be bathed.
And then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
And if the opening is small and there is barely any blood flow, and you fear that you will not get the desired amount, then repeat the phlebotomy on that part according to its position and adjust the opening a little, and apply compression in front of the location as it becomes apopthematic, for the location is apopthematic in many people due to only a slight opening.
It may sometimes be already inflamed, so do not apply any treatment to it, as it does not excuse any cause; and apply some ointment on any part of the wound, because it heals the body from infection. And it is better at this location than any other oil or ointment.
And it seems that the application of oil in all forms of vein extraction, which venesectionists perform to prevent body infection, is a wise and knowledgeable practice when they stop at one of those on this location, because the infection is eliminated and turned back when it becomes severe.
And if a great inflammation is produced in the location of the vein extraction, as it often happens, especially when there is no significant bleeding but only swelling, or at the sight of a few veins, then you apply, and compress the place with a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly heated, and keep it like that for an hour, because it dissolves.
And then cover it immediately with the compression of that vein or another vein to complete its treatment.
And if after some days a blackness or greenish color appears, do not pay attention to it; and if you wish, apply some external cause of alum and myrrh mixed, or some other cause of mint juice or warmth or similar to it.
And often accidents occur, necessitating the removal of abscesses and protrusions through phlebotomy from the basilic vein.
And therefore place your hand over it, and if you feel softness, you should apply compression to that area; for the swelling is due to a bad vein and must be treated accordingly; and then be careful in applying any of the causes we have mentioned, as the blood will flow strongly from the arterial vein.
And apply plaster to the area where there is stiffness, so that the place becomes firm, and then take care of the other treatment until it heals.
And take care to extract the blood from each person according to the quantity of their virtue and according to the dominant color above the wound as it appears.
If the wound is black, leave it to fester until it becomes pus; similarly, if it seems thick, leave it to soften until it becomes thin; and if it is acute, leave it to heal completely.
And be careful with those who are full and strong and require bloodletting at once; in such cases, enlarge the incision of the vein and make the venipuncture wide.
And for those who are anemic, do the opposite; extract blood in several stages and make the wound narrow.
And the best method for venipuncture is the transverse section, not puncture.
And this manner of phlebotomy avoids the flow of blood and the incision of nerves, and it is more laudable and more safe than phlebotomy according to length and breadth.
And to which syncope is usually subject after phlebotomy, you should cure that in front of phlebotomy with a small amount of wine infused with milled grapes or simple oxymel; and extract it from the blood in three or four passes.
And if there is a cold of compression, then take before phlebotomy wine infused with myrrh or honey-based syrup aromatized with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar, or in fragrant and highly scented aromatic syrup.
And if syncope occurs after phlebotomy and it is caused by the sudden release of much blood, you should take in drinking water with a little wine and fragrant syrup; and use its aromaticity with fennel, and cool your foot at that place.
And use other causes as mentioned in the division in the chapter of fainting for evacuation.
And here he should extend his arm and dissolve the gangrened part a second time, as in the case from which flebotomy is indicated for rapid evacuation, and its virtue is warm, which evacuates the small gangrene little by little, according to the quantity of virtue in continuous days.
If one should extend their arm and remove the gangrened part a second time, and their body is strong, then do this about seven or nine hours after the first flebotomy.
One who wishes to remove the gangrene from the body contrary to the direction in which it is declining, should make it extend on the second or third day.
As for a body in which there is much gangrene, already hardened and acutely painful and causing fever, it should be removed from the gangrene in one operation and a great amount of blood drawn off, and the perception of pain amplified until fainting occurs, since you will have preserved all the conditions of flebotomy; and you must place your hand on the chest of the patient to prevent death by fainting, as these attempts should be made only when the flebotomist is ignorant or negligent.
And be careful when you want to loosen the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, if the orifices of the vein are already closed and it is difficult to draw out the blood, press down on that part with great force and slightly bend it outwardly, for this causes too much harm.
Habitize the layssa (dressing) within that is flebotomized secondly; or renew this with the acuity of the flebotomy that coagulates the blood in the orifices of the veins; or place over it a light compress of turpentine or sage, and continue that compression until the blood has fully drained.
If the vein is inflamed, dress it and do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
If it becomes necessary to evacuate the blood a second time, and there is no excuse, you may bleed that person at another site or on the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called the "funnel of the arm" is punctured in place of the cord or basilic when they are not found or are obscured, as it is composed of those.
And the quality of the vein puncture is that the patient inserts their hand in the water until the point becomes engorged and the vein appears clearly.
Then it is tightened over that ligament with a strict compression; and then a vein puncture is made according to the transverse small, not longitudinally or transversely.
And the incision should be wide, and your vein puncture should be made with the point of your instrument on the joint of the hand slightly.
And if the flow of blood is obstructed, then you insert your hand in the water again and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your need.
If you were in the summer days, then you are exempt from the iteration of the hand in cold water, and in winter, the body of Saint Charles is immersed in cold water for a longer time.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is far safer than that of all other veins, because it has neither pulsating nor nerve.
And the phlebotomy of the saphenous vein in the right hand is indicated for liver ailments.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that you should tighten your hand strongly or with the other hand, as you have immersed it in cold water, so that the vein is swollen and clearly visible; then phlebotomize transversely; and if you cut into it, it will not hurt at all.
And be careful not to cut off the hand during phlebotomy, because then the nerves in that part of the body are exposed.
And then apply the hand to the affected area and let the blood flow through it; for if you do not apply pressure to the wound in warm water, the blood will clot within the venous opening and prevent further flow.
Once the blood has been extracted according to necessity, you should apply oil and salt to the vein to prevent it from hardening; and make sure that you do this in a narrow space.
But the healing of this arteriotomy with the hand from the left side is appropriate for illnesses of the abdomen.
And do the same for the arteriotomy of the other side, just as you have done with the previous one.
The healing of the venotomy should be for illnesses that are in the extremities of the body, as well as for illnesses of the uterus and retention of menstruation, and for illnesses of veins and ulcers of limbs and old garments, and similar to the illnesses mentioned above.
And the nature of the foot surgery is that the patient immerses their foot in water and friction until the veins appear; then he wraps it around the ankle joint with a strap; the position of the vein is clearly visible, from which it branches out in various parts of the foot.
And therefore, make the incision wide enough to remove the hernia through the opening in the leg, as this is better and more salutary.
And if you perform a foot surgery on the surface of the foot, be careful to avoid the nerves that are left there, and place your incision precisely where you perform the surgery, otherwise it might not go as planned.
And the surgery should be successful.
If it is prohibited to elevate the leg, then immerse the foot in water and let the blood flow out until it is evacuated.
And if the phlebotomist misses on the first attempt, he should repeat the phlebotomy in that place a little more, since the area is sensitive; and do not fear any harm from it, but be careful of the nerves as we have said.
And it seems to do the same thing on the other foot equally.
And for sciatic vein, the same place as we have said is where the tail should be placed below the hip joint in the wild position.
And the healing of the phlebotomy wound is at the hip joint when it is for a hard case.
And the quality of the phlebotomy for him is that it brings the disease into a bath, relaxes and strengthens his body from the side of his leg towards his foot on all four sides with a thin long band, since only then will it appear through this.
And therefore, when it appears, you perform an incision on that part according to each skill at your disposal and the direction, and it is better; or incise it through incision or secare it through secation, for the location of it is open.
And it is in most people not easily noticed; and if you find it, and it does not appear in the sensation of all, perform a flebotomy on one of its branches, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot instead of the mentioned auricular and ankle joints.
And be mindful of the nerves, and allow the blood to flow from the wound as much as you wish.
Then release the tightness and place your hand over the site of the flebotomy gently, as it is said to be healed lessening.
Of ventilation and the qualities of use of those.
Ventozas are made of horns, or iron, or glass.
And the treatment is carried out in two ways: one involves incision and extraction of pus, and the other is through incision alone.
And this incision treatment, which is through scarification, is carried out in two ways: either with fire or without fire.
And the twelve locations on the body where such incisions are made include: the one where vents are placed in turn, which is at the nape of the neck; the middle point on either side of the collarbone; vents below the jaw, beyond the mouth; vents on both cheeks; vents on the tongue, two at a time; vents on the shoulder blades; vents on the arms, two inches apart; vents on the legs, two at a time; and vents on the feet, two in each.
And the extraction of blood should not be from large veins but from small ones scattered in the flesh, and thus it does not cause harm through phlebotomy; nor should bloodletting be done with fire or hot coals in any illness caused by congestion within the body until it is entirely evacuated.
If it is necessary to induce bloodletting for an illness or a continuous condition, we should do so at the beginning and end of the month, and in the middle of the day and at any time that seems appropriate.
And therefore, when pain occurs for any reason among those, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the night, they command a ventilation to be done rather than waiting two or three hours past day.
And one immediate relief from the ventilation of the neck is that when it confers gravity on the head and everything that sinks into the ears; more importantly, it is evident that this is an appropriate evacuation for the entire body.
This ventilation is in the area of phlebotomy of the head.
And it is not advisable to use on what is of foul composition or where there is catarrh, as it brings great discomfort to that area.
And for that reason, one should not use it on the feet, and on the tops of which are joints of pain.
May he who is lying on his side be relieved; and for that reason you must order the bellows handler to place his hand slightly on the parts where the suction is applied, lest there be a loss of relief.
The application of suction from the bellows in place of phlebotomy of the vein (vena fusca) and basilic artery: thereby it confers relief from asthma, constriction of the lungs, tearing of the lung's muscle, cough, and congestion.
And it is necessary that the bellows be slightly moved, for if it remains in place, it generates weakness in the body and stomach.
And the suction of alhagdahan confers relief from accidental pain in the head and eye, migraine, bright light sensitivity, and tooth root pain; and it is in place of phlebotomy of the basilic artery.
And be sure to instruct the blower not to press his hand during the scalping so as not to pierce the artery and cause bleeding.
After scalping, apply alcohol to the wound in the mouth, and treat the corruption of the gums, and similar conditions in the mouth, which are in place of phlebotomy using other means that are applied to both lips.
But the scalping that is done on both sides of the jaw provides relief from pain, which is achieved through the application of heat.
And the scalping of both parts within the sockets provides a rejuvenating effect of phlebotomy of three blood vessels, namely the basilic, the femoral, and the cephalica; these vessels draw the blood from all those hand-operated veins in the flesh, as well as from the smaller veins of the other, larger vessels, to achieve attraction to the three vessels.
And command the bellows man not to blow too strongly in the scarification, for the place is stripped of flesh, and leaves only nerves and arteries.
And it is a bellows used to blow over the anus and confer relief to hemorrhoids in the rear end and to pus ulcers left behind.
And it is necessary to command the bellows man to be a strong bellows, and of iron, for the place requires a powerful section; and its strong blows should be subtle and scarified in the scarification.
The smaller bellows from the legs decrease in gentle blows, for they draw blood from throughout the body, and relieve old pains of gout and kidney stones, and the bladder; they induce menstruation and ease breathing and coughing; and are used in place of flebotomy of two phials, and also in strangulation and of two nails.
However, these weaknesses debilitate the whole body and cause fainting in many men.
And from the openings (or vents) of the loins, the rejuvenation is proper to the rejuvenation of the vents of both legs.
And the quality of the position of the vents is that it stops the vent in the beginning of the vacuum and sucks by temperate suction, and does not prolong the position of the vents, but rather gently pauses them, and remains tightly placed, and allows the humors to come to the location through equal occurrence. And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the location already reddened and swollen, and the pain of the wound appears.
Then make cuts and repeat the suction little by little, and consider the disposition of the body.
For that man whose flesh is tender and thin, be sure to scrape him once and not too hard, so that the place does not become an ulcer.
And command the bellows to increase the scraping and press slightly, and facilitate the suction with ease.
And if the swelling in the vein becomes great, be sure to scrape twice, for the first scraping opens the way for the veins to drain and their content. In the second, apply the scrutiny acquired from the extraction of the large vein.
And if the vein is very foul-smelling, make a third scraping so that you may achieve its end.
Lastly, when we want to extract the vein little by little or a small one, a single scraping is enough.
And if we wish to extract a hard stone, we perform a thorough incision; and if we know that the stone is large, then we should make an incision with a deep scarification.
And the term "scarification" refers solely to the depth of the cut.
And if the cut is deep, hard, rough, and its edges are very tight, then the places where the suckers (or ventosas) are applied should be softened, opened, and resolved; if it is in summer, one may use oil of aloe, or oil of violets, or oil of pressed almonds, or oil of nettle; and if it is in winter, then use oil of nails, or oil of lily, or camomile oil, or saint john's wort, similar substances.
And if the excess (or "superfluitat") is thick, sticky, then use oil of amaranth, or balsam oil, or aloe oil, or anise oil, and similar substances.
If the leech is of ample size and has tender flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and to these places where leeches are applied, the leeching should be done with watery solutions, or with hot water saturated with solatrum, or with water from a couch (medical pad), or with grape must, and similar substances.
And he whose leech has very moist sanitization, washes his leeches in wine or in water mixed with myrtle and sumac, and similar substances.
And for he whose excesses are abundant, wash his leeches in antivin (wine made from grapes fermented with their seeds and skins), or in water mixed with savin, marjoram, or anise, or chamomile, and similar substances.
And be it known that leeching should not be administered immediately after a bath; rather, it should be done approximately one or two hours after, and the leech should be allowed to rest close to the treatment area.
What is it that must be done to regulate the flow of blood after phlebotomy before venesection?
When beginning the treatment, if the phlebotomist or the one who has had the bloodletting is irritable and has severe pain, inflammation, then you should take causes that cause chilling, thus with acetylcholine, and belladonna, and other similar herbs.
And they should also abstain from their meals thus with chicken, and other lean meats, and foods seasoned with spices.
And for those whose condition is severe, they should take in drinking alcohol from almonds or cannabis seeds, and sumac, and a mix of fragrant herbs between vine and nutmeg; and it is recommended that they consume little alcohol and food, abstain from chicken, cabbage, and pigeons.
And it is necessary that on days of ventilation and flebotomy, the liquid intake should be greater than the food intake.
It is necessary to give some men a small dose of tyriake, or musk, which is peppered, or alcelite before ventilation or flebotomy, or afterwards, so that the main members are comforted and the pain is lessened; and it is not necessary for them to take this scalding.
Rather than the openings (ventosities) that are a form of lancing being on the liver, and on the belly, and on the umbilical, in the regions of the joints, and on the sides, these members do not suffer from lancing.
And it is not desired for these (openings) to drain the pain from the members, but rather to attract the pus of the member, thus pausing a ventosa on the breast in cases of flux of pus from the nose; and they use this so that the ventosa's binding force on the member be dissolved, just as it pauses on the belly and the umbilical; for it rarefies the member and scalds it and removes pain as it resolves the ventosa.
And it is placed over the swelling when an injury or bruise occurs, for by virtue of strong attraction it improves the injury and eradicates the bruise from its place.
And it seems to do when it is placed over the liver and gallbladder, requiring ventilation in those enclosed spaces.
And these ventilations are administered using suction, sometimes only; and in some cases, they are administered over fire.
And sometimes they are administered filled with heated water for the ailments of the gallbladder.
And this is so that the ventilation be filled and the pus be great, it is only heated water or water in which suitable herbs have been steeped.
Form of a wound administration at the fire: the size of the opening should be two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and the quantity of the poultice should be the thickness of a palm; and in the length of it, in the place that is in the circumference, half of it, the bandage should be small according to the amount that fits into it an needle.
It is prepared with eringos, oranges, thick lemons, onions and tomatoes so that they do not damage the member from its position on it.
And in the middle of it is a transverse slice of eringos or iron, where the candle is placed over the fire.
And this poultice is much greater than the one we have previously mentioned; and its size is smaller according to the ailments and the state of him who uses it.
And the cups used for children and the weak are different from the cups used for young and robust individuals.
And the method of applying this cup is to hold the fire over the affected member with a piece of wood from the fireplace, and place it on the middle of the transverse bandage in the exact spot of the cup, so that the fire is ignited around the edge, preventing any harm to the patient's body.
Once applied to the patient's member, as we have described, and when the cups are in place and do not need to be adjusted, then fire is brought to the pointed end of the bandage, which ignites the vapor within, causing the cup to dissolve shortly after.
And continue holding the fire according to your preference, applying more cups as needed.
Place a cup that is administered in the pleurisy pain, with water, in which there is no cross or breach, and it should only be filled with water and placed over the affected member.
And this is the way to do it: And the larger this cup is, the better, because it can receive a greater amount of water.
Chapter .xcvii.
Bloodletting should not be administered in most members, but only in those where it is not possible to place cups, due to their small size, as well as the nose and other similar areas; or on a member devoid of flesh, as in the case of the nose and its surroundings.
And the quality of using those that you have found bloodletting cups, which are in the infected water of boils.
And then, in the evening and night, let them lie in warm water until they are relaxed and no cause for pain remains in the belly of the patient; then empty the body at the beginning with flebotomy and enemas; then massage the patient's limbs until they turn red; and then let them rest upon it.
And when they are full and the case is handled.
And if it is possible to remove the obstruction with an enema, it is more beneficial in youth.
And otherwise, wash the area with hot water and then apply cold water; massage and squeeze it.
And if the fever of the infection persists and it is necessary to stop the bleeding, then you should immerse a cloth in hot water and place it on top until the discharge stops.
If the ulcer is multiplied, sprinkle it with vitriol triple-distilled or gall and substances similar to astringent causes, until the ulcer is absorbed; or place the roots of boiled fava beans over the spot, leaving them until the beans adhere to the site, and the ulcer is absorbed.
And if, it is necessary, bloodletting should be done, then it is possible to change those sites.
If bloodletting is prohibited from suspension, then the spot should be rubbed with fresh ulcer or a needle left in the place until it forms an ulcer; and afterwards, they should be stopped, because those that feel any pain soon allow the formation of an ulcer.
And when you want them to fall off, sprinkle some triple-distilled aloe, or salt, or ash on them and they will soon come off.
Thus begins the treatment of the third stage: restoration. This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine; it deals with the restoration of broken and dislocated bones.
Oh, child, know that those who boast of this chapter are foolish doctors and common people, and those who at any time have not studied the books of the Ancients or read a letter from them.
And for this reason, this manner of science in our land is hidden; and you should not forget it at any time; and I have not devoted myself to it until now, except through the length of studying the books of the Ancients and understanding their teachings, from which I extracted the science.
And I will now discuss my experiments and studies over the length of my life.
And now I present to you a summary of all that my knowledge encompasses and upon which my experience is based; for I have condensed it here for your benefit and freed it from the constraints of detail; I have abridged it at the end of explanation, and demonstrated it at the conclusion of description; and I have outlined in it various forms of the instruments that are administered there, as an addition to explanation, just as I did in two preceding chapters.
**First Chapter**
**Summary and Collection of Fractures of the Bones: Since it is necessary to make a preliminary mention of those fractures from which we must proceed, before we begin the remembrance of the broken limbs and the diversity of each one.** **Therefore, let us state in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of the discourse; and the chapters to those whose understanding the artisan is forced to begin at their commencement, and who are at ease regarding the truth of these; it is for you and those who are eager to know or learn this noble art from you.**
And therefore it is said that when you encounter any fracture or dislocation or twist or injury, you must act at the onset with flebotomy or remove that part, or in some instances, if no specific cause is prohibited, with debility of virtue, or it is the one to which the accident happens, or weak from decrepitude, or there is time for violent heat or violent friction.
And then it is sufficient to content oneself with food consisting of herbs, veal, and crab; one must abstain from fatty meats and foods that clog the veins, except when ensuring safety from apoplexy, and if there is no risk of effusion of matter into the member.
And then return the patient to their previous condition, which is usually the course of treatment for them.
And so when the broken bone begins to be healed, you must ensure that the patient is given nourishing foods with substantial and heavy nutrition, such as foods made from flour cooked in water, and rice, and bread, and beef, and goat meat, and fresh fish, and similar coarse foods, and at this stage, the fracture will coagulise more gently and better.
And you should know that bones crack when they are in the first state of decay and in the old, it is not possible for them to continue and consolidate according to their nature because of the dryness of their members.
Nature, however, adjusts and amends the broken bone from any cause similar to gout, in which a swelling adheres and strengthens that part which is always glued and united together, until the end of strength and firmness, just as fire at the beginning, whenever any cause does not prohibit it from its works.
And for this reason, it is necessary to abstain from the patient's food, food in which gravity, viscosity, and thickness predominate, as we have said.
And you should know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of members, for the fracture of the bone of the leg is different from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is different from the fracture of the bone of the arm; and similarly, all other members differ among themselves.
And you have gained remembrance of every species of fracture, explained in its separate chapter from the others.
The great variety of fractures within itself. And the species of bone fractures are diversified within themselves; for there is one type of curved fracture that occurs in them, and others happen according to the length of the bone: thus are the sagittal, stellate, and other fractures, both proceeding and not proceeding from the pain, as is done when preparing to write, and there is the fracture by contusion and dislocation in the head, and the small fissure fracture.
And for all kinds, it is a specific torment in its restoration according to the distinctive remembrance of it in their places.
A sign of bone fracture. And this is known as bone fracture: the deformity of it, and that prominence and sensation of it when pressed by your hand.
And therefore, when there is no deformity in the place, and you do not feel a strong pain when touching the bone due to movement and the patient does not exhibit great suffering, then it is not a fracture here.
It is possible that it is a deformity or small fracture, where you do not feel pain when pressing with your hand and upon compression, you apply the remedies of which you have recollection suitable for the place; then make it very tight due to subtle stiffness.
And you know that the location, when it is curved and does not split into two or anything else that does not happen in it naturally, if all parts of its comparison are broken, then understand that you must begin from your hour of correction of the habitation that has happened to it post-accident with caution.
If it has happened as a post-accident caution, then leave it for a few days until the apostema ceases; and then bind it in any way that you can of lightness and ingenuity.
And you know that the restoration of it and the stitching of it is lighter than the bone in which the accident has happened naturally.
And then strengthen it according to the return of memory of it.
If it is in a bone that is severely fractured, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from two parts, if it is the hand or the foot; or use your hand if the member is small; or with two strings or one string and the hand.
And your position holding the member should be equal to its natural shape, while the extensions of the bent member are stretched, then you pierce to cause them to return to their original state, using whatever means you can in those places.
And beware, according to your strength, that you do not cause harm to the patient during your operation or inflict any damage; and pierce with according to your ability, applying one pressure to another in their best forms.
And be sure to touch the area with your hand appropriately at that time, and if you encounter any other cause, correct it and engage it with the amount of your virtue.
And avoid violent extension and compression, as foolish doctors often cause ulceration with their frequent operations, or they cause contraction in the member as we have seen this happen through the operations of their frequent movements.
And the quality of the closure of the member is what you will observe; because you should know that broken members differ in their fragility, size, and shape.
And regarding those that are small like the arm, elbow, and forearm, when their closure involves a very thin piece of cloth, then ensure that the wrapping is delicate.
Those who have thick joints or limbs, should know that every one of them must be enveloped and firm, as the joint's tightness connects the large member strongly and equally to all parts, so nothing enters it.
And then, as you begin, carefully start your evacuation of the swelling, applying appropriate pressure, over the site of that fracture with three or four wraps depending on the member; and firmly grasp your hand slightly against the ligament.
Then, carefully shift your position to the superior part of the fracture site, and tighten gently rather than pressing hard on the area you have secured with your tightness. Then, gradually extend your wrap around the fracture site, and slowly soften the tightness until you feel the location open up slightly.
Then, take another bandage and wrap it around the injured area over the previous wrap, and carefully remove the initial wraps below the fracture; and continue your work on the tightness of the new wrap and softening as per the method described for the first wrap.
And then place between the folds of a cloth or linen, which conform to the contortions of the fracture, if there is any; otherwise, do not place anything on it.
And then place your attention on the other side, wrap these sterile bands neatly around it, if the area is not inflamed or infected, and stop when you reach the point of inflammation; leave it for a few days; and then tighten the bands.
The bands should be of different types of canvas, made skillfully; or of wooden sticks; or of palm fronds; and their width should be according to this form and figure.
However, note that the band applied over the fracture should be thicker and more elastic than the others; its length according to the measurement of the member in magnitude and smallness; tighten the bands on the other side as per your initial tightening; and then bring them closer together with a needle decently according to the stricture mentioned before, and it is that your stricture should be according to the location of the fracture more, and the tighter it is from the fracture, the less it should be.
And take care that the threads are strong in thickness and fineness, and are numerous; if the threads are thick, as you have seen in some operations where the thread of the cord is tightly twisted, it is a great error when the constriction is not equal.
Likewise, very thin threads are not suitable, because you will not be able to achieve the desired constriction, and it will not be possible for one thread to fit between two others without a gap of at least a finger's width.
If the illness is localized in the extremities of the bones, then constrict at those points without applying excessive pressure, so as not to cause damage to the patient with threads made of leather or silk wool.
Sometimes the disease breaks bones and causes disruptions in the joints, and it is necessary to refer back to what was mentioned in the second chapter regarding its peculiarities.
And you should know that a completely broken limb is not immediately tied with steel; this is because when the limb is large, it cannot be bandaged by steel except after several days or seven or ten, depending on your certainty of avoiding gangrene.
And this is the manner of plasterers that the ancients used to restore fractures and dislocations and twists.
A method of plastering as an emergency restoration of fractures, suitable for complex cases and especially for women and children, where heat and friction should not be applied: take powdered lime from the mill, which is the essence of flour that prevents the movement of the millstone against the walls of the mill.
And if that is not possible, then take a thin and soft cloth, and prepare it as an alternative, using this method.
Another method of plastering to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists: prepare a mixture of assafetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, and myrrh, all ground from dragon's blood, of each 10 parts; mirra and aloe, each 5 parts; alochil, 20 parts; mix these thoroughly with warm water or egg albumen, if the patient's wound is clean; then apply this plaster, for it is of good composition and gently restores broken bones, and benefits many people.
Another method of plaster, which confers benefit in fractures and twists: prepare a mixture of myrrh and white aloe, 10 parts each from dragon's blood; mirra and aloe, each 5 parts; acacia, 6 parts; and Armenian powder, 20 parts.
All these should be thoroughly mixed in a mortar with either warm water or egg albumen and administered.
A method of plastering joints and separating bones from their locations, causing pain in these areas as well as to cracks and fractures; take fine wool, immerse it in a mixture of wine and oil, and place it over the affected area.
This plaster is not merely for restoration, but also for preventing abscesses and expelling pain.
Another method of plaster that restores closed bones: take leaves of the fig tree and poppy flowers; mix them all together to make a paste.
A method of quick plaster administered for the restoration of broken bones and when you wish to resolve the abscess of a wound: take roots of alder, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, whole grain flour, all mixed together; make them into a paste and apply it on the member, if it is not infected.
If it is scalded, then apply that with cold water of parsley or cold water and use it.
Another method of applying a poultice for a hard abscess that requires the restoration of the member: take alder roots and seeds, and elderberry, and melilot, and basil, and violets, and chamomile flowers, from all parts; grind them to a paste and mix with savin water or distilled water or wine, according to the quality of the member and its color.
Yet Hippocrates does not specify in his book that it should be placed over the afflicted member before its restoration, except for making it with wax and oil, and not otherwise; and he recommends that it should be applied between thickness and thinness.
A warm compress can be applied to the broken member after its restoration and for causes of shrinkage, also using myrrh, cloves, and similar substances, just as we have recommended for those causes.
A method of applying a plaster for injury and pain: take half a pound of cedar wood shavings or wolf's fur, and other herbs, and salt, mix them together, crush and filter them, and make the plaster.
The amount should be adjusted according to the size of the wound and its separation, considering if there is no pain or discomfort or if the bone is not broken, it is better to leave it in place. You should not separate the bones for several days. And if there is severe pain, pressure or swelling at the site, you should immediately remove or loosen the plaster, and prevent further application of it.
Take a piece of linen and sponge from the sea, and immerse it in hot water until it is moist, then apply this to the site until the pain and discomfort cease, and rest the member for an hour. Then place over it a cloth soaked in wine and oil or rose oil, and cover with another cloth for a night, ensuring there is no risk of infection and that the swelling of the member and the pain are relieved.
And then repeat that delicate constriction and apply a small plaster, not tightening it with your initial restriction, but using subtle means to heal it.
And if the abscess, swelling, pain, inflammation and all other symptoms have subsided, and you feel the need for a plaster and constriction, then repeat the process as you initially began.
And if no other cause occurs to the member from those we have mentioned, then do not remove it for three days or four or five or seven; and in some cases, everything is left for twenty days, as it appears to you, due to the relaxation of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and it approaches the coagulation of the flesh over that place.
And then adjust the constriction more than your initial constriction, and regulate the amount of food for the patient according to the recurrence of their condition.
If you examine the site of the fracture and find it already dried and weakened, but not covered, then know that nutrition is prohibited from reaching it; so you should pour warm water on it every time you touch it; for three days in total; slightly relieve the tightness, and with this operation direct the nutrition to the limb, and healing will occur more easily.
But here is what the foolish restorers of a limb fracture do another time when they do not cover it properly, and restore it according to its distortion, which is an error according to their operation, and causes great fear, and if it were a skilled surgeon, he would enlarge the scars on the patient's free limbs and cure them towards this.
And you have not seen any of them do this, so it is all the more reasonable that they should not do it.
**Section: On Fractures When They Occur in the Head.**
The fragments of fractures are varied, and their shapes differ, and the causes are diverse; some fracture occurs from the impact of a blow, which stops all the bone within the joint, leaving the bone dislocated, as it is in a fist, and that's why this type is called dislocation; or space cuts a piece of the bone, cuts the flesh, and the incision does not pass through the rear of the bone; and this type of fracture is called absolute levation.
And the severity of these two types of fractures is great or small, and from fracture that is compression or traction; and their cause is the impact of power or weight on bone, and they seem similar.
This fracture is either penetrating, reaching the surrounding fat and leaving the bone exposed, or it is on the surface of the bone, and the severity of these two types of fractures can be great or small.
And of fracture is when it is damaged in the bone, in the delicate part of the hair root, and for this reason this specific type of fracture is called capillary.
This is a description of a fracture caused either by an impact or a sudden force, where a piece of bone breaks off and remains embedded inside the body, leading to a concave indentation at the site of impact, similar to what occurs in the case of erysipelas when there is a breach in the skin.
This type of fracture is most commonly seen in the bones of children, especially at the ends of long bones.
In all these types of fractures, the bones often remain slightly separated with fragments still attached. And one should return to the original state of affairs at the site of the fracture.
And I have learned all these types of fractures by examining them, and questioning their appearance and the state of corrupt flesh that is upon them.
And the capillary injury is known for being discovered over the bone, and it is washed, and bandaged over its affected area, as the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, one must consider from the beginning the accidents of the illness, and if you observe for the accidents that signify by their manifestations on evil, such as vomiting of anger, and extension, and loss of understanding, and cessation of speech, and fainting, and acute fever, and emission of pus and bleeding from those areas, and similar conditions to them in the major dispositions, then it is not a cure.
If you observe non-corrupt accidents, then you hope for health, but you begin the cure of it.
The cause is that if the illness comes upon you at the beginning as it does and this happens during the winter days, then you must study the bone's exterior from the 13th day according to your disposition.
And if it is during the summer days, then you must know that the bone should be studied from the 7th day, after which what is left of the bone decays due to panicullis, and accidents we have previously mentioned occur.
And if the fracture has already reached the panniculum covering the brain, and it is in small pieces and inflammation, then you must incise the fractured and inflamed part as I have previously mentioned.
And it is that you dislodge the patient's head from the illness, and discover the bone according to its usual place and manner as much as possible according to the shape of the illness, and elevate it over the patient.
And if you accidentally discover a bone fracture, pus or abscess, stop it with what covers it, and this is done by filling the area with sheets soaked in wine and rubbed oil, and allowing the inflammation to subside until the abscess is resolved and be certain of the flow of pus; then begin with the circumference of the bone and the removal of it.
This is the second of two methods of operation.
One method is to cut the bone with a sharp incisor tool, and this is its form: And then administer another incisor, slightly wider than the first one; and this is its form:
And then administer a wider incisor than the second one.
And you should have a variety of incisors, some of which are wider than others; and some of them shorter, with their ends more acute, made of iron or steel.
And use their aid to facilitate percussion over the incision so as not to injure the head or harm that part.
And if the bone is strong and hard, be careful that you do not perforate around its circumference before making the incisions with the instruments, which are called non-penetrating incisions.
And they are not called this way but because they do not reach the end of the bone in the testis to which it is attached, so that at the margin there is a rounded or curved extremity, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take a great number of these incisions, as each one corresponds to the specific nature of each bone, provided that at all parts of the skull the end of which is acute, the quantity in length and brevity is according to the amount of specificity of this test.
And this is the method for three kinds of treatments: When drilling into the channel of a broken bone, place the treatment instrument on the bone and rotate it within until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the treatment instrument to another location and pause where it cuts through all or most of the thickness of the ray or surrounding area.
And then you cut with scissors what is between each part of the bone, making it as thin as possible that you can place over it in a lifting motion, as we have said, to remove the bone, or with your hand, or with any other tool you have prepared for this purpose, using pliers and fine forceps.
And be careful that the scissors do not touch any part of the healthy tissue.
So, once you have drilled through the bone and it is separated from the healthy tissue if it is connected to it, take out the extracted part, be careful to scrape and clean it on the roughness of the bone away from the other tools that resemble scissors, but ensure it is more delicate and thinner than the others.
And if one breaks a small bone or dislocates it, take hold of it with ease using the tools at your disposal, and then treat the wound with lice and ointment as we have said.
And another method of operation is light, free from pain, which divides Gaul and lauds for great glory; and this is the speech of it: It is necessary for you at the beginning that you begin to uncover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most vehement and manifest, while, as soon as you have uncovered that part and paused over it, the extreme end of this cutting tool, slow yet gentle, which this figure represents, should be applied.
And the lenticular cut is round and does not cause any harm, while the acute cut is in two parts ahead in length, thus; that the lenticular cut be adjusted to the shape of the face of the acute cut that is applied to the bone.
And then carefully strike the incision of a limb with a small mallet until all the bone is easily separated as it is revolved, and be certain of the absence of panniculitis in that area where you fear any manner of complication, and if the medicant were the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of their ailments; certainly, he would be asleep.
If, however, a rupture occurs with the pancreas in some places of the bones, cut that part of it at the end of the incision tool, which is shaped like a lens, and separate it from the bone easily, for it is separated from the organ without pain or suffering.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the pancreas, and what is abscised or remains attached to the bone is the facia, which has asperities and subtle veins, then you must scrape those asperities and eradicate those veins with delicate razors that you have prepared in various numbers, so that it is possible for you to apply to all parts the most appropriate use of them and the most correct according to how your operation on that fractured bone proceeds.
And be sure to administer in your treatment the reason why you cut the bone at the beginning of the pus from those cuts, and then use it for the subtle pus of the body, and do not stop doing this continuously until you achieve administering the heavenly and subtle pus of all these.
In any of the other small breaks or subtle fractures, be sure to administer care according to what you have for the correction of it.
And it is cause that it is not mastered over all those who have studied in that art. And let us focus on what we have written regarding great fractures.
And if the pannicul is compacted when you remove the bone, be sure to take a cloth from it according to the quantity of the swelling, submerge it in warm oil, and place that over the area of the swelling; then take another cloth folded or doubled and submerge it in vinegar and oil, and place that on top of the first cloth gently, so as not to hurt the patient; and administer on that a light poultice, and do not strain that unless the swelling requires it.
And leave this treatment for a day or two until you are certain of the abscess's safety; then remove that and administer medicines as needed, such as rosewater, flour of herbs, powdered bones and aristology, and similar substances.
And you should make this medicine into a powder that is sprinkled on the wound when it is dry; and generally, administer to that person all medicines of good quality from which he/she abstains and does not bite.
And be mindful according to your virtue that the wound in your treatment is clean; and do not have any obstructions of ointment or other things; nor should you add severity to it; for when it is appropriate over the panicle of the brain, it corrupts and destroys it, and brings about a malicious malignancy towards the illness.
And it happens in the head's cerebral matter, as it purifies the bones and more significantly when the treatment of it is delayed, and it becomes black on its surface; and therefore consider whether it affects the patient the accidents that we have said, knowing that it is pernicious for all its knowledge.
And if blackness does not occur from the medicine placed upon it, but rather because of that medicine, then take some honey and crushed olive oil in equal parts, and with those lines wrap a cloth, and then place it over the affected area; and subsequently apply the treatment with the appropriate spices for healing until it is cured.
**Chapter III**
On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken in two places simultaneously, but rather one of those small bones, for it has two bones inside, and the piece that is separated is cartilaginous, and it is not broken, but rather suffers from attrition, deformity, and sinusitis.
If one of the two pieces is broken, then you must introduce that small fragment into its nose, and with your finger hold the fracture from inside, and with the same finger push it outside, until the nose returns to its natural shape. And do this to facilitate for yourself, and be careful not to cut through your operation on the patient's pain.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and it does not reach that point, then you should equalize the pressure at the end of the line where there is a significant curve.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then do the following to it.
And attempt to restore it on the first day of the fracture if possible; otherwise, return the patient to complete rest for at least seven days after the operation.
And insert a piece of linen cloth into the end of the nose if the fracture is in one part, or two pieces if it's in two parts, making sure that the linen is as thick as possible to fill the entire nasal passageway.
And thus, some of the ancient remedies are that the swelling should be immersed in a border of herbs, changed several times a day, which I have not seen; after discovering that the joint is covered with albumen of chicken eggs mixed with flour of corn; and then apply it until the bone is hardened and the cartilage strengthened.
And sometimes, in certain cases, it is inserted into the nose instead of swelling, because it is wrapped in cloth from the lion's fur; and this is when the fracture of the nose is very painful and the injury does not prevent inspiration.
And this is not necessary at all; and if you wish, do this, and if you prefer, use swelling.
And if another situation occurs, such as a nosebleed, apply a plug made of wax or a piece of cloth dipped in hot vinegar and rose oil, or aqua vitae.
If you do not prevent the development of gangrene, then coat that part outside with flour of sesame and powder of burnt bones mixed with egg white, and place your hand over it to stop the flow of blood, and do not bind it for any reason.
If the bones of the nose are broken or cracked, then you must carefully divide them and extract any pieces that remain in the wound; then, with a cut, remove any remaining fragments, and treat the wound with appropriate medicine to promote healing and consolidation, and apply suitable dressings.
And if an infection occurs inside the nose, then you must carefully treat it with warmth and administer nasal drops of mercury until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV.
On the restoration of the jawbone when it is broken.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not extensive, but only slightly out of place and not divided into two parts, its judgment is light.
And if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left little finger into the patient's mouth; and conversely, if the fracture is on the left mandible, insert your right little finger; and with your other hand, gently pull the fragment inside to facilitate its movement outside, and equally align them.
And if the mandible fracture is already separated into two parts, then administer extension to both parts according to their correct alignment, to enable their equal positioning.
And if there is a concussion of the teeth leading to their displacement, then apply those of which you expect them to return to their original position using thread of gold, silver, or cedar; and place a bandage over the broken mandible, wrap it with a doubled cloth, and secure it with a large, properly-cut piece of linen or a single strip of the same length as the mandible; and then fasten it according to your ability and what is suitable for the application, without damaging it.
And command the patient to rest and be quiet, and abstain from food and excessive drinking.
If you estimate that the shape has already been altered in any way, then on the third day, cut and loosen the adhesive from the affected area; correct what has been altered, and apply a poultice with flour, egg white, or chamomile, as you will have left the cerate on it, and hold the compress over the paste.
And when the annex and the application of the poultice are in place and the arrangement of the bone is not altered, leave it, do not loosen it until it has healed and strengthened the fracture; for this fracture tends to tighten in three weeks.
And if there is another acute inflammation, then follow what has been said above for the treatment of it until it heals, and heal that abscess.
And if the fracture is a severe one, consider whether it's a complete separation of the bone or a dislocation, then use your skill to reduce those dislocations to what suits the case in the removal of those from the instruments.
And if the orifices of the fracture are narrow, you should widen them with a flébotomi according to the amount of your need.
And once you have reduced those dislocations, and they do not remain dislocated again, then with the orifice of the fracture widened, you should apply the splint; otherwise, place it on one of the appropriate splints over that area, until it heals.
Chapter .V.
On the restoration of the furcula (a bone in the throat) when it's dislocated.
When the bones of the joint are broken, the fork-shaped part is fractured, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Depending on whether it is broken, separated, or separated into two parts other than those that occur accidentally, its restoration is more difficult; or it happens in such a way that there are no attachments, and it is more subject to complication; or the fracture is like a plague.
And for the operation on that one, when the fracture is its most complicated, you must have two assistants; one should hold the broken fork and assist, while the other extends the collar to support the joint.
Then apply the bandage to the fracture, making sure it takes on the shape of the part according to its form, and not leaving any bulges or cavities.
And if you need more extension, wait until the padding of the patient's bed is soaked in linen or wool, and its size according to the amount of your necessity; then extend and raise the fork and shorten the padding with your hand as you swallow the fracture as needed.
And if you cannot extend the end of the fork to the desired length due to its bent state, then you should place the patient in a supine position, and place a cushion over their muscle halfway in size.
And the assistant should press on the muscle at the joints while holding the fork's end in the supine position, until the os of the fork is raised as it was initially, and then you will correct the fracture and swallow it with your fingers.
If you feel any splinters of the fork and they are painful, then you should carefully cut them off and extract those splinters with ease.
And if it is retained in the bone, you will ingeniously make an incision of it with one of the scissors that you have prepared for this purpose, since you had placed the fork, the instrument that serves to extract, aside; and this is the form of the instrument, either made of wood or of iron.
And it resembles a cup, whose concavity is such as you have needed for it, according to the size of the bone or the thinness of it.
Make the length of it according to what is possible for you during the operation; since there are two ends, and one end is wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the disease which you have cut when you have extracted the piece from the bone is wide, and it seems secure from fistula, then adjust the two edges of the wound with stitches.
And if the disruption is minor or you fear a bad infection, you will use moist cloths and powders according to the quantity of the wound's break.
And if an abscess forms, then insert a cloth soaked in hot vinegar and oil, and place it over that.
And provided that the star (or the fracture) above the broken bone is not worsened; and so that whenever you see the illness each day, if you notice the ligament becoming softer or the star already being reduced, then you correct it and tighten the bandage.
Then hold the patient's sleep (or rest) over their neck, and place a small cushion beneath them to gently raise their head during sleep; so that by that means the supporters (or muscles) of their body are elevated from the side of that joint, and thus is raised the fracture of the furcula at the elevation of the muscle; or it is lifted the arm of the patient at the neck.
And do not loosen the bandage unless it occurs in the vicinity or aperture (of the wound), within 12 days.
Then renew the plaster if you see that it is coming off on the patient, and adjust its tightness; restore (the treatment) and leave it until it is healed and the fracture of the furcula is coalesced.
And it is tightened and bandaged according to its state in 28 days, and in some cases for certain men it is cured in less time than that.
**Chapter VI**
**On the Restoration of a Broken Shoulder**
The blade of the spatula is broken in the lateral part of it, but not the main body, rather only the edges.
And therefore, when the place is broken—and it is broken in the middle part of it—it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture, you must prepare it and reduce it back to its natural state in every way with all the skill at your disposal.
Then place a powdery mix of alum and honey over the wound; and stop it with a double cloth poultice; and place a thin piece of wood on either side of the table according to the size of the spatula, or a little more.
If the stick is concave in any part of the spatula, then you should fill that concavity with a stop, and then adjust the stick according to equality.
And then tighten it strongly over the dilated tongue with a restraining stick, until it does not move from its place.
And consider the lubrication every day; each time it becomes softened, tighten it again and adjust the stick if it moves from its place.
And keep the patient on their side.
And the spatula should be restored in 10 days or 25 days. (The text seems to have an error with "xx" and ".xxv", suggesting a range of days.)
And therefore, once this number of days is completed, you will dissolve the lubrication, and be sure that it is from among the bones whose beginning was not feared nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed from the site of the painful bone and place a chain there, then split it open and hold it fast, and act as we have said regarding the fracture of the tailbone or aposteme caut if this should happen.
**Chapter VII**
**On the Restoration of a Broken Foot**
A broken foot sometimes cracks in the middle and tends to heal poorly; its ends may be healed, but the middle part remains cracked and divided.
And among the accidents of the foot when the middle part is broken, it inclines to the sides within and causes great pain, difficulty in walking, and all kinds of twisting, and it may produce severe vomiting; and it is evident in the cavity of the bone that is broken, and it is not hidden from feeling.
And the restoration of it is that the patient be placed on their back, and place a cushion between their shoulders; then press upon their muscles, adjust their ribs to the two lower ribs, and proceed carefully in the operation, according to every manner possible, so that the bone structure returns to its original form.
And then apply a plaster and stopgap, using a thin sheet of lint or cloth, wrapping it around; carefully attach this to the broken bone without causing further harm; occasionally check the bandage's tension, tightening it as needed, and when it softens, loosen it.
If it becomes necessary to trigger the displacement of any corrosion, pain, or abscess that has occurred in the area, then cut and loosen the bandage, remove the plaster, and correct what has happened as a way of treating the patient; and if required, reduce the bandage again after applying appropriate treatment; and adjust its tension until healing occurs.
Chapter VIII.
On the restoration of broken ribs.
You know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur casually but in severe impacts to the back; and as for their endpoints, away from the point of impact, it is only due to something that is cartilaginous that pain occurs in them. And the knowledge of him is not hidden from sensation, you must inquire within to understand his condition.
And the restoration should be such that the fracture is addressed according to its type, each in turn, as it is possible; within reason, it should be swallowed, and then a plaster applied and the broken bone pulled together, if necessary for that.
If the fracture of the ribs is declining towards the internal parts, it causes intense pain and piercing to the patient, similar to the pain caused by someone who has pleured, and due to the pressure that the bone exerts; it leads to difficulty in breathing, coughing, and severe vomiting; and this is a difficult cure.
And already the ancient ones are ingeniously designed in that most cunning device.
And from their actions, they say: take away food from the patient that has caused inflammation and windiness, so that the belly is inflated and extended, and the rupture is pushed out.
We should avoid this lest it cause a slight wound to generate an abscess, if it happens; and if it already has, then immediately aid it.
They also say that certain things should be applied to them which are cooling and, close by, sucking strongly; and it seems reasonable, yet it is feared that the wind may carry away the excess due to weakness.
They also say: take a piece that the location should be covered with wool already immersed in hot oil, and place powders between the ribs until it is filled, which should adhere closely as you wrap it according to its shape; and it is treated for the patient's illness with pleurisy of food and medicine.
And if the disease causes a violent constriction that cannot be endured, and the bone punctures deeply, fear over the disease, then cut into the place, expose the broken rib, and with your hand press down on that instrument which preserves the health, remember its previous effect, and cut through the bone to facilitate it, and extract that.
And then it is necessary to adjust the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with stitching, and treat it with bandages until it is healed.
And if an abscess occurs inside the wound, then cut and insert poultices in warm oil and place them over the area, and treat the disease with what covers the abscess inside.
And let him be supported on the side on which he sleeps, until it is healed.
Chapter .ix.
On the restoration of the fractured spine at the back and neck.
In some cases, there is a fracture of the neck bones, and it begins to swell, resembling the fractured spine in the back. And when this happens to anyone and you want to know if it will heal or not, consider this: if their muscles are already relaxed, stunned, and dead, and they cannot move or tighten those parts, and when you press them with your fingers or pierce them with a needle, they do not feel pain, then you know that it will not heal, and in such cases, the condition is mortal.
And if it feels tight and painful when pressing or piercing the affected area, then know that the bone's end is safe and that the malady will heal with treatment.
And if you see the spine of the neck resembling this and want to know if it will heal or not, consider the patient's feet.
Now, if you notice that it has already become soft, this happens to those affected in the joints, and when they lie on their back, they feel stiffness and lack of control, and sometimes they turn onto their back and want to urinate but cannot, then know that it is fatal, and therefore do not try to treat them.
If no such cause occurs, the cause is better and should be left light.
And the treatment for it is that you pierce at the relaxation of the affected joint with a heated cauterize point or with oil-soaked wool, and sometimes place these over the affected spine several times until the affected area becomes numb.
And then place a comfortable and firm bandage over it, tighten it well upon that affected limb; and order the patient to use rest and tranquility, and not to sleep on the afflicted part until it is healed.
And if there is a need for amputation of the leg bone or any other cause that has already separated from it, then you must cleanse and dress the wound over the thigh and hold onto that bone; and properly adjust the two edges of the wound, either with sutures if it is large; and then treat the flesh around the wound, until it is healed.
If the last part of the bone is broken off and it is the end of the limb, then you must insert that portion of your left hand into the wound, and with your other hand hold the broken bone as closely as possible; and then place a bandage and splint over it, if these are needed, and tighten them.
And if you feel bones broken in them, then you must bind those, and hold them still, and treat the wound with the appropriate treatment until it is healed.
Chapter .X.
On the restoration of the wide [or: extensive].
The bones of the anches (hips) are often broken, and when they break, the fracture is not uncommon but communicates with the extremities of those parts, and is sharp in length and declines to pieces within; and it causes pain to the patient at the place and a shock when fractured.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over the place which is over the fracture, as the position of it.
And if the fracture is at the extremity of it, you then cover that according to what you have been taught by custom, in such a way that it resembles its natural form.
If the fracture is in the long bone or has already moved to the joints, then make the patient lie on their stomach until you are prepared for the restoration of that fracture. And so when you have finished that, apply a poultice and then place over it a board of wood or iron, and tighten with pressure, without worrying about the puncture of a fracture or the removal of the staple.
And fill the concave space with something that fills it completely until it takes on the right degree of tightness, and instruct the patient to sleep either on their back or on their side.
If an abscess forms dangerously, then stop the spread of it and its restoration until the hot abscess is calmed, and apply to it what has been described previously; and then return to the restoration of it, and tighten it thus with a cover.
And if there occurs an accident in the leg bones or they are broken, then you treat them.
**Chapter XI**
**On the Restoration of the Broken Helper (Femur)**
The helper (femur) is that which lies between the hip joint and the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which one is to take a piece of bone roughly in the middle and shape it as follows:
And they should be seen in both extremities of the bone, then it is suspended from an elevated place.
And follow the patient on their side; and then pour out their broken arm over the pole until it reaches the joint in the middle where the curvature of the bone is attached.
And then suspend over any heavy cause or the physician extends this to the parts below; and the doctor should hold the fracture with his hands until the fracture returns as it was.
And another method is that the patient is placed on their back and their head is held up with straps, and then two assistants are commanded: one to hold the fracture with his hands; and the other to hold the pus below them; and each of them extends themselves to different parts.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then tighten your hold on the fracture with straps and on another part with another strap, and each of the two assistants extends themselves to different parts.
And so, if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, you must stop half of the ligament over the bone and leave the other side of the fracture against the joint.
And if the fracture seems to be in the joint, then you must stop the ligament at that spot and against that joint.
Apply this with ease and care, and as it is wrapped according to how it must be done, strengthen it firmly if there is no risk of gangrene.
If there is a risk of gangrene, do not tighten it within the seventh day; place on it a cloth soaked in vinegar and oil, to rest the gangrenous part, and then strengthen it.
And the method of strengthening is to place a plaster over the fracture, then wrap new cloth around the plaster; adjust the arm upon the support, and place your hand open over its muscles.
And hold the cloth and tighten it over the support on the arm to keep the arm in place, unless any cause prevents the broken bone from healing.
And then use splints.
And it is that you place over the fracture a splint that is both broad and strong compared to the others; and you space each splint according to the distance between them, and the length of the splints should be according to the break, adding three times the entire length.
Then tighten the splints with the tension as mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that the tension over the fracture site should be more tight. And the less the fracture is displaced, the less the tension should be.
And thus, by adjusting the position of the bones and relaxing the tightness as we have said when you restore the member to its normal place, you will succeed.
And if there is a risk of abscess, you will relax the tightness and the bones will return to their normal position within seven days as we have said.
And then consider the dressing in all cases for three days to prevent any further damage or inflammation at the site; avoid food that reaches the member due to excessive tightness; and thus, correct everything as we have said.
If you are confident that nothing further will occur due to it, do not untie the bandage but instead wait for three days or more.
And the patient's rest should be on their back, and their hands should be over their stomach.
And place your hand over the hot poultice filled with wool completely, and consider at all times during the night or day that the form of the broken member is not loosened or dissolved, or that the ligament is softened; therefore correct it with all your virtue.
And stop the patient's food according to the order we have mentioned, so that the food is subtle at the beginning until it starts to strengthen; and then observe that the patient increases their intake of food.
The custom of the poultice and the leg support is that they should be strong for 10 days; and observe that they become loosened, and that baths are administered and medications applied with ointments that correct this condition.
And if the fracture is old and dried, then you should not loosen that ligament and stitches within one or two months.
Chapter .xii.
On the restoration of a broken arm.
An arm is composed of two bones, which are called the humerus and the radius; of these, one is smaller, and is known as the little bone (pous), while the other is larger and is situated below the little bone (focils).
And if the larger bone (focil) is broken only slightly, or both bones are cracked at the same time, it is a serious matter.
And when the smaller bone (focil) is broken above, its restoration is easier, and its healing is more rapid.
And when the smaller bone (focil) is broken below the fracture, it is a bad situation, and its healing is difficult.
And then the disease becomes worse when two bones are broken.
So if the bone that is broken is the main support, it is convenient for the doctor to restore it as soon as possible, before the break spreads further and complicates healing.
If the fragment that breaks off is large, then it will cause more severe spread of the damage.
And if both fragments break off together, then it is necessary to stop the bleeding more urgently.
And you should place your hand in such a way that it restores the bone and stops the extension of the fracture over a cushion, with the wrist positioned higher than all other joints, the little finger lower than the others, and the patient placed on a carefully prepared bed.
And place a cushion before them or behind in their correct position, so that the illness does not move around.
Then the minister extends the arm of the patient who has pus, or maybe their hand, and another minister extends his/her hand similarly.
Then the doctor should align the bone within its proper position, according to the best figure that can be achieved.
And if in the fracture of the bone there are many pieces, then you must carefully reduce all of them to their proper place using your skill.
And if there appears to be a separated condition that affects the bone and it is not in your hope for its restoration, then you should finish over it and maintain it in the manner we have said above.
If the fracture is a severe injury, you have already prepared for it with a special procedure, so now take care of that one.
And if an abscess occurs during the initial stages of your recovery, you should apply a clean dressing made of rose oil and white wax, gently pressing between specific points with subtlety, and tighten the bandage over the affected area until the abscess subsides; then remove the dressing, apply a new one prepared from powdered clay mixed with owl's fat, and place additional stitches; and ensure that the stitch placed over the fracture is both secure and tight.
And you should know that the names of the stitches on the arm are placed in specific positions, either in a single point or in two points together.
And you should tighten your bandage over the fracture site more firmly and intensely, and when the pressure from the bandage begins to ease up on either side of the fracture or lower down, loosen the bandage slightly as pain memory allows, according to what is mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And the sheets that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough, and the thread used to tighten them should be of a medium thickness between fine and coarse, as we have recommended.
And consider the members and their ligaments after some days. And if any cause occurs that requires correction, as soon as the pain strikes the member, apply water with a spout until the pain ceases.
And do not bind the member tightly until it relaxes, then return to the stricture.
And if the stricture is already softened and the bone has healed and appears like those (before), then correct everything with your virtue.
And consider more if the nutrition is blocked from reaching the member due to excess tightness, then you will know that you must soften it a little and leave it for some days until the nutrition reaches it, and then strengthen it.
If the patient does not present any of the causes we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to loosen it within a few days or around those times.
And also, since the hand of the hernia is due to its moving nature, it should be suspended from the patient's body, and they should sleep on their back.
And you should know that this fracture is healed in 30 days or 33 days, or if the pain is severe, it is healed in 28 days, and all of this depends on the condition of the complications and the disposition of the virtue.
**Chapter XIII**
On the restoration of the fracture of the hand's finger and its joints.
You know that the hand's finger and its joints often suffer fractures, and these do not occur suddenly but are caused by gradual wear and tear.
And when a hand suffers a fracture or dislocation, one must ensure that the patient remains calm and then place the hand over the affected area gently.
Then the physician should extend the broken bones and align them properly, ensuring they are in good position.
And one should know to apply a plaster and stopgap, unless there is danger of gangrene; then, cover it with a cloth according to the area's extent, and you have already wrapped it in linen cloth.
If the fracture is internal and affects the belly of the hand, make it look like a strip of cloth, and command the patient to tighten that part of their fractured hand; then wrap a long strip of cloth around it.
And let the star of life be a strip of cloth in which the body is wrapped, so that it adheres to the palm; tighten it according to its need.
If the fracture is in external parts, then you should place a cushion on the star and another cushion at the opposite side on the palm, so that the hand is covered and raised; and then apply the compression, thus turning the hand to its normal position between the joints and ligaments.
And if a fracture occurs in any of the joints, and it is the little finger, then wrap it as you see fit and tighten it on the palm; and if you wish, place a small cushion to the right so that the fracture is elevated and not damaged.
If the fracture is in any other digit, such as those in the middle joint, or in the index, or in the little finger, then it should be wrapped and tied to the finger with which it is affected; or all the joints below it can also be tied, which is better; or a small splint can be placed over that particular joint, as we said regarding the foot.
And consider, in your restoration, and appropriately arrange the position of the abscess carefully and opposite - to your operation - as it covers when any cause of those occurs, according to what is described about it.
Chapter XIV.
On the Restoration of the Hip Bone Fracture.
The hip bone, being mobile, breaks and turns to the side, thus becoming exposed to the dominant force.
And the restoration of it is done thus: the ligament is tightened over the fracture and another left to support the fracture, and the patient is laid on their stomach and face.
And then the minister should extend the ligament to its full length according to quality, when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
If it is deemed necessary to cut at the root of the bone, then its ligament should be cut on both sides near the thigh, so that extension occurs in it, and the other ligament left supporting the fracture.
And similarly, if the break is deemed to be on both sides, then its ligament should be cut at the ends, and its extension made towards the parts left open.
And then the doctor should equalize the bones by gently reducing them to their natural position, and join the bone with a good connection; he should cover it with plaster and tightness, if he does not want to cause harm to the member. If it occurs in an abscess, leave it for some days until the abscess is drained, and then return to your treatment.
The compression should be as follows: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, fold it two or three times, and remove the excess; then wrap the leg until it reaches the thigh and the root of the limb.
And insert a long strip of material between the limb and the bandage near the joint, bringing the ends of the strip on top of both parts, then turn over the bandage and the limb to remove the excess of the bandage.
Then place your hand over the limb at the site of the fracture as if pressing a splint against the bones of the leg.
Then fill the vacuum between the limb and the skin with soft rags to ensure the compression is firm.
And then tightly wrap it three or four times around the fracture site; the tighter you wrap it, the less restrictive and more flexible it will be, and the easier it will heal.
Then extend both ends of the bandage to the sides, leaving it open in the middle to reach the sole of the foot, and tighten both ends of the strips from the other side to prevent the bandage from slipping from its position.
Then secure the bandage over it so that it does not cause damage to the affected member or lead to gangrene, abscesses, or similar issues; and if any of those conditions arise, then remove the bandage, and correct what has happened immediately, as we have mentioned before.
If it is painful to move a bone that is dislocated, then hold it in place as best as you can; otherwise, reduce it and immobilize it, and treat the condition that led to its displacement until it heals.
And in some cases, this fracture of the thigh is tightened other than with bandages, as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
However, in restoring it in this manner, it does not happen that the patient becomes lame; and if it is restored alone, other than what is applied to the other leg, then it is necessary that he become lame from the one which has been treated most recently.
And you should know that the thigh is tightened for 40 days or a month or two, and all of this depends on the variety of complications and other dispositions.
Chapter .XV.
On the restoration of the fracture of the shin bone.
Know that a fracture of the ankle bone often leads to stiffness, which may result in limited movement.
If the fracture occurs, it is nothing but a crack or break in its parts, and this is what is called a plague or the plague, and everything has been said about it.
And the restoration of it should be such that it is equal to what was broken from its parts, within the limits that it can be added and joined according to what is possible by calculation and ease of fabrication.
And then apply a plaster over that round swelling, if needed, and tighten it with a strap according to what is appropriate.
And consider all the dispositions we have recommended in other fractures, thus with due caution and similar to those that oppose any accident to what is appropriate for its healing.
Chapter .XVI.
On the restoration of the broken leg.
You know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is thick, and it is called the thigh bone; and the other is thin, and it is called the fibula.
And it happens in some cases of fracture that the two bones of the arm are affected, and for this reason their restoration is done together with the restoration of the leg, and the operation on them is one.
And if both bones are broken together, the leg is completely shattered.
And if the thin bone of the fibula is broken, the leg is shattered in a different way.
And if a thick, dark bone breaks, probe it gently, as these are causes not easily recognized.
Then administer extensions, adjustments, and bindings to the hernias according to that agreement.
However, if the fracture of the leg bone is clean and without movement, the extension should be less and more gentle, and thus you will aid your virtue.
And in the leg is any cause for operation on the arm, and when you tie the stitches and complete all the surgical procedures, you will take wooden splints of a size that fits between the causes left behind in solitude, and they are made entirely of palm leaves; align them with those requiring slight pressure, and avoid using your hands, and let their length be according to the length of the leg, from outside inward to where it is most depressed.
And then wrap each drape in two layers according to its length, place one at the junction of the leg's thigh and the other at the opposite end, ensuring they are well within the foot's base.
Then fasten the two bands at three points on each extremity and in the middle point, for this tightness prevents the leg from bending at the left and right joints, and maintains a good position.
And now a strap of leather is applied according to the length of the leg, and it should be placed on the leg to prevent any further movement.
And above all, ensure that this is done in the case of a fracture, and when this pain is truly acute.
Then consider the leg in each day and study it thoroughly, observing for signs of detachment or inflammation or other similar causes; and when any such condition arises, be cautious in treating it until it is cured.
Chapter .xvii.
On the fracture of the talus bone and other bones of the foot and toes.
The talus bone does not experience a fracture completely; rather, it is the bones of the foot that sometimes suffer fractures; and the toes of the foot rarely experience fractures, but they do undergo atrophy due to their structure.
And if the bones of the foot do indeed fracture and those bones become elevated among themselves, then the patient should lie down on their side so prepared with support.
Then place one foot over what is elevated among those bones, and press and compress those, until the bones return to their proper places.
Then apply a plaster and bandage over them, and place the foot's belly on a small table with two ends.
And then stretch the foot firmly with a downward pressure, as you have already wrapped it tightly with bandages and other causes of which you are aware.
And after three or four days has passed, you will loosen the ligament, as you will find the bones entangled, either broken or dislocated, and the operation on them is just as well known.
But if it is that someone has a broken bone, then restore them, engage them just as you have learned and recommended to yourself in the restoration of said parts of the hand. And then place the broken bone straight according to its length and slightly bend it on one side; and return the foot to this table which is recommended to you, and stretch that firmly with a downward pressure.
If what is broken of the bones is two or three phalanges or more, then you should place each finger straight with a bandage around it as much as possible, and stretch the table firmly at the bottom of the foot, and stand on one of the ends of the table to keep the entire foot in good position.
And it is important for you that you do not forget to consider all the causes which we have mentioned to you in the other fractures of accidents we have discussed; and be cautious with any event that resembles this.
Chapter XVIII
On the fracture of the condyle of the femur, and the bone of the penis, and the glans of the man.
When the condyle of the femur is cracked, it causes a severe pain in the knee, and you should slightly bend the leg at the joint, and hold it behind.
And the midwife should fill the condyle with some material, and do so gently as possible; and the woman should be made to lean, supporting her weight on both legs, little by little, until all is removed from inside, and it is placed in front of the joint as best as possible, hoping that the broken bone returns to its place.
And then place pillows on their back, and when they wish to urinate, facilitate the process with care, then make them urinate, and return them to their initial position according to the manner in which you placed them at the beginning, and then return them to their first pillow.
And do the same for seven days or around those times, for that is when it is restored.
And if you wish, take a bladder of sheep and strangle it over the patient's throat with a reed tube; then insert the entire bladder into their mouth, and blow air through the tube until the bladder is inflated inside the mouth, for the fracture returns.
Then it is filled with warmth and left for several days according to our recommendation, until it is healed.
And when the hip bone of a man or woman is broken, then administer in their restoration and healing the same thing that we have recommended for the thigh bone.
And what is right is not hidden in these adjacent fractures that rarely occur, especially for those who have some study and understanding of this my book; for that fracture indicates to you the best dispositions through which it can be restored and tightened.
When the skin is torn on a man's body, take a clean cloth and place it over the wound; then wrap it with another layer of cloth, and secure it so that it does not move for three days or so, and it will heal.
Chapter XIX.
On the Restoration of Bone Fractures When Afflicted.
It is convenient for him who suffers a fracture, and especially if the bone is large, such as the bone of the thigh or of the adjacent bones, or similar to those that require flay and amputation soon, if the conditions for amputation indicate so, as we have said above.
And if the plague becomes purulent, be aware that you must contain it as if you were covering it with a third cloth, if another cause is not present.
And then it begins to restore the fracture in that member on the same day, and do not prolong this, if you do not risk gangrene.
If gangrene occurs cautiously, leave the restoration of it within eight days, as long as the gangrene has subsided, and do not approach it on the third day and beyond, for you might cause more harm.
If the bone is broken and protruding over an exposed joint, be aware that you must perforate to reduce it, binding it with your hands as easily and gently as possible.
If the extension is beyond your skill and the condition of the patient requires your hands, then reduce it with your hands using this instrument; an instrument made of iron, whose length is seven or eight digits, and whose width corresponds to the amount of the wound; and for this reason, it is necessary for a doctor to have these three or four on hand in every type of fracture.
And it should be made, and in a certain roughness, so that it is not folded excessively during the operation.
It should have a sharp point at its edge, where it touches the sides; and it should be made of thick material, stretching from above and within to the parts [of the body].
And this is the shape of it:
It is called "volent lip hernia" in Greek, thus it is a rare case.
So that the sharp end of it is held above the edge of the bone, prominent.
And it should push the patient all at once until the bone returns to its place, and be secured without any further operation.
And so try to intertwine the ends of the fracture among them, and if the end of the broken bone is delicate and you do not grasp it with a good instrument, then you must insert the end of that bone inside the tool so that it has power over it.
If you are unable to reduce the bone to this condition that we have recommended, then cut it with the scissors or saw it in any way that is possible for you.
Then remove the one that is embedded in the bone with roughness and small splinters.
And when the bone is reduced and the patient feels severe pain, you will know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and thus do this so that you bring great relief to the sufferer.
When your restoration of the bone is complete and you apply a black, astringent cloth, especially in summer, do not place it directly on the wound or any other area where there is oil, to prevent it from causing putrefaction and corruption.
And subsequently, during the final stages of bone restoration, you should apply bandages in such a way that you expose the wound, carefully incise it with scissors or similar tools, and then use bandaging materials according to the size of the wound.
And be extremely careful not to strain the wound towards the fracture, as you have seen foolish doctors do this and cause their patients great harm or fatal corrosion of the tissues. It is a matter of health. And if the swelling is light, soft, different from the swelling of other fractures...
If the disease is severe or a bad ulcer, and you are concerned about further complications that we have reported, and you feel pain in the area, don't press down on it, but rather wrap it tightly with a cloth made of hard fabric instead of soft cloth and hold it firmly.
When, after a day or two, the disease begins to manifest with swelling, remove the cloth that you had placed over it and apply some ointment, which is what we usually use to treat such plagues; take, for example, tetracycline and similar substances that resemble those used.
And it is necessary for you to clean the wound and observe the plague each morning and evening until it is healed and stopped; be sure that the member is prepared in such a way that the infection flows from it to the surrounding parts with ease.
If the plague passes many days and is not healed or separated from the arm, then you should know that here are only delays in the treatment of the small ulcer, so be sure to take care wherever the plague attempts to spread. And from those techniques, separate the ones that are removed and extracted, and those that are not separated, place the member and cause pain; perforate to incise those according to what is possible for you.
And if you encounter an infection or gangrene, which is a different kind of corruption and putrefaction, then take care that each one of them receives whatever is appropriate for their cure, which is preceded by a narrative in its chapter.
And concerning what I should say and what you should do: when the swelling is broken, it protrudes over the member as well as the bones of the thigh and its auxiliaries, resembling those of the larger members, and do not attempt to draw it out, nor extract it, for you may cause death by doing so; leave that alone until it can heal on its own in a matter of 2-3 days; and treat the infection if you see it, or let it be, if not.
Chapter .xx.
On the treatment of swelling that occurs during the healing process of any fracture.
Swelling often occurs during the healing process of a fracture, especially near the joints, and it is aggravated by the shape of the member; thus, it hinders the normal functioning of the limb.
Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer those medicines that have been found effective for it, such as aloe, senna, and others similar to them; take some or all of these, and apply those with a styptic effect, or white of egg, or vinegar, and rest on the swelling in a compress, and tightly bind those around it for good constriction.
And do not remove the compression for several days; then loosen it and repeat with another, as long as the swelling persists; or place a plate of lead over it, as lead has the property to reduce all inflammation in the limbs.
If it is already granted that the joint is in a bent and tight position due to necessity, then divide it by the most superior part of the bone, and incise the superfluous and prominent, or quickly extract it until it is remedied; and treat it while it is still healthy.
It appears that the text you provided is a part of a medical treatise from the Middle Ages, and the section heading "Capitol .xxi." indicates the twenty-first chapter or section. Without additional context or content following this heading, it's not possible to provide a complete translation or interpretation. However, based on the previous lines translated, we can infer that this section likely delves deeper into treating specific medical conditions, possibly focusing on joint issues and their management.
On the restoration of fractures: When the fracture is restored, then gently and properly apply heat to the delicate and injured member according to its nature.
When a bone fracture is restored, and then heat is applied to the delicate member, it should be for legitimate reasons: one of which is to promote healing of the ligament and proper union without delay; or due to excessive tightness of the ligaments that prevents nutrient flow to the member; or because of excess brooding; or because of inappropriate movement at an inopportune time; or due to poor blood circulation in the affected area of the patient's body, caused by weakness.
And the treatment for this is to restrict food for the patient and make their heart tender while the pain multiplies in them; administer baths; insert a gauge and apply pleasure to them.
Then apply pressure to the member, so that the pressure draws the moving nutrient to it, or continue washing it with lukewarm water until the nutrient flows and returns to its natural form.
**Chapter XXII**
Regarding the healing of fractured bones when they are restored crookedly and surgery is forbidden from them, what would be the course of treatment?
When a member is already restored and the fracture and displacement of the bone are corrected, the treatment for its deformity and nodding should be focused on restoring the form of the member. However, despite this, the member is not prohibited from undergoing its natural operation; as long as you receive the permission of one who understands the member (i.e., a qualified medical professional), then it is appropriate to proceed with any necessary operations.
Many have been these folk doctors and healers who have practiced this on our land; and this operation is most reproachable, losing great fear the sign of which is mortal.
When the weakness and trembling are recent, know that they should be immersed in tepid water containing herbs that soften them, such as altaias and yarrow, and similar ones; and a compress of mollifying plaster should be applied to it, also with good distillation; or take a thick mud mixture from yarrow and apply it with a lint cloth or oil of chamomile, and make a compress on that; or take fat figs and twist them with columbine women, resembling those used in the medicines called Amerman's consolidation.
And sometimes it is dissolved by constant gentle friction that is applied to the wettest parts, and movement of the limb should be administered in all directions at regular intervals.
If the deformity has already progressed and is severe, it turns into a stone and requires surgical treatment; then, one must ensure that the pus has drained and the continuity of the bone has been restored, and incise what is superfluous in the joint of that member with delicate bone cutters, and provide relief to that part which is greatly distressed and studied.
**Chapter XXIII**
**On Dislocation**
Dislocation is the displacement of one of the body's joints, preventing any movement and distorting the shape of the affected member, which causes severe pain and significant damage to the patient.
Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it should be reduced as soon as possible; if it is delayed, the joint becomes stiff and its reduction becomes difficult.
And so it is important not to stretch or move in the moment of the appointment, as sudden movements cause spasm and pain in the muscles.
If this happens, you will understand that you must perform a flap surgery on the patient's thigh, and then place something between to rest the hernia; and the affected member should be immersed in lukewarm water and oil, and then reduced with ease.
And all members should be treated with the water of which the memory will return to its proper place.
And you have already ordered the treatment for dislocation as mentioned above in fracture; from the upper part of the body, gently move it towards the lower part.
Chapter .XXIIIII.
On the treatment of mandible dislocation.
When the two mandibles are dislocated without any injury, the dislocation of both occurs in one of two ways: either they are slightly moved from their places with little force, and they become slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated and swollen, so that saliva from the wound cannot escape, and he is unable to open his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped around itself.
If the dislocation is slight, it often returns to its original position on its own with little cause.
If the dislocation is complete and swollen, then it should be administered a gradual reduction, without delay.
And the practitioner should have a firm grasp of the patient's condition, and the doctor inserts his finger into the root of the dislocation of the mandible inside the patient's mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts both fingers together, if the dislocation is on two sides, and the other fingers are outside to keep them aligned; and commands the patient to cease moving their mandibles and relax until they return to their proper place.
And if the reduction is difficult, especially when both mandibles are permanently dislocated, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil, until a gentle reduction of both is achieved and do not delay the complete reduction of both.
And so when they are returned and compressed, and the opening of the hernia is closed and not relaxed, then place a layer of cloth over it coated with wax and oil, and gently apply pressure to facilitate its ease.
And let the patient sleep on their back, with their head between two pillows, so that they do not strain themselves to the right or left, and do not force any cause; having their food be a mild diet, until when the pains are relieved and the mandibles are relaxed, then they may eat what they wish.
And this should be facilitated, and do not work on the opening of the mouth during eating, drinking, and elimination, until the mandible is healed and relaxed.
And if the reduction of two dislocated jaws is difficult and they do not return to their proper positions, then fever and continuous sweating occur, and the patient's belly is greatly distended and they vomit pure choleric matter.
And when you see this, you will know it is a loss, and often the patient dies within a few days of this happening.
Chapter XXV.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the furcula (a bone in the elbow) and the end of the bicep muscle.
The furcula is not displaced from the socket by following the course of its attachment to the bone; however, sometimes it is dislocated towards the outside, and this is indicated by sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient struggles under their weight and extends their arms. And then constrict the area with your palm firmly, so it returns.
And then press upon that compress and poultice, and strengthen it.
Apply the end of that which sears the thigh and continues on it, so it is not dislocated in any day; then cover that it be reduced and bandaged as we have said and as your equipment allows.
And then press upon that compress, poultice, and restriction, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed.
In this treatment, the cure is reduced to the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from its place.
Chapter .XXVI.
On the reduction of a dislocated muscle.
You know that the muscle is not dislocated in any way but according to three manners, of which one is when it is displaced at the attachment to its origin on the other side.
And the second is that it is displaced at the attachment of the muscle, and this should be treated carefully; it is not displaced at the rear attachments through the shoulder, nor at the front attachments by the nerves.
And it is most often displaced and comes out at the attachment on the other side after the tendon, especially in those places where there are few muscles, it is slightly displaced; but in those with a lot of muscle tissue, it is difficult to dislocate.
And often it happens to certain men through a blow or accident that the muscle becomes inflamed and swollen, and is torn from its original position.
Then, as you understand that the patient is in too much pain, you proceed with their treatment.
And the dislocation of the muscle is known when it is in the position left after the titillic (tendon) has been moved; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy one, because you find a manifest difference; and you find in the head of the muscle a concavity and place the titillic again with your fingers as if it were a hook, and the patient cannot move his hand to its normal position, nor hurt it by any movement.
If the dislocation is in the foot or ankle, and you find a clear sign of injury, it is not hidden.
And from this dislocation, light reduction is made when it is fresh and the illness is young.
And the reduction of it is that the minister raises the patient's hand to the parts above; then he applies gentle pressure where the hernia is, and reinforces the joint with strength in its place; the minister raises the patient's hand and extends it over them; and then leaves it so that it returns lightly.
If, however, what we have said does not return, and only at the beginning that the dislocation occurred, a few days later, it is necessary to ensure that the illness is bathed in cold water, and administered drinks that soften and line up as if they were cut with fennel, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and be administered.
And then the patient should be placed on their back and paused where the hernia is, waiting for it to shift between relaxation and tension; then the doctor places his hand over the expectation, and lifts the head of the muscle towards vertical, and pulls the patient's hand away so that it is not hurt by the parts below, and another assistant holds the patient's head so that it is not hurt by the parts below, for soon it returns to its place.
And if you wish, reduce this second way: so that you make present a man who is taller than the hernia, and he stands on the side of that place, and inserts his muscle between the hernia's tickle and raises the tickle of it above the parts beneath until the hernia is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the hand of the hernia from the parts beneath his belly. If the hernia is lighter, then understand that something else causes it to be suspended, so treat it carefully, for the displacement may return soon.
And it can also be reduced in another way: take a long stick with a round head, similar to a pilon of mortar, neither too thick nor too thin, and place it beneath the hernia; so that when you lay drapes on the head of the stick, the hernia stands according to the length of the stick, and extend your hand from it to the other side, and strengthen the opposite part, for the joint will return to its place at great speed.
And if the reduction is difficult due to all the causes we have mentioned, use this treatment: take a stick, its length should be about two arm-lengths, and its thickness four fingers, and shape it like this:
Then cover the head with a round cloth to prevent the stick from causing harm.
Then place yourself comfortably, holding the stick with your hand or arm between the affected parts, and rest the stick on the assistant and your arm and the end of your hand.
Place your arm on a scale according to its length, and extend your hand towards the affected parts, while the other hand is suspended from the other side, so that the joint can be treated at the right time.
And when the treatment of the patient is completed in any way that is possible for you, and you notice that you have left off the gentle touch of silk thread; then prepare a poultice with powder from millstones, mixed with egg albumen over all the muscles, so that they are turned away from it, and tightly bind the thread to the poultice, attach the patient's hand to the collar of the poultice, leave it, and do not remove the patient's hand for seven days.
And be sure to restrict the patient's food intake slightly, as long as the member is comfortable, for it is lighter on the healing of him.
Then provide the patient with more food after seven or five days, and exercise some movement; if it stops hurting and does not become worse, then it is healed.
But if the joint is dislocated due to moisture that happens to it or any other cause, then be sure that in such a case, hot cautery should be applied as mentioned in the chapter on cautery.
And if all this is done and after five days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the plaster and compression are reduced on him several times, but it does not heal and he cannot raise that arm to its normal position, then know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are already damaged or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never stay in its proper place.
In the case of dislocation, the foot and ankle or the joints behind should be manipulated with pressure and stretching to reduce it, until it returns to its proper place.
And the same treatment should be applied to any other compression, and care should be taken until it is healed.
And if the healing becomes more serious in the member and there is delay in its motion, then the disease uses frequent baths several times until that gravity is alleviated and returns to its original nature.
Chapter .xxvii.
On the cure for dislocation of the hip.
You know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and appears to return with difficulty; it is dislocated entirely, most notably in front compared to behind, and the dislocation of it is not hidden by any covering or touch, according to how it is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip, it becomes manifestly clear, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor can it move its muscles.
And be aware that you must cover the hip and reduce the dislocation as soon as it comes to a standstill before it becomes apostemic, for if it becomes apostemic, reduction is difficult, and complete healing is unlikely; especially when it's in the back parts, as it is most severe of all types of dislocations, causing great pain, and many times leads to death.
And for the restoration of the hernia, when it is possible to reduce it, extend your hand of the patient to two more directions, stretch their arms, and place the hands of the doctor on the sides and push the joint with the fingers of both hands until it returns to its proper place.
If the dislocation is in the front parts, then return it by bending your hand with your other hand, until it strikes the side of the hip joint with the tip of your palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey to reduction, then apply violent extension and strong motion.
And indeed, two assistants should extend the arm, and each assistant should hold this position firmly to avoid any weakness in the extension.
Then, turn the arm completely around, so that it is wrapped with a long piece of cloth or bandage over the patient's hand.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he applies some oil to it in order that these causes which help in the lubrication of the joint and facilitate its return. And then gently push the joint until it returns.
Then return the intestine to its cavity, which is paused over that lump where there is stiffness and adhesion, it is extracted with a loose and descending tightness, and the arm is suspended from the collarbone and left for several days.
Then it is loosened; and so if the joint is formed in its place, you loosen the ligament from it and leave that.
And if you see that the joint is not too tight, then you repeat the application of the plaster and ligament, and leave it for several days until it is extracted; and then you loosen it.
If it occurs due to gravity during the reduction of a joint, and its disposition is in motion, then administer humidification in baths and gentle friction, and rest, as long as it is relieved; or apply heat over the affected joint, if it's a case of greasy movement; and afterwards, wrap it up and place that over the bone during day and night. Then remove that and place this in a bath; and when it becomes clean, you rub the joint with gentle friction, and repeat over the affected area, as long as it is stiff due to movement, once, twice, three times. in baths, as long as it is relaxed.
And if you wish, apply a moist and roasted sheep's dung over the split, and wrap it tightly around that; do this several times, as it is moist and returns to its original state.
Chapter .xxviii.
On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, which is at the joint between the arm and hand.
In some cases, the shoulder can be dislocated, and its reduction is delicate, unlike other joints, but it is nevertheless crucial to act swiftly in reducing it as soon as it becomes dislocated, lest the location become inflamed or develop an abscess.
And the reduction of the dislocated shoulder involves placing the patient's hand on a table and extending their arm, while the doctor applies pressure or uses their palm to push the joint back into its socket.
However, it should be considered whether the palm is already resting on the patient's belly, in which case the patient places their back on a table for extension and reduction; if the dislocation occurred previously to the back of the hand, then the doctor's hand should be positioned intrinsically over the joint.
And therefore return as soon as possible; if not, tighten that compression on the hernia and let go of that; do not delay, otherwise you will suffer and cannot achieve its reduction any more than the days pass.
However, the joint pain may be due to the body's curvature; do not pay attention to any cause of the illness, but rather that the hand becomes softened and cannot grasp any cause; then you will know that the nerves are either crushed or stretched, and there is no generation in it except for its being tightened with a cautery suitable for its location, and thus it grants some relief.
Therefore, when the illness has returned, place the compression that we have prepared over it and leave it for several days; then loosen it and leave it, and exercise your hand on it.
If the movement of it is stopped and some discomfort occurs, then apply a lukewarm water compress and friction a few times, until it is relieved.
Chapter 29.
On the treatment of dislocated joints.
Sometimes, the joints become completely dislocated.
And when a joint is dislocated to the back of the palm or the belly of the patient, pinch the joint and push it back into place with your fingers, until it returns.
Then support the head of the joint, suspend the affected part, and leave it for two days.
Then suspend it and extend it until it is right again on that same day.
And at night, according to this narrative, continue to straighten it with care during the day and exercise it slightly at night; do this for several days until it becomes straight.
And make it appear as if this is the case, if it is dislocated in the mother's womb, and connect these parts to each other, and perform the first operation on it, until it is healed.
And make it appear as if this is the case when it is dislocated in other parts.
**Chapter XXX.**
**On the Treatment of Dislocated Spinal Vertebrae.**
When a dislocation occurs in any of the spinal vertebrae of the back or neck, and the bones are completely out of their normal positions, it is not possible to cure them at that time, as death often ensues for the patient.
And the sign of this is that the patient cannot control the treatment of the malady, and sometimes the muscles of his limbs or both legs or both arms, or even a spinal vertebra, are weakened; or it is completely dislocated and often removal of these to four parts is done.
Therefore, that which is already licked by the behind is called hemorrhoid.
The treatment for hemorrhoids involves considering whether they occur due to childhood issues, because at that time, neither cure nor complete healing is possible.
In cases where hemorrhoids are seen due to accident or impact or similar conditions, as the ancients said in their lengthy speeches about treatment, the most beneficial results come from it; but you have already been briefly treated of that for which there is little excuse due to the excessive amount, by my close proximity to understanding, to which I expose and shape myself according to various tools, by which I will show and disperse this.
And of those, only the one that occurs in the back itself by this condition is cured.
And indeed, the disease is spread over its face, covering almost all the walls, and extends below, causing great pain so that it cannot be endured.
Then place a straight stick, firmly fixed in the ground at the tip of the patient's foot around their head, and another stick with their feet on it at the other end of the bed.
The minister holds the stick, but it should not be fixed in a pit; and another minister holds the other according to that form.
Then wrap around the patient's head and below their chin with tight linen; extend the end of the linen to the stick that is against their head, tie it to that stick, and similarly attach the other end to the stick by their feet; adjust all the linens and tie those to the other stick opposite their feet.
And then apply the surgeon's knife to cut open the wound at the base of the leg, and do not allow the two legs and their ligaments, which are attached, to remain uncut, but nonetheless they should not be fully severed as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or he places them on a table, and then adjusts the patient's feet on the table until recovery occurs.
If recovery does not occur in this manner, take a table whose width or length is three bras long, and dig into the wall where we have said that the malady is most present, a location between the ends of the table. And then place the edge of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and gently presses until the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
And if you wish, open it again with your hand; and since you must be on the ground, place the patient's head at the back of your fist, the length of which should be an arm, and their head at the back of the other fist precisely two fists long; and the distance between each fist should be a palm, and already there will be a trace in each fist where the flow returns, and every part is firmly pressed to the ground so that no more pain occurs.
And take another fist-sized round object on which the flow turns, and turn it in both directions between the two fists.
And at the end of it, there is a trace where the object turns, the length of which is a palm where it turns; and in both other fists, they are similar to that one.
Then tighten the ligaments you have straightened on the patient's foot at the point where their head is placed, and the ligaments you have tightened on their thighs at the turn which is opposite their legs.
And then you should take each turn and have a minister twist the turn with their hand, and the doctor bend the spine as we have said.
Then, when the spine is returned to its place and the position is adjusted, cover it with a dry, clean bandage, and stop. Then place your hand over the bandage, starting from the table, where its width should be about three times or so the length of the affected area, and along the part of the spine.
And then, using the treatment we have mentioned, observe the patient's condition and provide them with subtle, nutritious food until they are healed.
And if any danger is perceived in the area at the end of healing, then medications that soften and soothe should be administered orally for a long time, as we have recommended; this can also be done by applying a thin layer of lead on that place.
And in some cases, there occurs an urgency in the rear of the spinal bones, and it is separated due to that dislocation; and it is that bone which you should already consider as imminently dangerous because it will cause great pain if this medicine is not promptly applied to it, for it can lead to death.
**Capitol XXXI.**
**On the Cure for a Dislocated Hip.**
You know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle should not be displaced so much, and this only happens to those whose other joints experience minor dislocation and curvature.
And the hip joint is displaced in four ways: when it is displaced inward, or outward, or forward, or backward.
And it is most often displaced in the joints inside, and less frequently in the front or rear joints.
The sign of dislocation in the inner joints is this: when you straighten the patient's leg towards the healthy side, the diseased side becomes longer and more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their foot towards the anus due to the pain. This is where the post-dislocated anus becomes cauterized from the heat, so that the head of the bone has already been affected here.
The sign of the condition in which dislocation occurs, whether inside or outside, is that the conditions of the disease are contrary to this accident.
The sign of dislocation occurring in the front joints is that the patient extends their leg completely, but still feels pain on the affected side, and if they attempt to walk, it becomes difficult. Their urine is retained, and the anus becomes cauterized; they must lie on their side for healing.
And the sign of a dislocation in the rear parts is that it does not extend the pain, nor can it bend opposite to the bent knee, and the leg's position is shorter than the other, and the joint becomes soft, and the end of the limb points to that place.
The main reduction for this dislocation is that you consider, if the dislocation is old and ancient, it has already been reduced by itself or properly treated with rest and according to its position, then it is not in need of further treatment; thus, there is no need for any additional provision.
For those in which the dislocation is recent and it belongs to one of the four types of dislocations, you must do as follows: return the joint to its place and extend it both inward and outward, and turn it to the right and left, so that it strongly returns and does not need other treatment.
Perhaps, if it does not return in this manner, you will need to prepare a strong assistant and extend the bed of the patient beyond them, or apply more bindings, or a linen which is tight over the pain, and another assistant extends their hand from that side so as to place their hands behind the patient's thighs; and another tightly binds the limb at its joint, and another minister holds the end of the binding.
And if it is an extension of the patient or of the limb within the angle of the fork, or behind the back at the base of the spine.
And it is the extension of all these at once, so long as the patient's pain is elevated to their chest and hangs pendulously.
And this type of extension is specially important for all four (extremities).
And so if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it will be good; otherwise, it will be necessary for every kind of case to speak of its own treatment.
In the reduction of the hernia, when it is dislocated and the dislocation occurs within the folds, the patient should be placed on their side; then, the ligaments should be tightened around the base of the fold in the area between the top of the hernia and the point where the pain begins; and finally, the ligament should be extended from the painful area to the highest part of the fork.
Then, another assistant should firmly grasp the patient's thighs and press the swollen area of the affected thigh, extending outwards with great force, so that it returns to its place.
And this type of treatment is for the more delicate cure, whereby this member is returned to its place, unlike other types of treatment.
If the patient cannot stand on their feet due to this type of treatment, then both feet of the patient must be tied together with a strong ligature, lighter than usual, on both legs and both toes.
And the length of each part should be such that it is four times the width of the other, and the affected leg should be extended more than the other by a factor of two.
Then the hernia should be suspended over the top of the leg, and placed in the lower part; and the length of it should be from the ground two arms' lengths.
Then command a strong young person to reduce the head of the hernia, and hang the other hernia from another young person, while the other young person gently pushes the hernia back into place with firm pressure, so that the joint returns to its location quickly.
In the proper reduction, when there is a dislocation from its normal position, it is necessary to keep the patient immobile on their side as we have recommended in the case of a dislocated joint; and tighten the ligament specifically around the injured thigh and on their chest.
Then use two sticks as supports: one on the patient's feet and another on their head; and place a moist cloth around the middle of the thigh where the hernia is located to prevent damage while keeping the extension of the parts below from being pulled.
And each assistant should extend their part, and the doctor with his hand guides the reduction according to art (or skill).
And when the dislocation is in the front parts, you should ensure that the leg is extended slightly, and according to this method, the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the affected joint, then he tightens with his other hand, and by applying this pressure, he reduces the dislocation.
And if the dislocation is in the back parts, you should not extend the patient on the side, but elevate him above the ground; once you have established that he is resting on a hard surface, thus as we said about the position of the body when one joint is dislocated to the outside, and according to what we said about stretching the ligaments, there should be no harm.
And it should be administered compression with a splint on the area where the joint is dislocated.
Therefore, when the reduction is complete according to need — and the sign of the reduction of the hernia is not hidden from you, since you extend two thighs from the patient and when you see those folds and the hernia extrudes its thigh and you expand your excuse, then you know that the member according to need has returned — and now you arrange two things and place a bandage and pull out a bandage so that the opening is not worsened in any of the parts; and keep the patient at rest for three days or four.
Then carefully remove the ligature and the bandage, and compare one thigh to the other.
Now, if you see those folds in appearance, then you will know that the dislocation is already healed, and therefore release the patient.
And if you see any sign of softening, then return and bandage that, pull out that according to your initial stretch, and release it in three days.
And then gently pull it, causing the patient to walk slowly on some surface for a few days, until it is healed.
**Chapter XXXII**
**On the Treatment of Dislocated Joints**
A dislocated joint can occur in three ways: when it is pushed out of place, when it is pulled inward, and when it moves to the side, but it is not dislocated when it is pushed forward.
And the sign of a dislocated joint is that you command the patient to apply pressure on the affected area; then you know that the joint is dislocated.
And the restoration of dislocated joints is to cease the patient's pressure immediately, so that he extends his limb as much as possible; to hold his thigh against his chest, and to rest his foot between his legs; and then to press the dislocated joint firmly in your palm, and to interlock your fingers over the joint on both sides of the dislocation, and to stretch out your arm until the joint returns to its place.
And the sign of recovery is that their leg adheres to the thigh in a non-painful position.
Then apply a plaster to adhere the leg to the thigh, and then bind those parts with a bandage for three or four days, and then remove the bandage.
And do not use the patient's mobility for some days, until they are healed and comfortable.
If the reduction of the hernia is not urgent, then administer plenty of extensions to the laments of which treatment of the mentioned hernia has been previously described.
Chapter .XXXIII.
On the treatment of the dislocation of the talus.
Sometimes the ankle is remedied by a slight removal, and sometimes it is dislocated completely; the dislocation occurs either within the joints or outside them.
And the sign of the dislocation is that the ankle swells proceeding to the part where it is dislocated.
The treatment for the dislocation is with gentle reduction, and it should be extended to facilitate movement of the muscles and bones, and then wrapped until it heals.
But in the cure when it is completely dislocated, it is necessary to cease the pain immediately, and have a strong and able minister at the back of the body at the middle part of the dislocation.
And then you should place your right hand on the top of the foot from the dominant side, and your left hand below the foot at the location of the ankle.
And then gently pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and with your left make two movements, then extend your left hand; push the foot of the patient towards the bed on the opposite side from the leg that is working.
And do this two times as we have counted.
And on the third movement, push the foot of the patient towards the bed, and you are at the ankle.
So if you return in one movement or two according to this manner, and turn the foot inside out, it is good; otherwise, continue the operation over that part.
If you are forbidden from reducing it in this manner that we have recommended, then have the patient lie on their back on the ground, and stretch out a hard piece of wood over their chest, and press between their thighs, and wrap them tightly with a cloth so that the hernia does not escape.
And then the practitioner should hold the patient's legs, and another minister should extend the foot along its toes or with the aid of a ligature placed on the collar of the foot; and he should stretch out each minister in opposition to the extension of his part, and the padding between the thighs of the patient should retain him, so that the matter of the hernia is not drawn into the folds left beyond its extension.
Then the physician should re-align the dislocation with his hands, and another minister should hold the healthy thigh away from the affected side, so that the dislocation returns to its natural position.
And when the dislocation returns to its place and it is determined that the reduction is successful, then apply a plaster and reinforce those ligaments strongly, and tie the foot with ligament to the leg.
And be careful of the nerves that are behind the sole of the foot, so that the ligament over it is not violent and damages those parts strongly.
And then place a poultice on it for two days or three; if the inflammation subsides, remove the poultice.
And on the third day or the fourth, remove the poultice; and forbid the patient from moving for forty days. If it becomes necessary to move the patient from that position, there is a risk that the dislocation will not heal properly and become corrupted, and this can prevent recovery.
And if an abscess forms, then apply what we have mentioned about treatment and immersion in the place where it occurred, rather than other remedies, as long as it is healed.
Chapter .xxxiiii.
On the treatment of dislocation of the joints of the feet.
Know that one who is dislocated should be splinted to a certain extent for their treatment; and what is not difficult, it is quickly healed.
If the dislocation is in some sensitive part of the foot, then you should make the patient lie down with their foot elevated either on a pillow or table, and keep it that way as if they were walking.
And then you stand by the foot, place your hand over what threatens the joints, and gently press the foot towards the affected area until it returns to its normal position, and you observe that it is splinted and does not appear in the prominent location.
And then you place a board under the patient's foot that takes all the weight, which has two ends, and gently tighten the structure decently and firmly for three days; and afterwards, you remove it and make them rest from walking for several days, until they are completely healed and free from pain.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of the types of dislocation that are caused by illness or fracture or any other injury.
When any of these causes occurs and you perceive yourself in the task of healing it and restoring it, you often end up succumbing to death.
And for this reason, one should not presumptuously assume that anyone capable of healing is knowledgeable in the art, but rather those who have long studied it, with mercy and compassion; late, not hasty, and who use cautery only when necessary, leaving the judgment to divine will, unless one hopes for salvation from perdition and relief from suffering, and in whom there appears some hope. And therefore one should strive as much as possible to reduce it at the beginning of the cause, before applying cautery.
And when the member returns to its normal state, administer treatment with gentle care and cure the pain with moist poultices as appropriate for it.
If a dislocation is accompanied by a fracture and occurs in the joints where bones are separated, then you must drill through their statements and do as we have said for simple ailments of this kind that precede in the places of those.
And beware and avoid, according to your virtue, the instrument in the ways of fear as it is preceded by my prediction; for it is better for you to honor your Creator, maintain your glory, and heal your true body with those things at the right time. Thus, ends the words of Albucasim perfectly, from which God be blessed. Amen.
