Oh, my sons, when you have completed this book, which is the last of medical science, through the fulfillment of its purpose it has come to an end, and through its explanations, and through its declarations, I believe you will find great satisfaction in this treatise, which is a part of the most important operation, namely, surgery.
For surgery, considered the most important operation in our region and in our time, is shrouded in great secrecy, as knowledge of it has declined and only a few brief descriptions can be found in the books of the Ancients, which have led to the development of many errors and misconceptions, as the understanding of its principles is closed, and its power and art are obscured.
And I have found it necessary to revive the order of this treatise through a second method of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and in order to include illustrations of cautery tools and other surgical instruments used for the work, as an addition to the explanations, and preparation, which is essential.
But the cause why our artful physician does not employ his hand as he should in our time is that the art of medicine is long and requires expertise in anatomy to understand the growth of members and their shapes, the union and separation of them, the knowledge of bones, nerves, and cartilage, and the names of these, and the extraction of them; also of pulsing veins and static ones, and the places of their emission.
And for this reason Hippocrates says that the name is misleading, but in practice it is small, especially in the art of healing.
We have already spoken of this in the introduction to this book; for those who are ignorant of what we have said about anatomy, it is not to be wondered that they fall into errors from which men may die, as you have seen many such people formed in this science but lacking in true knowledge and experience.
You see a foolish doctor who has cut an infected ulcer on the thigh of a woman and cut some arteries in her thigh so that much blood flows inside, causing the woman to die between his hands.
And you see another doctor who put his tongue in the mouth of a man who had been biting his teeth, and the tooth was large, and he managed to pull it out with a piece of the jawbone, so that man died on the third day.
And you have already urgently extracted it, and you see that due to the size of the tooth and the state of the patient, you know that he will die.
And you see another doctor who was hired by a duke from our land for surgery, and he operated on a black castrated man whose thigh had a fracture; due to the doctor's ignorance, he removed the fracture, over the wound, with saws and nails with strong tension, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
And then, according to their desires, release the tension, relax the muscles, and rest for some days, and command that we loosen the ligament; in this way, too, if the matter is in the feet or the legs, it will heal completely and be cured.
And so, having called upon it and prepared to loosen the ligament, peace is achieved and thus, their pain disappears.
However, if the corruption is confirmed in the member and it cannot be restrained, the corruption will continue to spread throughout the member until it reaches a dangerous state of illness.
And there is another doctor who perforates a cancerous ulcer, which festers for some days until the malignancy of it grows stronger under its lordship.
Which causes is because the crust of the ulcer is pure melancholy humor; it does not cover that it will reach him through all means, but rather should be in the member which suffers that it should entirely be consumed.
And therefore, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation should be divided into two parts: one is in an operation associated with health, and the other in a deed which is perilous to major dispositions.
And you have already encountered this in every place in this book where operations are spoken of with error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to guard these things and lay down those, so that the ignorant do not take them as a path to speak and slander you.
And therefore, take up your weapons with diligence and the protection of God, and your patients with ease and firmness.
And use the best way for the grace of God, leading to salvation and glorious success, leave behind terrible illnesses with difficult healing, and set down your weapons of what makes you afraid, so that despair in your faith and in your name does not escape you: for more remains for your glory, and also for the honor of God and after your sanctity.
Cut open some of their wounds: Do not treat bad ailments with bad medicines, so that bad doctors do not become famous.
And you have already divided this book into three chapters.
Begin the division of the book, and first, the first part. The first chapter arranged deals with the feet, in the forms of instruments and the tools of cautery, and anything else that is necessary for the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter deals with incision and piercing, and also with cupping glasses, plaisters, and the extraction of arrows and similar objects, all described in detail regarding the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the treatment of twists and similar conditions; a chapter arranged on internal foot anatomy and the forms of instruments.
Understand what I have said about the quality of the youth of that cautery and the documents of it, and in what condition cautery is prohibited.
Therefore, it says that the discourse on the quality of cautery's youth and the documents of it is long and prolix, subtle for knowledge, and secrets concealed; and already many savants have spoken of them, and there are disagreements among them, and I will content myself with a small part of their discourses, fearing prolongation.
And therefore it is said that cautery will relieve every general connection universally, which is of matter or its matter, excepting two connections, which are connections with their own matter.
In the connection that is dry and hard with matter, it becomes disordered; for some say that cautery is helpful to such, while others say the contrary, that cautery is not appropriate in illness caused by dryness and hardness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it would be inappropriate to treat an illness that is dry and hard with a moist and hot medicine.
And those who say the contrary state that cautery is beneficial in all dry and hard illnesses that are found in human bodies, because when you compare the human body and its humidity to the connection of fire, you find the body to be harsh.
And he says, based on the argument of those who hold this view, that he has already discovered this through experience several times.
However, it is not appropriate that anyone who has already been trained and practiced in the art of cautery on various parts of the body, who knows the diversity of the composition of humans, the disposition of illnesses within them, the causes of those illnesses, and the circumstances of their occurrence, as well as the passage of time, should come to this.
In other cases, there is no cause for fear, especially with dry and hot illnesses, as all doctors are in agreement about these, and they do not disagree on the use of cautery to treat them.
And know, my children, that the secret of healing by cautery with fire and the goodness of it, are superior to medical cauterization, because fire is simple, its action only affects the member being cauterized, without causing pain to other members with its proximity, except for a slight discomfort.
The action of medicinal cauterization, however, affects distant members and can severely disrupt the healing of a member suffering from a difficult-to-cure illness, and it offers strong aid.
Kindle the fire, for its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not harm, but only surpasses. It is already known to us through experience and the longevity of studying the art regarding the truth of causes; and for this reason, I excuse the length of my speech. If it were not that I do not wish to reveal the secret fire to you in this brief moment, I would speak at length about its nature in the body and the quality of its operation in expelling illnesses, demonstrated through philosophical discourse, which would be sharpened in your minds.
And know, sons, that the times of disagreements regarding when to perform cautery and place pads are during the time of spring.
And you say that cauterization is convenient at all times, so that the harm caused by the passage of time is overcome by the healing properties of cautery, and even more so when cautery is for pains or necessary pains, severe and acute, which do not suffer from delay, because it is feared those that come with malice, which is better than allowing further harm to enter over time.
And thus, do not rest in your feet, oh sons, for it is only the common people and foolish doctors who cherish such a malady that is cured by cautery; it does not completely disappear, and those consequences persist.
And the cause is not thus as they believe, for cautery is merely a place of medicine that alters the composition and dries up the humors which are the cause of the pain.
Yet doctors may use cautery superfluously over medicine due to the desire for its effectiveness and the power of its operation and the greatness of their lord.
And it is possible that their illness may return at some time in the future, according to the complexity of the illness and the location of their malady, and the effectiveness of it, and what has been prepared within them from the addition of excesses within them, and what has come upon them from their intake of food and similar causes; but the illness on which cautery is administered, if it be a subtle illness in members with few excesses and humors, just as with a tooth cautery for pain and similar conditions, it is possible that that pain may not return in them, but this is done in small doses.
And it is commonly said in popular speech that a cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is right speech, not to those who do not understand it, for they believe that it is no cure that profits from medicine or any other cause except cautery.
And the reason is to the contrary; and I understand that a cautery is the last remedy of medicine not to be when we apply the methods of healing in some illnesses, and those medicines do not help, and then at the end of the cause, we administer a cautery, and it profits from that. And from here it follows that a cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding of popular people and too many foolish doctors.
And they said that a gold cautery is better than an iron cautery, and they did not say this except because of the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance.
And they say that the place of cautery does not burn unless it is absolutely true, for you have already seen and experienced that it only does so in certain bodies, and cauterization on that part is good and better than as they said; nevertheless, when you make a cautery with fire from gold, it is not declared to you, for the gold is consumed according to the amount you want due to the heat of the fire, and if you hold it over the flame, the gold melts into the fire, and some sheets fall into the fire so that the craftsman can catch them because of the occupation with that.
And for that, cauterization with iron must be done more lightly and more precisely to ensure the correctness of the operation.
And you have already organized this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and have ordered those from the head down to the feet, so that I am now asking him what he wants from it.
**First Chapter**
This cauterization confers a benefit upon the affected area suffering from humidity and cold, which are two causes of severe and numerous rheumatic fluxes, called corissa, affecting the head, the parts of the senses (eyes and ears), and also sleep, toothache, and throat pain, as well as any illness that arises from cold, similarly to paralysis, apoplexy, and similar conditions in those illnesses.
The method of this cauterization is as follows: first, command the illness to be evacuated using a laxative on the head, for three or four nights, depending on the severity of the illness, the age of the patient, and their usual condition.
And then he commands them to shave their head, and prepares the surgical instrument between your legs on a clean bench, and places his hands on the patient's feet.
Then he places the razor on the sole of your foot, between your toes. However, if the affected area is in the middle of the foot, mark that place with a try, and then apply the olive-shaped pointed cautery to it.
And then he places that on the healthy area marked with a try, in such a way that it descends, causing the patient's hand to be gradually restricted, and you turn it.
Then he gently lifts his hand and examines the area, and if you see that the bone is already exposed, along with some amount of pus, he raises his hand again, and if the instrument is not cold, he returns it to that or another place, as I have told you.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the area and leave it for three days.
Then apply pressure over the infected area at the border, and leave it until the scorch of the fire is destroyed. Then treat the area with a four-part remedy until it is healed.
And it is said that when the Roman plague opens, the more easily the wound heals, so it is better and more rejuvenating.
And they say that some of them cauterize the bone within the bone, and hold the cautery until some part of the bone's nature is hardened.
Then remove whatever is attached to the bone, and then clean it.
And they say that the cautery should be applied to the rear, first strengthening the bone with great effort as it passes through the bone, and this is the shape of the small knife: And they estimate that from that place, the vapours of the head escape.
And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and it should be treated until it is consolidated.
I do not have a clear understanding of these two types of cautery from what I have seen, but according to some people's way of thinking; nevertheless, in my opinion, the best course for health is to follow when it is appropriate; because the head has been exposed through the solution of its continuity as we have witnessed in the other members, and even more so when the nature of the disease is feverish.
And the specific type of cautery that comes first is most effective and best for me; and from that, to that work, for health.
Second chapter.
Of the cautery of the head.
When a chronic and prolonged pain occurs in the entire head and this prolongs the suffering, it is necessary to use blades, hooks, saws, ointments, poultices, salves, cats, dogs, chickens, and similar remedies, and most importantly, if cautery has already been performed with a tool that does not address any of the underlying causes, consider that the strength of the disease lies in the nature of its head; and if there is no significant heat or inflammation, another cautery should be applied to it slightly. And then cauterize it over the edge of his head with a cautery, as long as the wound is open. Cut the wound and expose the amount of bone we have found, and cauterize it with a cautery at the back of the head in the area known as the base, which is where the wind is stopped. And apply your hand to it, do not expose the bone, for the disease finds great pain through it, different from the pain of all other cauterizations on the head.
And you should perform this cauterization in its proper place, because you know that the cauterization which treats the horns of the head and the occipital region is a more subtle cauterization than the one performed on the middle part of the head; and this is the form of it.
Capital terms.
On the treatment of old migraines.
When a severe pain in the head or a persistent pain within the skull occurs, it is treated with drugs that clarify the head, and other cures, which I have mentioned regarding the deviances of illnesses; and if these do not prove effective, then cauterization on it is performed in two ways: either cauterization with acute medicinal fire, or with iron.
You may use cautery or burning medicines that you take a hot iron and scorch it, and amputate the ends of them from both heads. And then you incise the painful area in the temple with a scalpel until it is done, leaving the cord intact, as long as it remains hidden.
And then you apply a tight bandage to restrict it by gradual constriction, and leave it for three hours; afterward, you remove the bandage, and place the affected area in cold water for two or three days, and then apply a poultice over it until the pain subsides.
And then you apply a cure to it with a poultice until it heals.
And if you find that these methods do not work, consider using some of the burning medicines that I have written about in the two previous treatises on burning medicines.
Prepare the cautery according to this manner: take a hot iron whose shape is as follows:
It is called a clave, because its head has the shape of a claw with some curvature, and in the middle part there is a small prominence.
Then apply pressure on the painful area and hold your hand—to prevent the wound from becoming infected—and slowly turn the iron at a controlled speed.
And if the quantity of blood stuck due to the specific condition of the vein is such that it matches the amount of blood, raise your hand so that the artery below is not affected, preventing any flow of pus.
Then clean the area with salt water and place a bandage over it, leaving it for three days; apply plenty of ointment around the wound until it is healed.
And if you see, sharpen the end of the scalpel according to cautery, and be careful not to make an incision into an artery in this newly acquired wound.
Capitol quarter.
On the cauterization of ancient wounds.
When you treat an ancient wound as we have described in the previous section on treatment and fail to take advantage of the cure, and the disease returns due to lack of light (or proper care), then ignite the cautery knife until it is white hot, indicating its readiness. Place your hand over the area of pain for a moment, making a line along the length of which the greatest part of the pain occurs, or as we say, its focus; and rest your hand for a moment while you make an incision into the arterioles and penetrate within the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to be careful about the continuation of the mandible, which is crucial for chewing, and that the wound not adhere and affect the nerves responsible for it, and that no spasms occur.
And if it is about the care and caution of the flow of blood from an artery that is severed, as in the case of its sudden severing, there is fear, especially for those who do not understand what they are doing and lack patience; and let the operation on them begin at the beginning.
And you should recall the regulation of the flow of blood from an accidental artery injury according to its manner in this place within this book.
And if you find that this malady does not respond to the cautery and see that the patient's condition is tolerable, apply the cautery in the middle part of the head as we have mentioned, and treat the wound until it is healed.
And if you see, apply the cautery as we have said in the chapter on tightening the bowstring with cauteries that have two blades; this is the better and more effective cauterization.
**Chapter on Gout**
On the treatment of ear pain.
When ear pain is caused by a foreign body and is treated with cleansing and other remedies as mentioned in the previous sections, and if the pain persists, apply heat with a cautery, which is known as a "puncta," shaped as follows:
Then bring the cautery close to the fire, and rotate it around the entire ear, or in a circular motion if the pain is in any particular area. Continue applying the heat from the cautery to the affected area little by little until the pain subsides and the spot becomes numb.
And if the cautery with the points is applied all over the ear and some are detached, then treat the areas as they heal.
Chapter .vi.
**On the cauterization of tortuous (varicose) veins.**
The tortuous veins that are cured and treated by cauterization are nothing but the species that come from flux (venous insufficiency), as we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
Avoid cauterization of the species that should be treated by drying or spasm of the nerve.
When you treat that species of tortuous vein with pulling and squeezing and no relief is found, know that you cauterize the illness in three places: first, you burn the tip of the auricle, second, a small part of its temple, and third, the junction of two lips.
And hold your cautery in the opposite direction of the diseased part, for the softening is only seen where the part that appears to be healed begins.
The method of cauterization is that you cauterize the affected area with a hot iron directly on the skin, placing it slightly above the affected part of the ear, and on the temple, its length corresponding to the length of the finger, and hold your hand over the cautery until the quantity of the substance of the wound is burned.
This is the form of the cautery, and it is especially from the cutting knife, whose shape is presented in front. However, it may be even more subtle, as you can see with your own eyes, and take care to avoid any excessive roughness on it.
And then take care of the area that is exposed during the process until it heals.
Capital VII.
On the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and its cure does not respond to what has been said, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize it with four cauteries: first on all the corners of their head; second, at the middle point of the head, as we have mentioned; and third, on the groin. And the manner of the cautery is done according to what has been mentioned above.
And it is cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; it is the last step; and then its cure is in what you have processed.
Capital VIII.
Of the cauterization of oblivion done by flame.
They should be given to the patient at the beginning, large grains and pills that the servants will administer.
And then shave the patient's head completely, and place on their chest the plaster described in the treatise on plasters.
And repeat this several times, as it is the manner of cauterization. And do this according to the order of those methods that I have already mentioned.
And thus, if it is for the good of the patient, do so; otherwise, make three cauterizations to him on the last part of his head, descending from the higher part of the head to the lower part of the neck. And between each cautery, he applies pressure to reduce it, and carefully manages the cautery according to the procedure.
If you can add more and the patient tolerates it, then perform the cautery in the middle position; and if you need even more, cauterize on both corners.
Carefully tend to the area that is healed; and make the cautery olive-shaped according to the form previously given.
Chapter IX.
On cauterization and softening of the entire body.
Understand that you must proceed in the softening of the head according to what we have said; then carefully shave the patient's head, and cauterize it with a cautery in the middle position on the head, and cauterize all the corners of the head, and cauterize on the posterior part of it, and cauterize three times on the spinal bones of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the case of a severe illness that causes stiffness in the body and tolerable ailments, when the pain is intense, use four cauteries on the spinal columns of the back, and later apply cautery until the extreme pain of the patient is relieved, and raise your hand. Then take care that it heals properly, and this cautery is olive oil.
Chapter X.
On the cauterization of epilepsy.
Epilepsy is not cauterized, but only that epilepsy caused by phlegm.
And therefore, we must purify the brain of the patient at the beginning when he has had fever and other cures that we have mentioned in the previous division when the illness is severe and the patient can endure no more medicine.
And if it is a child who cannot endure medicines, then administer liquids and soft foods to them for several days, as a remedy for the diet.
Then shave the patient's head, and apply a cautery to that place with a cautery in the middle part of the head according to the previous manner, and another cautery on the occipital region of them, and over any corner of the head that has been cauterized. And if the patient is strong and tolerates it, then apply cauteries as mentioned above, having a paralytic and soothing effect on the body over the cervical and lumbar spines.
And apply the olive cautery as mentioned above.
If the patient is a child, then apply gentle cauteries according to this manner.
Chapter .xi.
On the cauterization of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted corrupt humors and excessive phlegm, then cauterize it with cauteries as we have mentioned in its having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess of fluids declining into melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then it is necessary to give him something that purifies his brain according to what has been previously divided in the treatment.
Then shave the head of the patient, then properly make a cut on the circle around it, and then place a bandage over the middle part of the head.
And the patient should feel relaxed, and be held from all sides.
And then apply a liniment; it is more worthy to border before sheep. And heat that above the fire with a tempered temperature according to measure, which says suffering when it is most in him. Then take that in the middle place of his head in the circle, and loosen it within so that it is chilled.
And do this to the patient once a week throughout the entire period until it is healed; or if you wish, make small points with a cautery according to its need, but hold your hand over it as well so that it does not burn too much. This type of cautery moistens the brain equally.
Then return that limb soaked in hot water or woolen bands.
Chapter .xii.
On the draining of water from the swelling.
When the onset of water in the swelling is indicated by the signs that I have mentioned in the previous division, then it begins to drain and provide the patient with a drink that purifies the head, and attend to all humidity.
And immerse that part in a bath with a degassing agent for several days.
Then command the patient to comb their head, and cauterize that area with a hot iron at the middle of the head; and cauterize that area with two irons on either temple if it is the onset of water in two swells, or on one side if it is the onset of water in one swell.
Cut with a cautery all the veins and arteries that are left by the chain; and the cauterizes should be on that length in the width of the temples.
And be careful of blood flows when cauterizing; and if you see flow of blood from it, stop any further treatment, which is within your power.
And come to have knowledge which is extracted from arteries and amputation of those, and caution against blood flows.
And sometimes cauterization is performed on the neck, leaving two bones with two cauterizes, thus producing.
Chapter XIII.
On the cauterization of ancient tears.
When tears from the eyes are frequent and through veins and arteries which are in the manifest place on the head outside, it is observed that this causes excess fluid in the flaccid muscles, then cauterize that with a cautery as we have mentioned in the chapter on starting hot water in the eyes, cauterize in the middle part of the head and two cauterizations below the temples, and two cauterizations below the cervix between two bones. And if there is additional indigestion, then cauterize it across the entire length of the tail of the intestine at the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter XIII.
On cauterization of nasal discharge.
When treating a patient with the condition we have described above and your treatment is not effective, then prepare and make them drink medications for three nights; then shave their head, and cauterize the affected areas with a hot iron cautery or olive oil cautery. And then apply the cautery, striking it twice on both eyelids, leaving a small hair intact.
And be careful not to ignite that.
And the form of this cautery claw is as follows.
Chapter XV.
On the mollification of eye lids with cautery.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by disease or moisture, apply a cautery to that eyelid with this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
And if you, apply the cautery to both eyelids with a small claw in each, extending them from the tempora. And the length of each cautery should be according to the quantity of the swelling.
And do not press too hard with the cautery, but according to the amount that the third part of the eyelid is adhered.
Chapter XVI.
Regarding the cautery of the eyelid, when the hairs change to the inside parts and press on the eye, apply the cautery to the eyelid.
When the hairs within the eyelid are pressed against it, applying cautery to the eyelid is done in two manners: either by making a cut or by using a medicinal fire.
If you are using fire as cautery, command the patient to open their eyes wide so that all their hairs are exposed, making them long and thin; and if you apply it again later, tighten the eyelids of the patient with a bandage so that the hairs do not grow back.
Therefore, when they are clean and washed, place the patient's head on the bed, and gently pull down on the eyelid of their eye, indicating a sign according to the shape of a dead leaf, and it is the beginning of the signal close to the hair.
And then apply a cold compress or a thick paste of egg white and herbs to the eye.
And then apply the hot cautery, which has this shape.
And then cauterize along the indicated figure, little by little, in repeated motions, until the surface of the wound is completely sealed, just as it was with a leaf of myrtle, entirely visible.
The sign of the patient's recovery is that you see the eyelid of the eye contract and the hairs stand up at the site of the eye's puncture.
And so raise your hand and place it there for three days, then apply pressure to the area at the edge until the swelling subsides. And then treat that with vinegar until it heals.
If it returns through the skin for any reason, and the eyelid becomes softened, then do the cautery on that again just as you initially did.
If the hairs are in the eyelid, then cauterize it until it is raised to its natural position and healed so that the hairs do not smell bad.
But the cautery with burning medicines is what you order for the patient to remove the hairs so that they do not grow back and are healed, and then make a leaf-shaped patch from cloth to cover it.
And then apply soap known for its cleansing properties and a living agent, or something similar, and mix those causes well, making it into a paste so that it is not cooled; and spread this over the paper formed like a myrtle leaf, and place it on one or both wounds; and leave the fragrant edge dipped in egg albumen, and keep the patient's head in a cool place.
And then stop talking about the medicine and apply a small amount, not too much, so that the patient does not feel the sting of the medicine, for its sting is like fire.
And so, as you continue to observe the patient's response to the medicine, stop it when the pain from the treatment ceases, and then resume the application of the medicine, washing the wound with water; and consider whether the eyelid has been raised as it should be after being cleaned by fire or an incision, for that is a good sign. If the medicine does not return to the area where it was first applied without causing further irritation, your operation will succeed, and the wound will begin to heal.
And then apply pressure to the area until the tension of the adhesion is relieved, and treat it with a healing ointment or other remedies until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you, in your operation, to exercise careful vigilance so that no part of the medicine falls out, and if after a few days the eyelid becomes softened due to some cause from the pus in the eye, then apply your medicine again to that place where the eyelid has become softened, and precisely as you did at the beginning, and let it act until it is healed.
And this is the way to make the poultice.
And you know that the eyes of men differ in size and shape, and therefore your treatment must be adapted accordingly.
And let the way of treatment not be hidden from those who study this art.
Chapter XVII.
On the cauterization of a fistula in the tear duct of the eye.
When you treat a fistula as we have discussed in the sections on diseases and your treatment does not confer success, then know that you cauterize it according to this manner: command the patient to rest their head on their side, and hold their head with a minister between their thighs in such a way that it is neither moved nor agitated by their own head.
And then place a small amount of hot wax or a paste of goose grease on the tear duct of the eye.
And then heat the cautery whose form is as follows:
which is curved, in the shape of a cane or a quill, from one end where the cautery is made.
And if you look, they penetrate into the other extremity. And if you want to get out this way with an attempt.
However, he who is experienced is better at the work of healing.
And press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus and dry it up. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the abscess from them.
Then place over it the hot cautery, and with your hand, gently press against the part of the nose, so that your hand or the patient's pain is not aggravated, and apply the cautery to the edges of the ulcer and burn it away.
And therefore, if at the beginning of applying the cautery it penetrates into the bone, that is good; otherwise, repeat the cautery once or twice, if necessary, and leave it in place for three days, then apply pressure over that area with a border and surround it with an antiseptic ointment until it heals.
If after passing ten days it does not heal, then apply a strong corrosive medicine over it until the bone is exposed and cut according to what is convenient in its chapter.
There is another way to treat a fistula, which some masters mentioned first: enter the place of the fistula and clean it, then apply pressure on that small fissure whose form is thus: and pour into it as much melted lead as necessary; hold your hand with good tension, avoiding any harm to the patient so that the melted lead does not reach the wound; and cover the part where you are applying pressure over the patient's wound with a cloth soaked in honey or water, so that the lead hardens on the fistula and heals it by extraordinary means.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, it is good; otherwise, it will be necessary to administer a drain from the nose and return the fistula to its place in the nose as it should be.
**Chapter XVIII**
**On the Cauterization of Hernia**
Frequent accidents cause fissures in the lips, especially in children's lips.
Therefore, if you treat those fissures as we have said in the previous sections and do not profit from your treatment, then use a hot iron in the shape of a knife as follows:
and the cavity of it according to the thinness of the knife.
Place your hand carefully over those cracks so that the cautery reaches the depth of the cracks.
And then take care of that dressings while it is still fresh.
**Capitol XIX**
**On the Cauterization of Fistulas in the Mouth**
When, during the extraction of the uvula, the palate, or the teeth roots, bleeding occurs and it does not stop, and a fistula forms, and you do not treat it properly, then you should ignite a cautery according to the size of the fistula, and insert that flame into the opening of the fistula, and with your hand, gently guide the burning tip until it reaches the depth, and repeat this once or twice; and take care of the dressing as we have said for the healing process.
And so if the wound is incised and cleaned, it is good; otherwise, it becomes necessary to expose the location and remove the corrupted bone as described in its chapter.
**Capitol XX.**
On the cauterization of teeth and the softening of vessels.
When the vessels are softened by moisture and the teeth are loosened, and treatment with medicines does not help, then place the patient's head on the affected area, and shape the cautery so that it approaches the tooth, but do not press too hard so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth being treated.
Then remove your hand, and repeat the cautery several times as desired.
Then make the patient gargle with salt water and do this for an hour, then stop it, because the loosened tooth will be firmly set, the softened gums will tighten, and the moistened humors will dry out.
Chapter .xxi.
About the treatment of tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to coldness or there is swelling or pus, and the treatment with medicine does not help, then cauterization is performed in two ways: either with a cow's hoof cautery or with a fire cautery.
Cautery with a cow's hoof involves taking the hoof of a cow and piercing it in the fire until it becomes hot, then handling it carefully, wrapping it over the affected tooth, and pressing it against the aching tooth until it cools down.
And repeat this several times until the heat from the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you see, dip some cloth or cotton in the wound on top of the tooth, place that over the painful spot, and place the heated iron on it until the iron reaches the depth of the tooth's cavity.
However, the use of fire for cauterization only applies to external wounds or cuts, and it should not be too severe nor should the heat of the fire reach the hernia's opening.
Then shape the cautery to fit, place it over the tooth and hold your hand over it until the cautery cools down; do this several times as the pain may return either on that day or the next.
And ensure that, with urgency in preparing the cautery, the patient opens their mouth well and holds it for an hour, then spit it out; this is the shape of the cautery.
And apply a cautery where you have made an incision as best as you can.
And this is the shape of the cannula:
Chapter XXII.
On cauterization of extrophy.
When extrophy is caused by fluid and humors that do not obey digestion due to medicines, and you need to force them slightly, then apply the cautery flame according to this form, having two sharp ends so that the smoke goes up from one end, and pause the ignited flame on the affected area once, and repeat if needed until it reaches the depth of the apostema.
And if the apostema is small, then pause the cautery according to the size of the apostema, and wrap it tightly for three days, pausing to apply a cool compress to the affected area until any remaining burn has healed.
And then apply that ointment and bandages until it is healed.
**Chapter XXIII**
On the cauterization of raw wounds and the constriction of arteries.
When humidity appears on the lung's surface and particularly when it is chilled by contact, one must understand that this illness needs to be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that place with a pointed instrument in the affected area.
And be careful not to penetrate the gullet with the cautery nor inflame the patient's bowels, but only slightly.
And cauterize that area or another cautery as needed on the joint of the neck in the last spine of the patient. The cautery of him is fastened in the manner previously described.
Then apply care to that as previously described until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII
On cauterization for lung diseases and cough.
When cough and lung diseases are caused by excessive humidity, and the patient has no fever or sputum, and it is an old condition, then cauterize with two cauteries on the furcula in the areas where the lungs are congested and painful; and another cautery at the mid-point of the foot between the big toe and the second toe; and fasten the cautery as previously described.
And if you wish, your puncturing cautery can be the one called a point, the shape of which precedes in the puncturing of earache pain.
And make punctures within these; and then carefully treat that with the medicines that are mentioned, before it is healed.
And now the cautery has three points for cauterization, and it is done in this way: once you can make three cauteries according to this form.
Chapter XXV.
On cauterization of the titillary (veins) which is the head of the assistant.
When the head of the assistant is dislocated due to slippery humidity and it does not stop at the time of its return, you must reduce its dislocation until it is in its usual place, and then gently move it back as we have witnessed; first reduce the dislocation, and then have the patient lie on their back or side; and raise the knee that was affected by the dislocation, placing it above the hip joint using your left hand.
And then apply the cautery, which has two ends; and this is its shape:
Then cauterize the opening through which that one penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cauterization will be seen when two cautery ends are used.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this rule, and that is the reason for the cauterizations. VIII.
Then place the entire cautery on the wound with salt, and make the patient lie in tranquility, and the member will not be harmed for any length of time until it is healed.
And if the dislocation is in the joints above and it persists, then this should be done, cauterizing over the muscle with a heated cautery claw or with pointed cautery points, for the joint is confirmed and the humidity is broken and the patient is healed.
**Capitol .xxvi.**
On cauterization of the stomach.
When stomach pain arises with inflammation and increases the space within it, and if you continue treatment methods without considering, soon you will see that the illness will shift to the patient's back, expanding their muscles and bones, and cauterize that area with three cauterizations: one leaving a mark on the foot with the size of a finger as a cautery claw, and two others on either side of the costae of the cautery, forming a triangular cautery shape; stretch between those not properly aligned, which will cause corrosion.
And if the depth of the cauterization is two-thirds of the thickness of the skin.
And the shape of the cautery should be according to this form. And if you wish, cauterize with a larger cautery in the middle area of the stomach following this form; and this should be a circular cautery as per this diagram.
And the stomach should be cauterized by puncturing it in the part that is frightened of this cautery: and you know how much puncture you want to apply over the stomach, then cauterize it with cautery on these points; and take care of the treatment as the cure has been preceded until it is healed.
**Chapter XXVII**
**On the Cauterization of the Varicose Vein**
When pain in the vein ends due to coldness or moisture or excessive wind, and before its abnormal condition is worsened by excess fluid, the treatment for this illness is as we have mentioned, not as others prescribe. Then, the patient should be placed with their neck raised, and three cauterizations should be applied according to this form and with this amount over the vein below the hip bones, which brings about the recumbent position of the man.
And the space between each cautery should be according to its thickness, and the cauteries should be according to the length of the body on the right side.
And do not cut the cautery with your hand.
And if the quantity of this (substance) adheres to the quantity of the nature of the cord, and it is not properly adjusted; and if the patient's pain is in their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them sit, who has already extended their things and raised their arms.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a cutting cautery, when it is suitable for your subtlety and prudence in the art.
And be careful not to burn too much during cauterization, and focus the gaze of all present so that the whole body is affected and penetrates into the intestines, for the bowel here is delicate; and know this.
Chapter 28.
On the incision of an abscess in the leg with cautery.
When an abscess forms in the leg and you want to know if it is in the flesh or around it, if it is in the flesh of the leg, the disease takes on a serious gravity and the pain becomes acute.
And if it is around the flesh of the leg, because the pain is very intense and often exhausts the doctors in treating it.
Therefore, position the patient so that their neck is exposed; then identify the location of the abscess; and apply the pointed cautery, whose shape was described on the previous page. And cauterize with those cauterizing irons until all the wound is closed, so that it heals properly.
And likewise, take care for the cure of other abscesses until they are healed.
And be aware that this form of cauterization should only be practiced by those who have studied medicine and are well-versed in it; indeed, many ailments can be caused by imprudent use of such methods, but for those who follow the rules, it is safer.
Chapter 29.
On the cauterization of pleurisy.
The ancient methods of cauterization for pleurisy, according to this practice, involve taking the long, thin blade of an old-style scalpel and making a single cut with it, of appropriate thickness.
Then immerse those in oil and heat those over fire, and cauterize the area between the continuation of the furcula and the collarbone with a cautery; place two small cauterizations below, slightly declining from the part where the beard is, and two cauterizations declining between the fifth rib and the cartilage, slightly declining towards the back parts; another cauterization in the middle part of the foot; and another over the stomach, and three cauterizations in the back parts; and one cauterization in the area between the two shoulders, and two cauterizations on both sides of the foot, leaving the cauterization between the two shoulders.
And do not cover your hand with the cautery, but hold it over the affected area while the procedure is in progress.
They also speak of other ancient practices that involve the use of hot iron cautery, resembling a ray and igniting it, and placing this in the space between the ribs, to reach and heal that place, as we have said about the hernia.
One should not fear this incision with cautery, as it often happens in the fistulous place where healing does not occur.
It appears that the text fragment you've provided does not contain meaningful content related to the previous medical treatise. The notation "Capitol .xxx." suggests a section heading or a book chapter, but without additional context or content, it is difficult to provide a translation or interpretation. If you have more text or context, I would be happy to assist further.
# Cauterization of the Melsa
When treating the illness of the gums with the method we have described for treatment in the division and you do not apply your care, use cautery on it in three ways, all of which are correct, one being that you make three or four incisions according to the length of the gum as per the shape of the cautery marks on the tissue.
And between each cautery, the thickness of a finger or slightly less, and the manner of the cautery is the manner we have described for the cautery marks on the tissue overall.
And do not hold your hand against the cautery; and the illness should be on its side.
And there is another way to cauterize, which is that you light the cautery with two directions, which we have described in the chapter on the dislocation of muscles, and raise the cord that is on the straight part of the gum where it rests on the patient's left side.
And let your elevation be such that you raise the body according to its length, so that cauterization is done according to the part of the body.
Then carefully insert two instruments, with fire, into the opening through which the chain from the other side penetrates.
Then remove the cauterization; and thus four cauterizations are made.
And if you see, cauterize with a cautery having three instruments.
Then you should take care of the cauterizations so that they do not become gangrenous for many days, as it is more comfortable than other causes preceding in treatment.
Chapter XXXI
On cauterization of dropsy.
Cauterization should not be applied to dropsy but directly to the affected limb.
When treating dropsy using the methods described above and your treatment does not improve the condition, you should apply four cauterizations in a circular pattern around the affected area, as well as one cautery on the stomach, another on the thigh, another on the shin, two between the spinal bones of the back, and one at the right side of the foot, and yet another cautery over the stomach. And the depth of the cauterization should be determined according to the severity of the condition.
Then carefully apply the cautery so that it burns deeply for a long time.
And do not evacuate the illness from treatment with cautery alone, as it should be combined with two intentions, and it will be celebrated with aid for healing.
The form of the cautery instrument to be used for the stomach should be a claw according to the shape required, and it is that which is used to cauterize the back is olive-shaped as per its previous form.
Chapter XXXII.
On the cauterization of feet and other parts.
When the feet are immersed in warm water and become filled with water (presumably referring to swelling or edema), cauterize the top of the foot between the big toe and the little finger on the foot without touching the bone, and do not twist the cautery; then lift your hand above the foot and do not return it until the saturated water has drained.
The cautery is done in this manner: Near both thighs, place two cauterizing instruments, and on each thigh, make a cut with the tip of the cutting edge of the cautery. And the cautery should be according to the length of the thigh: one leaves the sharp end up and the other down at the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh, two cauterizing instruments.
And keep the plague open for a long time so that no water remains in it.
And then attend to those causes that we have mentioned.
**Chapter XXXIII** (Note: The exact content of this chapter cannot be inferred without the full context of the treatise. This heading simply indicates the beginning of a new chapter.)
**On the Cauterization of Abdominal Parts** (Guessed section title based on context)
When abdominal pain is due to friction and humidity that clears the channels, it is the digestive and retentive virtue located in the stomach and intestines, and it is treated with curative methods, and do not provide relief, sometimes the patient suffers from gouty heat that exhibits virtue, then cauterize that with a large cautery on their stomach as previously mentioned in the cauterization of the stomach, with circular cauteries and four cauteries in the circuit of subtle humors, with a fine-pointed cautery; and with cauteries on the alkalines over great aloes, or with two cauteries.
And if the humidity bursts forth and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize that on the penis and intestines, strongly applying two cauteries over the stomach and near the groin, for it is a perfect cure for young age from which one does not stray.
**Chapter .XXXIV.**
On the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
When hemorrhoids, either old and derived from thick humors or corrupt due to moisture, are not healed by the methods mentioned in the previous sections, then cauterize them with three cauterizations over the pus left on the small of the back in a small triangular shape, and apply a cautery above the navel for two days.
And if it is observed that the patient's stomach is chilled and their food is not digested, and their face appears pale, then cauterize over the stomach with a large cautery as mentioned previously; also apply a cautery to the femur, and another cautery to the patient's tongue using a clavicle cautery, leave the cauteries open for some time, and then care for them until they are healed.
Chapter XXXV.
Of cauterization of hernias, it is appropriate to perform excision of them.
When you excise hernias, you use the cautery that is shaped like a ray. Next, insert that ignited instrument into the excised hernia, and secure your hand over it so that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the pus flows.
And do this once or twice, for if the hernias are too numerous, cauterize each one of them as we have mentioned, and then apply ointment to them until they heal.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on anything, it is better to do so later in the healing process.
Chapter .xxxvi.
On the cauterization of fistulas that are formed naturally in the passages of the intestine.
When nature does not obey the work that we have described in its proper place, and the patient is frightened by this, then it is healed with cautery.
So when one sees a fistula in nature that is old and corrupt with infected humidity, it is most worthy to attempt its healing subtly, and then you should consider the amount of depth of the fistula according to the aforementioned attempt.
Return the cautery that resembles a ray. And then take that ignited cautery and insert it into this fistula, according to the amount in which the attempt intertwines.
And repeat this cauterization until those corrupted bodies are burned through once or twice or three times, according to the amount of your need.
And be careful of the burning of nerves and veins; if there is a fistula in the bladder or intestinal cavity, be cautious of all these places; and do not attempt this unless the fistula is in fleshy tissue and you believe it is not penetrating.
And then cure the area until it is healed.
And if the area is sealed and the matter that caused it has been removed, and it heals in this way for a long time, then know that it is completely healed.
And if the matter is not from within the body, then know that it is penetrating or in the vicinity of the organ, or it falls because of those causes from which there will be a recurrence in its place.
Chapter .xxxvii.
On cauterization of ulcers.
When ulcers cause pain due to cold or excessive heat, and the patient's condition becomes aggravated, you should cauterize those over the ulcers with a cautery over each ulcer, using a clava from which the memory of the pain is extracted.
And we should strongly cauterize it according to a small gap, so that three cauterizations will come in line, and thus they will be less frequent in healing.
Chapter .xxxviii.
On cauterization of the bladder.
When the bladder becomes weakened and softened by friction and moisture such that the disease cannot retain urine, apply a cautery to the opening where the discharge leaves the bladder; the hairs of the penis begin at this point, and cauterize with a cautery on both the right and left sides.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the depth of the pain; apply a cautery at the lower part of the back, or two cauteries if necessary.
And the cautery should be driven according to how it is processed.
Chapter XXXIX.
On cauterization of the breast.
When the breast becomes inflamed and moist, which prevents conception, corrupts a woman's menstruation, delays her menses, and causes pain during their flow, then know that the location should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said regarding the cautery of the bladder; or two cauteries, driven deeply, and let them be well-fixed.
Chapter .XL.
On cauterization of the dislocated ankle.
When moist mucous membranes are infiltrated at the joint of the ankle, and this causes displacement of its parts, a sign of it is that the affected side remains prolonged over the other when compared between them. And the place of the dislocation is obstructed with some hard object.
Then you should cauterize the patient over the dislocated ankle with a circular cautery, because you have already tried to reduce it by moving the joint in a circle, and thus the dislocation falls into its proper place within the ring.
And the cautery mentioned above has the same form as the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not at hand, then cauterize it with three large olive cauteries.
And make the cautery according to the amount of inflammation in all the wound; and take care that what is healed be properly cared for.
Chapter .XLI.
On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain appears in the lower part of the body, caused by cold, wetness, and inflammation, the patient is treated with the methods we have mentioned, and these are ancient practices. Then you should remove the thick humors from the body using foul pills or artificial ones or similar; and then cauterize it.
And the method of the cautery on that part follows two ways: either with cauterizing medications that burn, or with fire.
It follows two knowledgeable methods, of which one is to cauterize that over the opening of the hernia with three triangular cauterizes according to this form; and make them as deeply as possible. And the space between each cauterize should be according to the thickness of the said part, and if the cautery is olive-sized or large.
In some cases, the cauterizes may be placed over the mid-section on the hernia's head, making it four in total.
And if you wish, cauterize the circle from which the shape precedes in the cauterization of the hernia's displacement, one that is a containing circle and burns away the stiffness of all the ligaments.
And this is the method of cauterization in this case when the pain is localized to the hernia and does not extend into the thigh.
If it is extended inside the thigh, then cauterize that place with two cautery irons over the affected area where the pain is located; and place a cautery on the ankle for four days, slightly to the outer side.
And if the cautery is cutaneous, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the amount of inflammation in the condition.
And if the condition causes pain to spread to the nearby areas of the feet, then cauterize that place with an iron having three, four, or more points, as needed.
And if the condition causes pain to remain in the thigh after movement, then cauterize that place with a cutaneous cautery iron.
And be careful in all cauterization so that you do not sever nerves or cause great damage, and through this, the condition is relieved without harm or constriction.
And you have already seen one of those which will be cauterized over the bone and finished in the cauterization process, and the bed of fire inflated until the tumor reaches the foot, and fire pierced and corrupted all the foot. And then I apply a strong acid solution of the belly, and thus I bring about death.
And if the pain is in two parts, simultaneously cauterize each according to this manner.
And the wise ones say about the cauterization of water cauteries, of which this is the manner: make it resemble a circle of iron whose circumference is the width of a palm; and its point should be as thick as a date palm bone or slightly more.
And within that circle, another third should be made; and the space between them is the width of a night's rest; and those circles are divided into two parts; and the length of those lines is one or two nights, and make on the edge of those iron circles a proper dressing in the circles; and this is the form of it.
Near the fire, it is lit so that it may heat and give off sparks, and then it is placed over the water's edge, the patient lying on their side. And so it is cauterized with three pointed cauteries at once.
And then it is left like that for three days; the wound is dressed with a border and left open for too many days; and the treatment continues until it is healed.
Albucasis says: O, my sons, of this kind of cautery we have used little due to the fear of its appearance, and because few of us have found those that regard it favourably.
One may use the best cautery on him who suffers greatly, and find comfort in the place of his pain.
Perhaps the text is describing a surgical procedure:
And if the space between certain parts of the body is such that it corresponds to the thickness of the said part, they should be opened from above and below, and placed so as to hold each other in this manner:
Then place your hand over the part where the patient feels pain in their side, and take some cold water, forming it into two circles, and applying it gradually to that area for an hour; and as the patient endures the biting and tightening (as if from fire) of the pain, until the biting ceases.
Then raise your hand holding the instrument, and remove the cold water from all parts of the affected area with warm water.
Then apply this for three days, and place your hand over the affected area until the swelling returns to its original state, and repeat this for some more days, and it will prevent future occurrences; this is the best course of action for young people.
And then attend to that wound until it heals.
If the pain is widespread in the thigh or leg, make him lie down with his affected part raised as if he were lying in water according to what is done in equal amounts of water.
And this is the manner of water treatment, and you have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Prepare a mixture of alkali and the cause of both parts, then press them and place them in a new wave from which the opening is perforated with a small tool according to the quantity that goes into it.
And then place the bottom of the wave over another wave in which you have immersed the alkali and causes of warm water for two fingers, and afterward, compress them with your hand over the tieua (presumably a type of material or tool) tightly, and allow the hot water from the alkali to descend into the opening left by the cold water.
And then carefully adjust all that water, and mix it with another living cause and other renewable alkalis, so that it becomes a strong, sharp liquid, which is administered in most medical operations and the cauterization of other members, for operation uses fire.
And among these medicines are some that use cauterization, with quick and powerful herbs and substances that cause a burning sensation, so they are mixed together.
An ancient man describes an operation and cure for pain in the knees and sciatica, and marvels greatly at its effectiveness, saying that no other treatment is needed, as it heals completely with a single application, when one immerses oneself in hot water and rests immediately from that moment.
It is that one should use fresh parsley from a certain plant, and if it is not available, take a recent fig; twist it slightly with some salt and place it in the water where the pain is, or on the affected area, or on the leg, and let it be.
And it should be left for a period of three hours or for as long as the pain requires adjustment.
Then immerse him in water and when the patient's body is relaxed, insert the hot (object) into the sole, as the pain ceases and healing occurs.
And be aware that no one should use cautery with these treatments unless it is for the evacuation of the body.
You may already know that when the narrow vein of a goat is cauterized, it helps the animal; and the cautery should be applied to them in this manner: take wool and dip it in old oil, and place it between the foot's toes and between the bones.
And take a dry goat's vein and apply it to the fire until it becomes charred; then place it on the wool and leave it inside until it is stretched. And then repeat this process, and do not cease to do so until the sensation of the bite disappears in the water and relieves the pain.
And this method of cautery is called the "cattle cautery.
Chapter .xlii.
On the cauterization of pain in the joints.
Sometimes pain is felt in the back for various reasons, such as strain or injury, or due to excessive evacuation, and for similar causes, through the infusion of foreign, irritating material.
And cauterization does not apply to any other species but this one which is caused by the infusion of foreign, irritating material.
Therefore, for the evacuation of the malady, make pills that resemble them, which are to be administered on both sides where the pain is located three lines according to its extent, as you have applied ten in each line with cautery or more, according to the quantity that corresponds to the patient's tolerance and the virtue of the remedy.
And cauterization should be made with a pointed cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or four with a claw-shaped cautery according to this form:
Chapter XXXIII.
On cauterization at the onset of jaundice.
This malady often manifests in young children; and the sign of its onset in children is that their small bodies become stiff in the evening, hindering their elevation and movement.
And it examines the last spine of the back and the nodes of the spine that already begin to rise above the other spines.
And so when you see this and want to prevent it, cauterize that part with a circular cautery in this form: that takes the cautery over all parts of the spine evenly.
And if you wish, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery in two or three lines. And the points should be proper among them.
Then carefully tend to the area as it heals, as we have said.
Be careful that cautery is not applied to a wound caused by spasm of nerves.
Chapter XLIV.
On the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And thus gout caused by cold, when not cured by treatment and the pain persists, then the application of heat cautery is used.
It is because you cauterize the immediate evacuation in the joint circuit of the foot using fire cautery.
And take a olive-shaped cautery whose form is thus:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pain intensifies within the toes or other joints, and this persists, then cauterize each toe with three or four of these olive-shaped cauteries.
And if you find that these cauteries are sufficient for your needs, then cauterize and do not press too hard with the cautery, just touch the specific area.
And if the pain is within the toe and spreads, then administer the cauteries as we have said in the previous chapter.
And if the pain is only in the feet, it is called gout, then make points along the course of the tendons as they bend, in those two lines.
And if the pain persists in these joints, make points along the course of the tendons on each side and on the pinched nerve of the hand.
And if the pain can also affect the joints or muscles, then cauterize the various parts of the limbs.
And do not evacuate the disease without proper treatment and reception of medicines, for if good regimen is followed and inflammation is removed with this cautery, God will help.
Chapter .xlv. (This appears to be a section header or title, not a translation.)
On cauterization of breaks.
When a rupture occurs in the angles and hernia protrudes from the abdomen, then it is necessary to begin by returning the intestine to its cavity, and you must ensure that the patient abstains from strenuous activity on that day and uses gentle remedies so that the opening in their stomach heals.
Then continue to support the patient with your hands on their back, and instruct them to keep their breath relaxed as the hernia or pain appears or disappears.
Then return the hernia to its original position and, after attempting to open the rupture on the bone of the penis, mark the end of it, which should resemble a circle in the upward movements of the body's joints.
And then apply the cautery whose form is as follows:
Within which a hot and moist wound lies. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And then apply the cautery over that sign with your hand, using cautery tools straight, and aim between the bones of the thigh within the middle of the muscle; repeat that another time if you have not achieved it on the first attempt between the bones.
And observe carefully the position of the hernia during the cauterization, that you do not burn the hernia so that it does not lead to death or other great harm on top of the illness.
And you should know that when you use a cautery, do not touch the bone, do not apply your operation.
And take care that the cautery on children should be subtle according to their size and measurement.
Then take care of the cautery site for three days, applying cold compresses until the burn from the fire scar is healed.
Then take care of those with other burns until they are healed.
And the patient should lie on their back for ten days until the site is sealed and the plague is gone.
And take care to give them no food according to the duration of their healing, as it weakens their stomach, and ensure that the hernia does not protrude due to efforts to heal.
And then, when it is desired to raise it after approximately ten days, administer a suitable remedy and maintain that for another forty days.
And also reduce work and the intake of food and drink, and avoid loud voices, for when one follows this regimen of healing entirely, they will be restored to health.
And now I will describe the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, at the very beginning, and so that they do not reopen, cauterize the rupture with a red hot iron according to its size, and it is this same fluid that is expelled from the intestines; then care for that as we have said, and do not allow it to recur.
And some have previously said that the first rupture should be cauterized with a triangular iron according to this form, as it is recognized by trial.
And it is a pause line that they hold in the width on both sides of the rupture, and another line above it; then place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
**Capitol .XLVI.** (The number XLVI represents the Roman numeral for 46)
**On the Cauterization of Twists**
When pain persists in various members due to injury or impact and continues for a long time without responding to medical treatments, then apply cauterization with a pointed cautery.
And the type of cautery should be for each member according to its size and depth, and the nature and location of the twist and pain in it.
Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, well; otherwise, repeat the cautery on it; for it is common with those pains that they are punctured from one member to another close to it, so be sure to obtain these pointed cauteries until the illness is cured.
Chapter XLVII.
On the cauterization of leprosy.
Leprosy patients sometimes require cautery for severe damage, albeit rarely if the type of leprosy is caused by putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
And therefore, if you wish to cauterize it, consider whether the leprosy is severe and has not been cured by what we have said in the division, and do not delay, nor hesitate, and be wary of the illness that corruption may encompass all of him and all of his integrity; then cauterize it on the head with a cautery: at the middle point of the head, and at the second place beneath it, spread the front to the end of the hair; and both on two horns; and one behind, over the nape or serve it.
And lastly, apply the heat of the cautery slightly within, pressing upon the bone a slight pressure, to dislodge the clots, so that the expulsion of thick vapours is relieved; and cauterize over the wound as required.
If the leprosy has already spread over the body and appears manifestly, then you should cauterize with those cautery tools we have mentioned at the beginning; cauterize on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on each eyelid, and two cauteries on both sides of the spine at the nape of the neck, and six cauteries on the spinal columns, and one great cautery near the coccyx, and one on the hip bone, and two on each thigh, and one on each leg, and two on each arm, and two on each muscle, and cauterize the tender parts of their feet; and cauterize all the joints of their hands and feet, and on every toe of their feet, and on the sole of their feet, and on the heel.
And be careful of the nerves which are on the foot, do not irritate them.
And in some cases, it is cauterized with a hot iron over the bone of the thigh, and others over the opening of the stomach, and others on the colon.
And you know that the more precise the cauterization, the greater its effectiveness and the less painful it is for the patient; thus, since the body is already numbed, the pain from the cautery is minimal.
And take care that the cauteries be of appropriate size, great or small, according to the members and joints as previously described with respect to the tools.
And then, take care of the cauterized areas with honey mixed with flour, and other remedies internally until they are healed.
Chapter .xlviii.
On cauterization of faints.
When a member is stunned or numbed and treated with medicines, oils, and bandages, but is still not healed, then you cauterize that stunned member with a hot iron according to the size of the member or the extent of its numbness.
And the hot iron should enter slightly into the depth of the flesh. And then care for that, so it heals properly.
And sometimes faints are cauterized from the head down to the hands and feet, and along the spine and when the nerves of that member feel pain, then the faint is removed.
Do not press upon it unless one who is skilled in the anatomy of the members and the emergence of nerves throughout the body moves it.
**Chapter XLIX**
**On the Cauterization of Hemorrhoids**
When hemorrhoids are old and do not respond to any of the usual medical treatments, then cauterize them with a cautery point, according to the quantity of the specific kind of cord within, until the white and color of it are reduced, and its color is changed.
And then prepare a mixture of flour from erg and lentils with warmed oil and leaves of arnot grass, or pigeon's blood or goose blood, each in its own portion and all mixed together, and apply it as a compress to the area until it is healed.
Chapter One.
On the cauterization of cracks.
When cancer begins to form and it desires to spread, cauterize it with a circular cautery along its course as it spreads.
And the learned say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle of the course; however, I have not seen this, as I fear it may be an ulcer, and I have seen this a few times before.
It is more advisable to cauterize it along the course of the disease with a circular cautery as we have said, or with multiple cauteries.
Chapter II.
On cauterization of abscesses.
When an abscess takes too long to mature, this is due to excess fluid, the state of illness, since it is old and brittle with little strength, or time, and you wish to hasten the maturation of the abscess; then cauterize around it with a number of small pointed cauteries; and apply pressure so that it will mature faster.
If you wish to make an incision in the abscess with a cautery, then heat the cautery whose form is thus: and stop it in the middle of the abscess until the wire penetrates.
And if the cautery is made at that place which is infected, in order that the body of the arm be relieved; and then take care of it until it is healed.
Chapter .lii. (This appears to be a section header or title, indicating the start of a new topic within the treatise.)
On cauterization of corrosion.
Corrosion is a wandering corruption of the member, which corrodes it as if fire were consuming dry wood.
If you encounter that corrosion in a place where cauterization with fire is necessary, then use hot clamps, small or large as appropriate for the location of the corrosion.
And then cauterize it completely until you eliminate all corrosion and do not leave any cause for it to return.
Then bandage it for three days, and apply oil mixed with herbs continually over the cauterized areas until all scars are completely eradicated and all corruption gone.
And then care for it using poultices of fresh meat.
If the flesh becomes healthy after three days without corruption, it is good; otherwise, repeat the cautery over what is broken in the corrupted places.
And corrosion is treated with some times acute medicine, because it is half in place of cautery. However, cautery with fire is better to remove the leucocit (white blood cell) immediately.
And you have already said the treatment of it with acute medicine in the division, and therefore take that when you have any inclination towards it.
**Chapter III**
On Cauterization of Joints and Similar Conditions
The visible lumps in the parts around the foot affected by illness, which is called a 'claw', are caused by a severe, penetrating condition that affects the foot; and treatments for these include cauterization with fire or with water-cooled cautery.
Cauterization with fire involves creating a burning instrument shaped like a twist of thread, made of iron according to the size of the lump, and having thin edges.
Then apply the burning instrument to the lump, and carefully rotate the cautery around the lump until it reaches the depth of the lump. And leave it for three days until it begins to heal. Then apply a paste made from dried herbs mixed with salt to the affected area, and leave it for one night so that it can eliminate the root of the problem.
And then treat the area with a healing ointment made from natural meat until it heals.
If these measures do not help and the pain appears on the surface of the body, especially in the joints and feet, then you must administer to those cauterizations with hot water, and take a small metal needle or a sharp instrument, place it over the joint, and pour a few drops of hot water into the needle; hold your hand over it, compressing it completely, and repeatedly move the edge of the needle along the joint's base until the hot water is completely drained; wait for the patient to feel the burn from the hot water for about an hour, then remove it, as the joint's heat will have dissipated.
And also, for those who have these issues, it is important to ensure that all of them are treated.
And also, treat the abscesses that form around the joint's roots with antiseptic ointments as the flesh regenerates.
Chapter III.
On the cauterization of tremor.
When you encounter any tremor caused by friction on the nerves or by fever resulting from such friction, or for other similar reasons, you should apply four small cauterizations with a hot iron to each vertebra of the back, between each vertebrae applying one cauterization; also apply cauterizations to the patient's feet, and over their stomach with olive cauterizations.
And the tremor of the patient should cease, hastening the healing of the afflicted disease.
Chapter V.
On the cauterization of sudden accidents to the body.
When in the body white patches appear, and pustules open up that are formed from corrupt gross matter; then at the beginning with appearance, cauterize over every part of the fistula with a delicate cautery or a hot iron, whose tip is dipped in fire; or cut with a long scalpel; or cauterize with a lenticular.
And in some cases, cauterization is also performed at the beginning of their expulsion according to this manner; they are not crusted, and the excess matter is removed, doing those, and healing from those.
However, it is important to ensure that this is done with the proper evacuation through phlebotomy.
Chapter VI.
On the cauterization of flu (or venous congestion) caused by an accidental wound through an incision of the artery.
Too many observed signs must flow from the arrowhead that pierces the wound which should be cleaned, or from the beginning of abscesses or cauterization on a limb, and then it seems similar, and it is difficult to retain this.
So if this happens to anyone, you must hold the wound with your hand at the orifice of the arrow's impact, and place a cushion over it, keeping in mind that you should stop the flow of blood as soon as possible so that it does not gush out.
And then apply olive oil cauteries, both small and large, in many places, and blow over them until they are ignited.
And then take from them a small or large one according to the location and the wound in which an artery is broken, pouring boiling poultice on it as you have previously cleansed the area, and cauterize it until the blood flow is stopped.
And if the blood is expelled from the orifices of the artery as you remove your hand and withdraw the cautery, take another cautery carefully from those that are prepared in the fire, and do not cease to repeat this until the bleeding stops.
And be careful not to injure the nerves here, which may lead to further complications for the patient.
And you should know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict the bleeding, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of four methods: either with cautery as we have mentioned, or by extraction when it is not extracted, for when its extremities are burnt, the bleeding is restricted, or by binding it tightly with string or ligature, or by pausing over it medicines whose virtue is to restrict the bleeding; and they should be tightened at the anus or genitals with proper constriction.
He who administers a moderate restriction of movement to the patient, with compression by means of bandages or due to concurrent causes and similar conditions, should only do so temporarily.
If this must be done for anyone and not in the presence of a doctor or medicine, then open at the indicated site on the vein as we have said, and understand the great constriction within that the blood flow is stopped from the sovereign cause of the illness; and on the swelling, it should not be rubbed; and rather, pour cold, wrung water within until the swelling is frozen and thickened; and then consider what cautery or medicine is required.
Regarding incisions, punctures, ventilation, phlebotomy, wounds, and their likes.
In the first chapter, we have discussed all manner of illness in which cauterization with fire is appropriate, both medicinally and through burning, along with their occurrences and causes, and the tools required for such as described in the forms of the cautery. I have organized the chapters ascending from the head to the feet.
And in this chapter, we shall proceed in this manner, so that anyone desiring it may find relief, as much as possible on the subject of which he has inquired.
And before you begin, understand that this chapter is for those who have learned in the first chapter about cauterization from fear.
And because you should be in great caution, for in the operation which is in this chapter, one can observe sudden effusion of blood, which is dangerous to life, you must apply the vein or make an incision over the abscess, or perceive the discharge, or clean the wound, or extract the arrow, or begin the treatment of stone and similar things. And from all of these, fear and trembling accompany them, and in most cases, death.
And I warn you that it does not fall on you in which there is a situation, because sometimes you must take the ways of men as the ways of diseases. And of them, some will go to their disease and despite all efforts, death will be denied to them; thus, because of the violence of what he finds in his illness, and due to the longevity of his illness, fear of the disease which signifies death.
And of these, he who gives you hope and confidence in health, for his disease is deadly.
And therefore, do not be deceived by those who come to you with this manner; let your caution be greater than their knowledge and their greed; and do not presume any cause about it except for certain knowledge that proves what they tell you, and which has received praise in its success.
Use in the treatment of all your patients, from diagnosis and indication of that which brings health, for it assists you in acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
Oh, my sons, may God inspire your understanding and do not allow you to stray from His guidance and protection, for it is in His hands.
And you have ordered this distinct chapter according to the preceding chapter on cautery, from the care of the head down to the feet, so that it may assist you in what you inquire about and of which you stand in need.
First Chapter.
On the treatment of water contained in the head of children.
You know that this illness often affects children, starting during childbirth and when the darkness enters the child's head, its vitality is affected.
And some times it appears for a hidden cause that is not obvious.
This disease is often seen in children; and to all those whom I have seen die from it, I have witnessed great damage done to them.
And you have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the head of him was always thus enlarged so that he could not lay down on his side because of the great size of his head, and more than that, the humidity increased until death by fire.
And this humidity is either added between the skin and bone or is added beneath the bones on the skull.
For the operation on that one, if the humidity is between the skin and bone and the abscess is small, then you must make an opening in the middle place of the head with a fissure in the length, and the width of the fissure should be two finger-widths so that the humidity can drain, and this is the shape of the spatum:
And therefore, if the humidity is greatly increased and the abscess is larger, there are here two cracks according to this manner:
And if the humidity remains between the bones, it is a sign that you must open the compartments of the head completely and the water is squeezed out when you press with your hand on the soft parts inside, but it is not something you should hide. Make an incision in the middle part of the head, which has three cracks according to this manner:
Then extract the incision to remove all humidity; tighten the cracks with bandages and plasters; drill into the affected area with a needle and pour wine and oil over it within five days, then loosen the lint and treat the wound with poultices and ointments, and hold the head at an equal level; feed the patient dry bread with little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
And there is another incision technique that you consider based on the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of water, for sometimes it appears at the back of the head, or in front, or on the right, or on the left; so pay close attention to where the abscess appears and the accumulation of water, and act accordingly as best as possible.
And observe that do not incise the artery, and strive for a steady flow of blood and stop the patient's suffering through the evacuation of humors.
**Chapter Two.**
When there is an unexpected or severe condition in the hands or feet, and this is old and does not respond to medical treatments, then the final remedy is to incise those two arteries.
And thus you should cover when you want to incise where the malady has raised its head, and then rub the area with rough cloth to reveal the arteries, and tighten the collar of the malady with another cloth; and consider where the pulse of the vein is; and the locations of each over the areas that are appropriately dilated, and they remain concealed in some people.
And then you should focus on the artery with a probe, and incise each one with the sharp edge of the knife as you make your incision towards the bone, and this is according to the extent of the head's size.
And if you wish, insert the probe between the artery and cut it at the points of your incisions on it.
And the length of the incision should be such that if any vein is incised, the blood flow is stopped from escaping through frequent pulsations.
If the arrow does not appear at the waistline, then measure from the auricle the quantity of space equal to three fingers, and then gently insert and try it within the bone.
And what you must get from the wound is a quantity of wine one (unit), and readily draw out no more or less, and all this depends on the amount that appears from the strength of the illness and the extent of the arrow in the body.
Then consider the plague, and if any cause of the infection remains on the bone, immediately cut it off to prevent the spread of gangrene.
Then strengthen the plague with plasters and bandages of linen, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Chapter III.
From extraction of the arteriies which are in the temples.
When an old or recent migraine occurs due to a cold and moist atmosphere and the quality of the tears in the temples, or an old and violent one that resembles those mentioned earlier, and it is not alleviated by medical treatments and we have resorted to these maladies, then we extract the arteries in the temples or cauterize them as we have shown.
And the method of performing and extracting those is to target the pain that originates in the temples; understand the artery visible in the temple where it is indicated by its pulse, and it is hidden from most people due to its violence.
And if it is hidden, then tighten the collar of the pain with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until you feel the artery manifest. And then you take the sponge that has this form: And then you cut the cord as easily as possible to reach the wound; and take off the clothes on top and extract the foreign body from the wound, uncovering that of the tunic that is left behind, from every part.
If the artery is thin, then you wrap it at the end of the finger, and cut off a part according to the amount by which its extremities are stretched and contracted, and it will not allow blood flow if not cut through; otherwise, the blood will not stop from flowing out.
And then empty the vein of blood within three beats.
And if the wound is large, then you cover it in two places with a strong double thread of silk or twine, and do not let it putrefy before the healing of the sore, and allow blood flow.
And then incise the superfluity which is between two ligaments; do this at that moment or another time.
And if you wish, cauterize that with a hot iron within the bone, cauterizing the ends of it after they have been cut, and hold in place that piece of work.
And it is better work if the patient has fever or there is a complex warming; for cauterization is of those causes that aid in ending humidity, and therefore it is better in youth.
And then cover the extraction of the ribs that have moved to a new location, and place them properly over it, carefully making sure they are not damaged, and treat with dry medicines to make the flesh and bones heal within a short time.
And if while working another time bleeding from the rib occurs, then you must constrict that blood flow, either with a cautery or something you place in the socket of the rib, and tighten your hand until the blood is stopped. And if any cause of those is not present, then apply your touch to the spot until the swelling is reduced, and pierce the spot with water of extreme coldness until the pain subsides, and tighten according as it suits.
And what is more lightly extracted from archery, it is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two edges, having already felt both spots, and ignite some, until they reach the bone and cut the vein in two places, so that what is between the extremities of it is elongated, as it is not consolidated by this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And the sharpness of both edges is an example. However, it may be better with just one edge, as if it is very sharp with two edges close to each other, it does not cut the flesh with speed.
Therefore, when there is any swelling in those areas, the heat of fire is retained in them, and the flesh is slightly separated.
And this work is best of all works and is most easily performed.
And the space between the two bones is determined by the amount of swelling in that area.
Final stage.
On the treatment of acute and acidic heart conditions in the chest.
When there are acute conditions with acidic tears, affecting the veins just above the temple on the forehead, and no medical cause can be determined for this, the patient's face may appear reddened and their movements will be as if they were being affected by ants, and their eyes are exhausted, moist to the point that their eyelashes become uncomfortably sticky, and their eyelids scalded due to the intensity of the tears. The traditional remedies used in treating such conditions in this operation include those methods which are most vigorous.
And so you command the patient to shave the hair on their forehead, and then make three incisions in the forehead evenly spaced according to its length. And if the length of the incision is two fingers: one incision should be equally spaced to the length of the nose in the middle part of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the tears, which are in the tear duct, and the third on the other side.
And be careful with the incision of the arteries, which are in two cuts, and extend your hand along the continuation of both mandibles. And the space of each incision should be adjusted to about three fingers' width.
And if you have a piece of sponge or dry cloth at hand with which to absorb the blood.
And then insert the knife between the two acute ends, which is the form of the incision. What is taken out of the temples during the second incision. Remove entirely the cord that is between two incisions on the hip bone, and then make this cut in the middle of the second incision. Then take this knife and insert it into the first incision, another time using a different tool called a scalpel, which is sharp on one side and not on the other.
And hold the sharp edge against the flesh attached to the cord, and the blunter edge against the bone, and use it to reach the middle of the fissure, and sever all vessels that descend from the head to the feet.
It may be continued the incision to this appear of the cord, and then make it in the middle crack between the other cracks.
And as the flow of blood decreases, squeeze the locations of the frozen parts of the veins.
And then place in each crack some warm wool, and press upon those powders coated with wine and oil, and it is important that it does not develop an infection cautely.
And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large infusion of cold water or tea, and then apply care to it with basilic ointment or rose oil and other remedies until the wounds are healed.
The title seems to be incomplete or missing some context. It appears to be the word "Capitol" followed by a period and a letter 'v'. To provide a meaningful translation or interpretation, more text would be required. The term "Capitol" likely refers to a place name, possibly related to a capital city, but without additional context, it's challenging to offer a precise translation.
On the treatment of bleeding from catarrh and the descent of fluids from the head's cavities.
When there is sudden, severe bleeding and the patient's wounds from the disease are extremely small, and upon examining them, their paleness and hair loss become evident, and in the region of the head, sharp pain and the resulting discharge occur, then you know that this condition arises from veins that have burst from within.
And the best treatment for these is this: order the patient to wash their face, and then make an incision at the middle of the forehead, a small one (and begin the incision from the left temple towards the right temple; and cut through the bone; and with your hand remove the blood from around the teeth, which is more beneficial after mastication). Until the bone is exposed.
Dry all the pus with sponge or clean cloth, and then fill between the two edges of the wound with very thin strips of new cloth or bandages. And then apply a fresh poultice soaked in vinegar and oil to prevent the risk of infection.
And when you loosen it and see that the infection has decreased, then rub the bone where it begins in the living flesh, and apply a dry poultice made from two parts of flour and four parts of colchicum, as if you were to make a paste, and administer it to these wounds, both on the native flesh.
Chapter VI.
On the treatment of what cats have in their ears.
Any cause that cats have in their ears is one of four types: it may be a hard mineral or something similar to stone, such as iron and copper, or it could be from plants like chickpeas or fava beans, or fluid-related, such as water mixed with vinegar and similar substances, or some animal.
And when a cat or other similar cause appears in the ear due to any reason that does not adjust or adhere to the ear, hold the ear to the sun, and if the pain persists, it distills into some cause of infected oil or mucus, then administer the extraction of it, and make it sneeze in a suitable condition, and support the nose to prevent sneezing. And then hold the ear canal with some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear away from the parts above it, for these motives are often forgotten due to these causes.
And if it is not removed, then administer the extraction of it with an instrument called a delicate epichirurgic forceps, of which this is the form:
And if it is forgotten with the forceps, then use these; and if not, administer the extraction of it with a very thin instrument with a slight bend.
And therefore, if it is not forgotten, make a cannula of thread and insert the end of the cannula into the canal of the ear, sealing around the cannula with wax and soft oil so that only the cannula opens. And then extract the small wind with great force, as we have seen.
If it is not forgotten in this manner, take a piece of hot metal or some kind of heated apparatus with which the outer shell of the object is carefully wrapped at its tip. And then insert it into the canal of the ear with ease and remove the ear from the moisture.
And therefore, if it is not forgotten with all the causes we have seen, then tie off that which causes abscess or spasms.
And the method of dissection is that you begin by cauterizing the affliction in the saphenous vein and extract the clot according to the virtue of the wound, then make an incision between your fingers and convert the edge towards the openings from which it came, and make a small fissure at the base of the edge where the thick part of it was previously pressed. And if the fissure resembles a crescent moon and reaches the base of the finger, and once the nail is observed, you can use appropriate instruments; then immediately apply pressure to the fissure with great speed and treat it until it heals.
And if the cause of the pain in the nail is one of the inflamed and swollen substances, then administer treatment and extract it; however, if you do not obey my instruction, then take some fine sponge and use it according to this method: and apply that for the removal of the fallen substance from the nail.
And do not attempt this when you think that the part is already moistened by the heat of the body, stop it with heavy weights, and extract it gently from its position or with a subtle gesture, or by incision as we have said, for it eases the extraction.
In the water that enters the ear, consider how this condition begins with sneezing and fills the ear with some old or young wax, then pour over the ear in which the water is located, and if it is expelled through that opening, it is good; otherwise, take a few hot stones from the fire, slightly warm them, and the patient should insert one of those into the canal of his ear and jump on one foot, pressing hard with the other stone on the stone next to the ear. Therefore, do not stop until all the water is expelled.
Therefore, do not stop until all the water is expelled. And water should be drawn as you would from a paper or cloth container, place one end in the ear and extend the other end over the fire until the whole of it is burned away.
Then place another cloth over it and do this several times until all the water is drawn out, and tear that from the cannula as is usually done with the stone extractor.
In the extraction of a foreign body from the ear, if it is small and resembles one another, treat it as we have said in division; but if it is a large object which causes an appearance at the sense of the disease, then administer the extraction of it by gesture and incision, and the cause of it is usually lighter than all other causes that affect the ear.
However, in the extraction of worms grown in the ear, when you treat it with water as we have said in division and in the distillation treatment and do not agree with your care, then watch that you protect the ear from sunlight.
And thus, if any cause of the worms appears here, then extract them with your fingers or some subtle tools, but if no cause is apparent, take a tube that is narrow at one end and wide at the other, which is the form of it. Then insert the very fine end into the ear according to the amount of suffering caused by the illness; and then suck with a strong suction, making movements as you do so, until all the worms are expelled.
If you do not follow these instructions, then heat and close the tube in the manner as we have said; administer distilleries which have already been prepared in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the section on distillation treatments.
And your pouring of medicinal oils into the ear should be done with this instrument, which has this form. And make a small, narrow incision, leaving it open, and apply a bandage over it.
And thus it is with the use of something that is in the cavity of the container here, it will be necessary. And if you want, take the ray and wrap it at the decent end, then pour oil into the cavity of the hearing or any herbal juice or whatever you prefer from these medicines in the canula — in the ear —, and then insert the ray near the edge and squeeze with your hand so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of the hearing and the patient feels relief within.
And what is inserted into the ear should already be scorched with a small flame. And be careful that the cause which you distill into the ear is not too harsh, because the ear medications do not tolerate this.
Chapter .VII.
On the treatment of ear inflammation.
Sometimes, children's bellies may swell without any apparent reason, and this also happens to some adults; inflammation in the flesh of the ear due to an infection or some other flesh damage; and this inflammation may be internal or external.
And the one that occurs in the internal part, which does not understand the cause, is in the most difficult situations for healing.
And in the case where you can see the cause, take the patient's ear to the sun and examine it. And if you see inflammation appearing, open that with a fine, sharp instrument from which this form comes:
If the extremity of the limb in which the tightness is felt has one part sharp and the other not, and the knife's edge is of two lengths to prevent it from cutting into the skin.
And so if the incision is for a bone lodged in the ear or in the flesh, then you make subtle cuts and carefully incise until all the flesh is removed.
And if the incision is in the root of the ear, take a fine blade and heat it slightly with fire, then gently insert it into the flesh of the ear.
And so if you sense an obstruction that the patient finds easy to expel due to its severity, exert pressure on it to facilitate its release; but be careful not to irritate the nerves of the ear.
Then wrap the ear with a cloth according to the amount of space in which you have applied the Egyptian ointment, and do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the wound; or soak it in water and pour that onto the affected area after drying it, then use another cloth. If the ear has already formed a crust, be careful not to destroy it and replace the cloth with one dipped in oil, as long as the infection shows signs of improving; and tend to it until it is healed.
If a bleeding occurs, submerge the exposed or drape in lukewarm water, apply pressure over the wound, and use other treatments that restrict blood flow, which are described in the distillation treatment.
**Chapter VIII**
**On the treatment of atrophy affecting the eyelids.**
Atrophy of the eyelids, sometimes caused by moisture, at other times by dryness.
Therefore, you should have those ointments or liniments at hand, remove the hardened matter from their roots, and apply pressure over the sealed areas.
If pain accompanied by blood flow occurs, then you may use a fine, alternating hot and cold cautery.
And the best cautery is to make incisions and watch for any signs of their reopening; and when cauterized with fire, those wounds are burned away and do not reopen.
**Chapter IX.**
**Treatment for a severe condition that comes to the eyelids of the eyes.**
**Motives observed on the eyelids of the eyes, due to some cause that resembles a great deal in its strength and hardness, are therefore called 'great'.**
**And there is an addition of thick moisture on the lower and upper eyelids.**
**Therefore, the operation on them considers whether the greatness is proceeding from within, appearing from the eyelid and affecting the whole; and the cause of it is slight.**
Therefore, open that wide fissure according to its extent, and then carefully extract it, suspending it from one side and cutting it off.
If the hernia is large, then adjust it with stitches; treat it until it is healed.
And if it is small, you will not suffer much because the natural healing of the hernia restores and incarnates it.
And if the size is decreasing towards the inner parts of the eyelid, you must remove the surface, then lift the eyelid and suspend the hernia with stitches, except for where you initially made the incision, and press on it from all sides. If the eyelid, due to the incision, becomes elongated, it will not be noticed for any reason.
And then make the incision, wash the wound with salty water; and treat the area with a poultice until it heals.
Chapter X.
On the treatment of an acute condition on the upper eyelid.
Acute inflammation is caused by the swelling of the upper eyelid's tunics, often affecting children most severely, leading to clouding of their vision and preventing them from looking at the brightness of the sun, due to tears gathering at these eyes.
And so you apply these measures to their faces all the time, and to their eyes while they sleep; and the eyebrows remain wet from the inflammation that has already covered them, and the imminence of a discharge is apparent in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel a discharge within those eyes.
And in some manner of operation, when the patient's head is in the bed, then place a sheet over them and do some cold application, and make it circular according to the quantity that contains the arterioles from every part, and place that on this and press firmly on both sides of the joint so that additional fluid is added to the middle of the circle, and stop in the middle of that moistened area with a spatula incident to the fissure according to its extent, and the fissure should not be greater than the fissure made in flaubotomy.
Insert into the opening a plug that reaches to where you want to obtain arterioles, for in the case of more advanced procedures, arterioles are extracted through fissures according to the form of white greasiness.
Therefore, remove those sheets which you have wrapped between your fingers from the parts outside and turn them with your right and left hand until they are completely drained.
And be careful not to press into the fissure, lest you prevent the sputum from reaching its goal and dislodging that one.
If it does not appear that your treatment begins at the start of the fissure, you may adjust the fissure slightly to facilitate its progress; then extract that as we have said; and then immerse cloths from him in water and vinegar and place them over the area and apply those as powders.
And so some apply salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure to help draw out that which is removed by moisture.
And then cure it until it is healed.
If an accident occurs at the posthemous location, then apply care with plasters until it heals.
Chapter .xi.
On various ways of examining the pulse.
When the pulse in the eyelids appears due to the natural growth of hair and becomes antiquated, these conditions on the pulse lead to various ailments with constant tears and softening of the eyelids, causing destruction to the pulse known as "tactinir del huel," and its cure is carried out in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with acute medications as mentioned previously in the chapter on cauterization; or by incision and suturing; or through cannulas, as I will explain.
And so you should place the focus of the ailment on the eye; then turn the eyelid of the affected eye with your left hand, and if it is turned, you are correct; otherwise, insert a needle into the area where there is a firm attachment of tissue from the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate through the tissue towards the edge of the eyelid where the hair begins, and pull the thread firmly away from the eyelid towards its inner side.
And then carefully cut open the space between the eyelids, adjust the hairs with a sharp instrument so that they do not interfere with the flow of tears; take out the foreign body and place the eyelid back in position using small cotton or cloth wads, hold it firmly with your finger, and shape it like a moth's wing.
However, it is necessary to consider that the shape varies according to the amount of swelling in the eyelid, for what is required in one case may be different in another, depending on the extent to which the eyelid becomes softened.
Then carefully cut with the scalpel along both lines that you have indicated, beginning at the lacrimal nerve where it enters the lacrimal duct. And if your cut is near the natural hairs, it should be as thick as the king's beard.
And then place the tongs in one of the two angles of the wound, scrape it entirely clean, and adjust the stitches with two threads, either silk or fine wool, rinse the blood, and let any excess from the threads adhere to the two eyebrows for certain reasons entangled, if you wish to do so, otherwise, do not treat it.
And then, after three or four days, open the suture of the threads and treat it.
And if you wish, leave the wound open without suture, and treat it with what dries and constricts, because the eyelid is lifted due to the sealing of the wound and the addition of pus; but a tighter suture is better. Thus, I have told you the ancient practices of the taxanir.
But nevertheless, there is much effort on the part of the patient, and it is a good operation, and there is nothing to fear.
And there is another way to treat it, which is as follows: place a figure like a mushroom on the eyelid, then raise the eyelid with three sharp movements, separating and bringing together according to this form.
If this is not possible, having the knives at hand, and it is not cut, then take a needle with thread and insert one in the middle of the figure, and insert the other two close to the lacrimal glands, and adjust between them so that the threads are equal, and then lift your hand with an equal elevation, lifting all the eyelids over which the figures are placed as we have mentioned.
And then adjust the two edges of the wound with sutures, and heal that which is clean.
If after your incision or opening, an abscess occurs, then treat it with wax and similar things, and clean it.
And in some cases, when the eyelids are affected and their hairs change, then use what we have mentioned about incision; a more artificial suture is done in some cases.
To drain cans is done in this way: and it is that you turn the eyelid and incise the figure within as I have mentioned; then, with art, make two cans or two thin plates of which the length corresponds to the length of the eyelid and their width is measured according to the width of the space. And you have already incised at the ends of each cut, where you hold the threads.
Then add each one with subtlety over what exceeds from the eyelid of the patient, and tighten the cans of each cut with strong rigor, and leave it for some days, for the thread will die due to the tightness and will be rejected, and it will fall off once it has healed by itself.
If it is delayed, then cut open the abscesses, and treat the wound until it heals.
Therefore, when it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the skin does not hurt.
And this is the way to make two incisions according to this form: and it should have the quantity of length and breadth neither more nor less.
Chapter XII
Of the elevation of painful hairs in the afflicted area with an agule when the hair is hard.
When there are unnatural, hard, and painful hairs in the wounds, the operation on them requires that you use a subtle agule and insert it into that thin thread of silk and lion, and then adjust the extremities of it very gently and handle it in a most subtle manner. And it should be the length of the fingers, about the quantity of a palm.
Then take another fine needle, insert it briefly, and twist the ends of that if you wish.
Then position the patient's head in a small space, close to the sun so that your work is made clear, as this is a delicate and precise operation.
Then insert the needle into the root of the tight hair where it requires attention, and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly until you extract that from its natural hair.
Then pull the hair out from its root, insert that into the tweezers, and grasp one or two or three hairs at a time.
Then use your hand to pull that out until the hair is completely removed from the tweezers on the eyelid and its natural place.
If it is pulled apart and the skin is not torn, you will pull the dressing to the parts where you have placed the bandage, so that the dressing does not come loose from the wound above.
And when you have the sight of the wound, then you will remove the dressing and the bandage, and clean any dirt or claws in the wound, and leave the cloth for two or three days, so that the skin sticks to its place and a good flesh grows over it.
And if the skin is too short, you will adjust a longer piece of natural hair, and raise it to that height, or leave it until it grows, so that it extends over some space, and then you will raise it.
CAPITUL XIII. (In Latin, indicating the title or subject of the chapter.)
On the treatment of a condition that occurs on the eyelid above.
When you see the eye becoming cloudy, and there is contraction of the eyelid when it closes either to the right or left, due to poor healing of a wound or section or cautery, it is called cataracts, and this cloudiness can be either natural or accidental, caused by the consolidation of wounds or sections or cauterization, or similar to their illnesses.
The manner of the operation is that you open up and separate the consolidation, and divide the lips of it, then place in it a piece of cloth, and bind them together until they heal.
And be aware that you must use healing methods from the causes that dry out and constrict; for if you do this, it will cause the cataract to return worse than before, with no improvement at all.
Use for those causes that mollify, such as fenugreek, and soak in water in which the seeds have been cooked or in vinegar, which should be liquid enough with some of the oil, and immerse the cloth in it, and apply to the affected area.
And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate everything that is not consolidated according to the form in which it appears at the beginning.
And this operation that we have mentioned is nothing other than a correction of deviated components that do not return to the form of the place as it was before.
Chapter XIII.
On the treatment of hernia in the eyelid.
This hernia, which is done in the eyelid, and is actually called a "deviation" (not hernia), is either of natural origin or accidental.
Accidental hernias can be caused by sickness, incisions, cauterization, or other similar means.
And the method of operating is that you take a needle with which you make double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and pass it through the tear from left to right, so that the thread goes through both ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh apart from its sides with the needle, and cut with a wide spatula. And so return the eyelid to its original shape if it is suitable; otherwise, take a thread and hold that in the split area, and turn the eyelid over, and make two slits on the edge of the eyelid.
And the ends of the two slits should form two angles of the incision you made, which meet, and so that when they converge, a shape is formed from them.
And this figure is Greek letter: lambda.
And then push the flesh aside as much as necessary, leaving enough space for the eye to be exposed.
And then arrange the separated parts and sew them with woolen thread; likewise, treat the affected areas with the medicines mentioned above for softening and washing until it is cured.
And if you need to increase or tighten using incisions, sutures, or cauterization, then make a flat incision in the skin of the eyelid as mentioned above. And then separate the calculus between two lips as mentioned before.
In the entire discussion on the treatment of raising or lowering, when it is above or below, let the operation proceed according to the preparation for the form of the raise, and that is in a diverse manner of spots.
And the skilled craftsman always prepares a device in some way that is possible for it to restore the figure to its natural form, or close to it, and treats each illness according to what suits them from the operation and instruments in the best dispositions.
Chapter XV.
On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this adhesion occurs in most people, they think that the eyelid is firmly attached to the white part of the eye, and it prevents the ease of movement and its natural functions, so you must insert your finger between the lid and the eyeball, and lift the lid over it, or extend it with the help of a dropper.
And then you should incise the adhesion with a fine spatula, which is not sharp enough to cause additional injury, making it slightly blunted so that the disease is not disturbed during the operation, and remove the spatula that does not harm the eye's sensitivity.
And your incision should remove that adhesion easily, so that the eyelid can be returned to its natural form, and all the adhesion is healed.
Then immerse it in salt water with which you wash; or distill it from sun-warmed water dissolved in the liquid.
Then separate the eyelid from the eye with a drop of water, and place on the eye a woolen compress soaked in egg albumen, and for the third day use consolidating causes until it is healed.
**Chapter XVI.**
On the incision of the eye and the prominence of the flesh of the eyelids.
You know that the eyelid is in two manners: either it is nervous, like a thin hard chip; or non-nervous, resembling white frosted moisture, which, when pricked with a needle, is cut off and the chip does not adhere to it.
And both spices do not begin until the major tear duct, little by little, covers the sight and blocks light and movement of tears.
The manner of operating in the incision of the eye is that the patient's head should be placed under the table, and the eyelids opened with one hand, while the other raises the upper eyelid, and then catches the corner of the eye with a forceps, making a few gentle movements to relax it. And then take a needle and insert it into one of the small hairs from horse, bull, cow, or similar, gradually doubling the end of the needle, leaving it in the middle of the eyelid, and penetrate with the needle, tying the hair to the needle; extend that above the eyelids, and extract the hair from the edge of the eyelid which blocks the pupil. And so you extract the hair from behind it.
And then carefully incise the membrane at the root of the tear duct with a thin spatula or small scissors, and remove the flesh from the natural tear duct so that by making this incision, continuous flow of tears does not occur.
And some also use an ungual (nail) or file, as we have said, and then carefully trim it with a sharp spatula to shape it thus.
And beware that with the spatula, do not touch the corneal tunic and cause its rupture, and that the pupil is not perforated.
After making the incision, apply a little coarse salt or any suitable medicine, and leave it for about a day; then take care of it until it heals.
And if the nail is not nerve-related and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it deeply embedded in the flesh, then attend to this type of nail being cured with medicines, and it will heal thus, when cut off at the division.
And if you wish to incise it, open the wound of the malady and take a thin piece of sharp steel according to this form: with subtility. And if it becomes hardened and closed up in that wound, slowly extract it from your side in the wound of greatest pain, either with a hot iron or a sharp knife, and keep the wound open for another day.
Then repeat the operation on that part until everything that is infected is removed, otherwise a foul pus will form in the wound, and when you leave it, take care at the beginning of the infection until it is healed.
Then repeat your operation on that part until it is healed.
The urgency of the lacrimal flesh, if noticed in the eye due to great damage, should be suspended immediately; and incise it from that one part, but do not close the incision so as not to block the flow of tears.
And then distill the main tear duct carefully until it is healed.
Chapter XVII
On the incision of abscesses and that which is born from adherent flesh in the eye.
Sometimes in the eyes of certain people, there is flesh that is born sick, and it is so swollen that it covers the pupil or moves very close to the eyelids, pressing them against each other, and it is assembled with rough splints from wood.
The surgical procedure is such that the patient holds their side in pain; then open the incision of that area and collect all the flesh with scissors suitable for this, and hold it with a forceps or a basket; then cut the flesh from the beginning until everything is finished with the knife, and be careful of the wound so you do not damage your operation.
And your incision is the one where we incise those or extract the pus that we have extracted in the incision of the finger, or small forceps, collected carefully according to the shape that it takes, appropriately for this chapter.
So when your incision is complete and all that flesh is removed, fill the wound with salt trita (fine-ground salt) or sprinkle on it a powder made from rogues (possibly a type of herb or medicine), similar to corrosive medicines, and place over it a clean cloth or albumen (a protein) until it is assuredly safe from abscess.
And if any cause of inflammation and severe pain is noticed, and there is fear of gangrene, then examine the wound and treat that gangrene with something that relieves that gangrene, and repeatedly perform surgery on it until it is healed, and make sure that the adjacent flesh, which occurs in this particular wound, does not become infected.
However, it is possible that you may be able to achieve complete cure of the acute pain through natural or accidental means, using a knife, and do not put your hand into any of these operations until you see that the affected member can withstand the operation.
**Chapter XVIII**
**On the Collection of Knowledge in Wounds**
Knowledge comes in various forms, some of which are resistant to treatment and hinder the progression of healing, especially when their duration extends over many days.
Therefore, at the beginning, it is necessary that you consider if the pain in which you are aware is strong and there is no other ailment known in it, then you will collect that knowledge.
And command the patient to hold their breath and then gently press those veins with your thumb or index finger, according to your discretion. The pressure should be subtle and of a double nature, following this form:
or two fingers gradually on one side of the body, following this form:
And when those veins are collected with subtle force and carefully, abstain from pressing the sanction immediately; wait until you see those veins refill with blood and feel them pulse.
And be careful not to cause pain in the extremities of the body; and if your operation is in the morning, facing the sun, and you are strong in your action, do not pierce any veins except those intended.
And when you have finished, then distil warm vinegar or wine into the wound to corrode whatever remains of the pus.
If it is not possible to collect all of this at that hour, then apply a poultice to it until the pain subsides and ensure that there is no risk of infection.
And repeat this process according to the nature of the illness until it is healed.
And this is the method of the forks:
Chapter XIX.
On the reduction of tumours in the nose.
When you rise from rest using a cautery or sharp medicine according to the description of the condition and it is not healed, then do not apply treatment to it but instead make incisions over the affected area after assessing its severity, and extract all the moisture present within it until the bone is exposed.
And so when the bone is exposed and there is corruption or blackening in it, then use a tool in the shape of this:
It is called a sharp knife, and it should be made to cut, and the skull should also be rounded so that it can be pierced with a thin point (just as in the following shape).
And place that over the corrupt part of the bone, then carefully turn it between your fingers, and gently press with your hand until you know that the corruption is gone.
And this should be done at times, then restore the area with astringent and drying agents.
Therefore, if the area is consolidated and there is good flesh, the intestine is separated from the healthy and robust body for forty days, without renewal or fistula, and no further harm occurs to it, then you know that it has healed.
And if it is not in the bone but only a fissure needs to be reduced to its natural shape, then follow this manner: you discern according to the instrument or acute medicine used, and once the bone is exposed, you take hold according to this form.
The tip of the instrument should be triangular, and the shaft of the instrument should first be extended within the extremity to the same extent as the width.
Then place that on the bone, and it should be the size of a tear; extend your hand a little further, and then turn your hand over the rib so that it penetrates through all the bone, and the patient feels the pain as if air is coming out from within when you remove your hand.
Therefore, restore the area with astringent medicines that dry out as directed.
Therefore, when the flesh around the area has hardened, the matter that was discharged from the openings returns to its original state, thus making it less painful for the patient.
**Chapter XX.**
**On the Reduction of Swelling**
When the swelling protrudes excessively and does not yield to ordinary treatment or decrease, it is necessary to remove the patient's clothing, apply pressure, and then make incisions in the neck for better drainage; afterward, apply a liniment made of aloe, henna, and sassafras to the swollen area, and firmly compress the bandage with motz (fine powder).
And the manner of the powders is to take sheets of lion's fur, and each sheet is folded in half four times; and make these folds.
Then arrange them one over the other according to the amount of the substance that requires mixing. Then tighten over these with a piece of cloth with a strong, firm structure; and apply suction with the cups for their scarification; and remove the cups, leaving the substance tightly attached during the day and night.
If, meanwhile, the ligament becomes softened, then ensure it is tightly bound.
And keep the ligature tight during the day and night as well, just as we have said.
And if the swelling has already been reduced, well, then it is, and otherwise, continue the application of the poultice with powders, compression, and cups until it heals.
Chapter .xxi.
On the incision of the eminence of the uvula tunic.
When it is necessary to disrupt the uvula tunic, and it becomes prominent and the eyelids are moved as if by a grain of sand, and the shape of the person is thus altered, and you want to perform an incision on them, then the operation on them is as we have described, that you insert the needle at the base of the uvula from below, and then insert another needle through which there is a double fold of the lacrimal part, and cause it to penetrate and leave the first needle according to its position; and then cut the location of the double fold and lift that portion of the uvula around the needle, and tighten that muscle.
And then remove the needle and place it over the humid wool soaked in honey, and let it remain until the thread falls off the uvula.
And then attend to the wound with something that will comfort the inside until the plague is healed.
And in some cases, from all over, a large circle of cloth is gathered around the wound, and then it is perforated with a thin blade that reaches the base of the wound, and the white humidity flows out, and the wound descends and eventually heals.
And then it is strengthened so that it heals.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of nobles.
This affliction called alconati is nothing but a sanity that descends into the wound, resembling flowing water, and it is not that one.
The method of operating is that you should stop the malady on its course, and then take hold of the patient's head with both your hands from two different sides, and press until you feel the flow of blood reaching the distant parts, and so it stops and does not descend, and light is brought, and thus the malady sees its causes.
And if it does not come down, you know that it is water.
If the descent of the fluid into the wound is not prepared as we have said, then stop the malady between your hands and take a subtle spike and make a cut there above the panniculus covering a little before the continuation of the conjunctiva with the tunica cornea in the crown (in the place wanted), until the fluid is drained.
So when it is drained, then you distil the warm water that you have mixed with honey or water in which fenugreek and honey have already been boiled.
And then it is treated as other causes within which it is healed.
**Chapter XXII.**
On the treatment of water retention (edema).
We have discussed the types of water retention in its division and it is appropriate to drill into the speech declaring, according to health, that...
Now you understand that you must sever the illness between your hands on a couch and bind its water strongly.
Then place your left hand near the eyelid of the eye with water retention, if the eye with water is the left one; or your right hand, if it is the right eye.
And then apply your right hand, if the pain is on the left side; or your left hand, if the pain is on the right side.
Then, hold the tip of the magnet close to the edge of the eye, considering the thickness of the tear in the socket, and slowly turn your hand while keeping the magnet on the skin.
Then, penetrate into the socket of the eye, and feel that the magnet has already been attracted to the cause of the pain.
And observe that the distance from the magnet to the point it touches should be equal to the space between the pupil and the edge of the black disc, which is the corona of the eye; for you will see the pupil through the clarity of the transparent cornea.
Then, place the magnet inside the area where the water is, and pull it down once, then release it, and soon after, the pain will leave the part on which his sight was fixed, and the magnet will attach to its socket.
And then rest a little; so if water is let down, you must rest that other time until the bladder is emptied.
And therefore, when it is contracted and does not descend, you should extract the bladder with ease, and turn your hand a little at a time, and then dissolve a small amount of clear salt gem in water and wash the inside with that water; and then remove the inflamed part or stop it or use wool infused in rosy oil and albumen of an egg and apply it to the swelling.
But for us, and those of our time, it is better to treat it with tripe and egg albumen.
And if you do not obey to your bladder against the pull of the swelling - for it is one of those men where the swelling is hard -, then know that you must take the sponge which is named alum, whose form this is:
And so pierce that joint, and do not end your hand in the trunk, and it is only when you make a subtle passage at that place.
Then insert the instrument according to what we have said.
And you must complete your work, prepared for the patient's peaceful sleep, made comfortably on their back in a dark room, and forbidden from all movements.
And hold it in a way that allows its nature to be cleared, not twisting their head to the right or left at all.
And it should be bound according to its position within the third day.
Then carefully remove that in this dark place and examine the bright sight, and discern some causes, and return the bandage within the seventh day.
And be aware that you should not do this during treatment or soon after an infusion. You likely understand that this should be done because the water can then easily and violently emerge due to great pressure.
If it happens that gangrene occurs cautiously, then know that you should clean the wound in front of the seventh day and correct any fluid discharge from the affected area.
Then examine the patient closely and place your hand over the mouth to regulate the breathing for several days, especially during the night's darkness.
And gradually reduce the use of that remedy and discuss its causes.
And know that at times the student is not exempt from seeing certain things, and then you should be bold in your judgment regarding the operation.
And we have already reached some of those who are in the art of surgery, and one says that fire should be made in the air with a certain instrument through which water is sucked out.
However, I have never seen such a perfect instrument in our land, nor is it mentioned in any of the ancient books, and it may be new.
And these are the forms of the spices of magic that should be over those who ignore them.
And they are made of iron or bronze properly, and their ends have this triangular subtlety, the sharp end thus with that shape.
Chapter XXIV.
Regarding the treatment of flesh wounds in the nose.
When there are diverse layers of flesh within the nose, some caused by a growth of many small feet or polyps in the nasal passages, this illness is called polyps because it resembles that foot represented. And it is flesh that is cancerous, pale, of dark color; and it is this flesh that is the lion's flesh, not of a dark color.
Therefore, in that flesh of the lion which is neither deceitful nor cancerous, you should do thus: open the wound between your fingers and place it in the sun, dry the nose of it, and pick at the small lump in those meats. Then extract it from the parts outside, and carefully divide what you have understood from that subtle action of one part within, knowing that all the flesh is already held; if there remains any cause of which the separation is possible, then use this as a tool to divide it with subtlety among the facilitators, so long as no other cause arises. If you have a fever or an acute apthetic abscess, then apply it to what it covers; or if it is one of the malignant absceses, cut and cauterize that part which has separated and leave the cavities entirely open.
And then, you should be vigilant at the nose; make an incision there and apply vinegar or water. If the nose is blocked and you perceive humidity inside the palate, then know that it is already healed.
If the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then know that inside there is flesh full of pus surrounding the bones of the nose to which the incision has not yet reached.
Therefore, you should insert the instrument carefully into the part where there is any hardness, and gently in and out, and between each movement, take a little or much as necessary, and thus dislodge the patient's illness and insert one end of the instrument into the nose either by force or for other causes that are possible.
And after this is done, it releases its aromatic essence so that it reaches the nostrils' canals and sits on its crown, for many times seeing these actions makes children in schools emulate them, and it is a minor cause for anyone who wishes to do so.
Then hold both ends of the thread, one end emerging from the nose and the other pulling on the thread, and apply pressure to the flesh with the fingers around the threads, and do this until you know that the flesh is attached to the thread.
Then extract the thread, and after cleaning the nose with a warm compress, apply an ointment for three days or more until the infection has destroyed all the damaged flesh.
Finally, at the end of the treatment, insert a nasal cannula made of lead for several days until it is healed.
If there is a treatment that proves effective, use it.
And this is the design of an early distillation apparatus used to extract oils and medicines from plants:
And make it of silver or bronze, which is similar to a small open lamp with a small cavity, and the material should resemble it.
And if you wish, make a closed tube similar to a cane, and the nozzle of the distillation apparatus should be flat, open; it should have a handle at the rear end of it, which you hold when distilling oils or water from the extracts and substances that adhere to it.
Chapter 25.
They grow from the ends of the nose.
Various growths are seen at the ends of the nose, and they swell and increase in size over certain days until the attention of them must be given.
And for this, you must understand the beginning of its appearance and eradicate all of it. Then apply over the area either cautery or medicine that is appropriate for its location.
If its incision is delayed and it becomes swollen, consider if it is blackened, hard, of a dark color, and without feeling, then do not touch it with a sharp instrument, for growths that appear at such an apostema carry great malice for the one who bears it.
And if the abscess is a severe infection and not of a dark color, in some cases incision is possible throughout it, then evacuate the evil and cut into it with caution, and treat the area with something that drains and constricts until it heals.
Chapter XXVI.
On the suture of the nose, lips, and auricle when continuity is broken due to a wound or similar.
Know that when there is a rupture of continuity in one of these cartilages, little benefit results from such an operation except for certain individuals.
Therefore, when you encounter any of these conditions due to some cause, and it is a fresh wound with pus, then you should adjust the two edges of the wound with suture, and care for it until it heals.
And if the openings of the solution for continuity are already separated and each one is made healthy, then be sure to extract each part from its adjacent tissue until it is completely clean. Then adjust the two lips to suture and strengthen them; sprinkle sacred fire on them and cover with a thin layer of fine plaster or some other consolidative dressing, leave it for two or three days, then remove that dressing and replace it with another one, leaving it until the flesh is completely healed.
The technique for the suture is that you add the solution of continuity either with needles as we have recommended in the suture of the abdomen, or add the solution of continuity to the wound, as you know best.
**Chapter XXVII.**
To extract those causes that come in both cheeks within the parts inside.
These swellings are often seen in many people within the parts inside their cheeks; some of them are hard like firm fat from erysipelas, and others are larger or smaller.
So, he will open the cheeks and extract each of those hard swellings from every part, and then he will fill the space with a clean dressing while the wound is still fresh, and he will wash it with wine and treat the area with water that has been strained, until it is healed.
Chapter .XXVIII.
On the incision of the tissue attached to the gums.
Cutting into the enlarged gums that were once called albulus, so he will either suspend them with a hook or hold them with forceps and cut them as necessary, and let the healthy blood flow.
And then apply over the area a sage or other astringent and purgative powder.
And if that flesh returns, then incise it secondly and cauterize it, for the cautery will not return.
**Chapter 29.**
Of the reason of toothache.
When on the surface of the teeth within and without, and between the gums, there are rough cuts, scars, and some are blackened and turned red or yellow, due to this, corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth become loose.
And therefore, you should remove the pain between your hands and place the head of the patient in a suitable position, and pull out the teeth in which these rough cuts and similar appearances are visible, without causing any further damage, and do this for their blackening and yellowing and other similar issues as long as they have not been cured.
Therefore, if something remains in the beginning of the reasoning, good; otherwise, you will repeat the reasoning on those points for another day and the next, until it comes to the final statement regarding what you want.
And you know that teeth have required various forms and shapes of surgical tools according to how they are prepared for your operation. For these reasons, the scalpel with which the tooth is removed from its socket is different from the one used to shave between teeth according to other forms, and you must prepare these various shapes of scalpels that you will often encounter:
Chapter .xxx.
Eradication of teeth.
Understand that you cure the tooth of its pain with all care and time in its complete eradication, for there is no cause to delay its extraction once it is removed, as it is a sublime substance whose excuse is not valid during the eradication of it.
When the disease is forced to extract a tooth that causes pain, you must be certain which tooth is painful, as the pain often deceives and makes us believe it comes from a healthy tooth, and you extract that one, but the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is extracted, for we have seen this through operations performed by barbers.
Therefore, when you must be certain which tooth is painful, and you know it well, you will then realize that you need to sacrifice part of the gum tissue around the tooth using a scalpel, or fine forceps, starting from a small beginning, until the tooth is completely detached from the gingiva.
And then use pliers with strong grip for good manipulation or extraction, and place the patient's head between your hands that hold them steady, and carefully pull the tooth according to its straightness so as not to break it or cause more pain to the disease.
And therefore, if it is not forgotten, take one of those instruments, place it there from all sides with ease and effort remove it as it was done at the beginning.
If the tooth is broken or rotten, you must take a piece of cloth wrap it around that wound and stretch it with the tip of a thin wire so that it does not slip during your tightening grip on that area.
And be sure to perform the scarification precisely in all parts of the gum and watch closely so that you do not break or tear it, then return to the patient for further treatment as the pain becomes more intense than the first.
And be careful not to do what some ignorant barbers do in their haste and audacity regarding the removal of teeth, for they do not administer what we have recommended; indeed, many times they cause great pain to men that is much more difficult to endure, and the roots of their teeth become completely broken, or some of them, or even those from which we have extracted certain bones in the mandible, as we have often witnessed.
And then proceed with the eradication of it, rinse your mouth with wine or add salt to it.
And if there are discharges of pus for a certain time, then also as the inflammations increase, cut off some amount of it and wash over the sore with hot water, and if that pus does not come out, cauterize it.
The shape of the forceps should be fine and thin, suitable for extracting a tooth from its beginning, with a short handle and thick, so that they do not bend when used in such cases.
And similarly, when using forceps with thick handles, make sure they are not bent when you first open them; the ends should be short.
They are made of Indian iron and have straight ends; the tips of these forceps have teeth where one fits into the other, and they open with a strong downward pull, and sometimes the tips of these forceps take the form of a bird's beak that has no curl, and they are very strong.
Chapter .xxxi.
On the eradication of teeth and the removal of broken bones from the jaw.
When you need to eradicate a tooth that is embedded for some reason, first apply heat to the area for one or two days until it becomes softened. Then insert pliers or tongs whose ends are shaped like a bird's beak, known as a ciconia or guanta, and carefully extract the tooth.
The ends of these should be filed or smoothed with a file or rasps.
And if you do not obey these instructions with the pliers or tongs, then carefully dig around the root and expose all the flesh, and insert the instrument known as a small lever, whose shape is thus:
And take a thin but strong thread, small in diameter, not wrapped so as to not be easily cut.
If the incision is forgotten, this is it; otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments, of which these are the shapes: the shape of the first instrument is triangular at its end, with some thickness.
The shape of the second instrument is triangular, with an even thinner end.
And now, with this instrument, having two slopes, the appropriate shape is as follows: and with other instruments used for tooth extraction; indeed, an operation is performed with this instrument resembling a large comb, and its shape is...
From the rounded or pointed end of the triangle, which may have some thickness, but is not obscured so that it is not distorted.
And you should know that the tools with moving teeth are similar to other instruments.
The skilled and subtle artisans, through their understanding of the art, discover for themselves the secrets of various operations and illnesses; for there are ailments to which the ancients did not give attention or create specific instruments, due to the diverse forms they take.
If the bone of the jaw or any other bones in the mouth are distorted, then apply gentle treatment to that area using the appropriate instruments and forceps, as we mentioned for removing teeth, and assist with the maneuver whose form this illustration depicts.
And if there is any small defect, tighten or hold it with the mouth so that it does not protrude or escape, and then restore the area with appropriate medicines for such a purpose.
If there is a small hole in the bone, then quickly remove the debris from that hole and from its darkness, and treat it until it is healed.
**Capitol XXXII:**
On the care of the prominent teeth among others.
When teeth are prominent beyond their natural shape, especially in women and particularly the more delicate ones; then consider: if it is not possible to extract or clean the tooth, you must extract it; rather than leaving it attached to another tooth, cut it off with this instrument which resembles a pig's tusk, made of Indian steel with a very sharp tip.
And your incision should be made over the tooth in many days due to the tooth's hardness, and it should not touch any other teeth.
And if the prominent tooth is exposed to erosion, then use a lime made of Indian steel with this shape:
And it should be entirely made of Indian steel with a precisely shaped edge; and have small, pointed tips like needles, with which the tooth is cleaned gradually over many days with ease, so that no other teeth are damaged or affected. And then cut those at the end, and quickly remove those with other razor blades.
And if it is a tooth that is causing the problem and it hurts the tongue, you must cut into the space where the pain originates, ensuring that the pressure from this issue does not prevent the tongue from moving freely or distort speech.
**Chapter XXXIII.**
On the restoration of lost teeth, use gold or silver wire.
When teeth are affected by concussion or removal due to impact or breakage, and the patient's condition cannot be improved with conventional treatments, it is necessary to use gold wire instead of silver for strengthening, as silver corrodes over time, while gold remains unchanged.
And the thread should be of such fineness and thickness according to the amount that can fit between the teeth; the shape of the filling is to take the thread and wrap it twice around two healthy teeth, and then increase its curvature towards two damaged teeth, or if only one or a few, until the fabric reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. Then continue the stitching within the opening from which you began, and tighten your hand with ease and wisdom so as not to damage it.
And the tension with which you tighten the thread should be such that it does not pull out the teeth.
Then cut off the excess thread using pincers or scissors, and place them at appropriate locations with your fingers, then fold them over and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged one, so as not to injure the tongue. And then apply this strap so tight as a Roman would.
If it becomes loose or breaks, tighten it or those parts with another strap in the same manner throughout the time.
And this is the form of teeth and the figure of correction for two healthy teeth and two rotten ones, thus when you tie these together:
And when it is done so that a tooth or two return to their proper place in their locations, and they grow again as we have recommended, then they remain healthy.
And this can only be done by skilled artisans and wise ones.
Sometimes, certain causes relate to the bones of a cow, and they are shaped like teeth, placed in the location where the tooth is missing, tightened as we have said, and remain and serve for a long time.
Chapter .xxxiv.
On the incision of the ligament which is found on the tongue and prevents speech.
This ligament which prevents the tongue from moving occasionally, or is natural and normal to man, or is accidental and occurs due to a disease which has already become hardened.
And the operation on it is to open the mouth of the patient, releasing its existence in the lower part; and lift up their tongue, and then incise that nervous ligament according to its width until the tongue is released from its restriction.
If there is any hardness or tightness in that area, which is due to the hardening of a disease, then you apply oil and cut it according to its width until you incise the ligament and dissolve the knot.
And be careful that you do not cause a wound in the flesh, and that you do not break any blood vessels so that pus does not flow.
Then, wash the clothing around the incision with warm water or vinegar or a cleansing water; then leave the tongue unmoving; it is necessary that the patient keeps the tongue quiet during each night so that it does not get stuck again.
If a pus flow occurs, apply vinegar to the area; if the pain increases, cauterize the area with a hot iron that is suitable for this purpose. And then apply the cure for other causes, as long as it heals.
Chapter XXXV.
On extraction of the ranula, remove the tongue.
Sometimes accidents occur causing the tongue to become swollen and resembling a small, closed mouth, preventing it from performing its natural function; and because of this, its strength is greatly reduced within the mouth.
And the operation on them is to open the patient's mouth wide, facing the sun, and assess the swelling.
And if you see it of a faint red or black, hard, color, where the patient feels no pain, then do not touch that part which is cracked.
And if it turns white, in which there is humidity, then place your finger in it, and insert a thin spatula, cutting it all away; and if the blood flows at the time of your operation, then hold a clean cloth over it, using vinegar, as long as the bleeding is contained.
And then return to your work, having completed it as much as possible, and wash the wound with vinegar and salt; and tend to the other remedies for this until it is healed.
Chapter .xxxvi.
On the extraction of abscesses from two auricles and those that are nothing in the glans, and other abscesses.
When swelling in the glans occurs, there are glands that are closely packed together, which break out and are called two auricles. When you treat them as mentioned above in the previous division and they do not heal, consider whether the abscess is hard, of a dark color, with little sensation, and then do not touch it with a needle.
And if it is of a dark color and the base is thick, do not touch it with a needle due to the flow of pus; instead, let it mature as it is, and either it will be discharged on its own or it will break through by itself.
And if it is of white color, soft, and the base is thin, then that one needs to be cut open.
And the operation on it is that you consider, in front of your operation, if the inflammation of it has been completely rested by cautery or if it has diminished in any way; and then stop the evil before the sun, and let the head of it be in the low position, and open the mouth of it, and the servant takes between his fingers the tongue of it gently with a fine instrument of which this is the shape.
Whether it is made of silver or bronze, it should be fine and sharp.
So when you press on the tongue and show the inflammation to your patient, sit down in front of that low position, take pincers and place them on the affected area, and pull it out as much as possible outside. Another thing that you pull out is the cause of the tunics, and then cut it with an instrument of which this is the shape.
Another thing that you pull out is the cause of the tunics, and then cut it with an instrument of which this is the shape. It resembles a pair of forceps, yet its extremities are curved, so the orifice of each of those is at the tip of the other, very sharp, which is made of iron initially covered in cloth.
If this instrument is not available to you, then cut out a spatula of which this is the form: sharp on one side, blunt on the other side.
And having cut one slit, cut the other according to this same manner of cutting, and then close the incision with warm water.
But if there is an excessive flow of blood, dress the wound with decoccion water from chamomile or mint leaves and similar to those used in cases of severe bleeding until the flow of blood is stopped, and then tend to that so that it heals.
And in some cases, if other remedies fail, you should apply two auricles here and two there, cutting them as you have been taught in the incision of two wounds equally.
You have already treated a woman suffering from an abscess that originated in her groin, which abscess had a dark color, little sensation, had closed the opening in her groin, and the woman was breathing heavily, had forbidden herself to eat or drink water, and was close to death if more time had passed, perhaps for one day or two.
And the abscess had already strained so much that it had formed two openings through which pus could be drained.
So, you should cut them open and remove the abscess, taking a large portion of it, and then you should incise that one from which you understood the other wound, and then you should press the mouth of the abscess, and seize its tongue, and then place the abscess in that opening.
And then make a large incision, and let no blood flow from it but a little. Therefore, the treatment for that woman is as follows: immediately start drinking water and then consume food. Thus, you should not repeat the incision from that sore spot for a long time, but rather move on to another location, where another incision can be made, which will help extend the healing process.
Therefore, you should apply a hot iron and cauterize the sore spot, which will additionally help; then walk around and do not clean that place with water, as God has already healed it for you.
**Capitol .xxxvii.** (Note: The numbering seems to be out of sequence, but I will translate as requested.)
Regarding the incision of the hernia when it is localized.
When the catarrh (accumulation of mucus or phlegm) in the hernia is localized, and it is long and narrow, then it is called perpendicular; but if it is broad and round at the opening, then it is called a bulge.
In the treatment of what we have mentioned in the previous section, and if your treatment does not agree with this, and indeed, after making an incision, the hernia has already receded and is small, then you should incise that which is added round; but if it is of considerable length, and is sanguineous, of a dark red or black color, and does not give way to pressure, then be wary of making an incision, for there is danger involved in the condition.
And when you observe it according to the manner I have described regarding its whiteness and length, you should ease the pain by applying pressure with an instrument that shapes its form, then place a new one on top, and pull it down, making an incision with one of the two instruments used in dividing into two parts.
And be careful not to insert anything but what is appropriate according to nature, because if you insert more of it, you will harm its function.
Then make the incision, use what we have recommended for the incision of two wounds, and care for it until it is healed.
If the patient was frightened by the incision, use your skill in the cauterization process to calm their fear, and the manner of applying the cautery to them is nothing but sharp steel, and it is that you hold the head of the patient on the table, and press their tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, and take water as we said in the chapter on cauterization, and apply it to the living wound, and ensure it is neither too thick nor too thin, and fill the cavity of the instrument, which has this shape:
The extremity of the cavity where the medicine is placed should be concave like a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine on top of it, and have the patient lie on their side so that saliva or mucus from their mouth does not fall due to the inherent nature of the medicine, preventing any damage to their throat.
And then apply your hand to the medicine, extract it from the throat until the space allows for its degradation and sedation by the bite of the medicine.
And if you wish, take care and wrap that around the end of the ray, submerge the wrap in the medicine, insert the ray into the wrap within a tube until the wrap adheres to the tube, and do this as many times as you need for the cauterization of the uvula, then let it sit so that it dries and falls off after three or four days.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it, then for the cauterization, place the wrap soaked in the medicine around the uvula, clean that which is in the circulation of its medicine with water, wash it thoroughly with hot water, and treat outside with embrocation, and internally with purgatives until it is healed.
This specific type of treatment is much safer than incision and free from fear.
Some times the ulcer is cured with something subtler than cautery and incision, for it is healed by smoking in this manner: take calament, hyssop, oregano, rue, Arabic chicory, camomile, broyde, and similar herbs, and combine all those causes, or some of them, into a single mixture, and submerge them in wine and let them bubble; and the wave should be struck gently and decently, and there should be a trough in the middle of the wave where an instrument shaped like a hook is placed according to this manner; it should be made of silver or brass.
And then insert the extremity into the opening of the patient's throat until the vapor reaches the uvula over the epiglottis, and the uvula becomes significantly obscured.
Then repeat this process over the affected areas while they are dry, and be careful not to perform this treatment when there is a risk of developing abscesses, as you would tighten the abscess too much, and it's important that you don't do that unless you have received permission from the doctor who has examined the cauterized area.
If you do not have this instrument at hand, take a cane and attach a bell of fire at its end, so that the mouth of the hernia is closed, for the bell of fire prevents the burning vapor from reaching the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
**Chapter XXXVIII.**
On the removal of thorns and other substances adhering to the skin, and on other causes.
You may observe substances adhering to the skin, or thorns in the flesh, or any other cause.
Then you should extract what is apparent from these [substances], focusing your sight on it, and using your tongue as an instrument before the light, so that you may clearly see what is in the mouth.
And for what is hidden from your sight in the gullet, be sure to make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, for powerful vomiting will expel the foreign body lodged in the gullet; or make them swallow a piece of napkin or shredded lettuce or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of dried seaweed, twist it tightly with a string, and make the patient swallow it, for when it reaches the place where there are spikes and is extracted, it will be expelled. And you may take a snake and mix it with vinegar, place it in the fire and extract it; or take a leek and cut it open and extract its contents.
If it is not forgotten about those causes that we have mentioned, then use an iron tool in the following manner:
And it should be thick enough to pierce and narrow at the end that you can easily insert it into their mouth.
And raise his head up, and be careful of the touch of his bone in the throat, so that he may take in air and ease the pain or pressure on the bone or spine, or what the doctor places his hand on.
Yet if the illness that has entered is more severe, due to his knowledge of the place where the cause is attached and he feels it descending, he places his hand on the instrument on him, all according to the amount prepared for him until it is forgotten.
Chapter .xxxix. (Note: The lack of specific content makes it impossible to provide a meaningful translation or interpretation in this context.)
On the extraction of appendices attached to the throat.
When treating an appendix as we have discussed regarding treatment with medications and not surgically removing it, consider the sunlight on the throat of the patient, since you will have to remove his tongue using the instrument that we have recommended.
Therefore, if you examine the blood flow, extract that small or subtle cause respectfully.
If it is not possible to extract the cause, then take a concave needle and insert it into the hollow of the patient's condition, and then place on the concavity of the needle a heated iron, and do this several times (while the blood flow is stopped and the cause removed from the hollow) and keep the patient cool with water throughout the day.
Then take a vessel filled with water, open it to the patient's mouth, and use it to wash their mouth; do not spill any cause from it, and pour the water out through your hand another time, as soon as the blood flow begins to feel the water.
But if what we have recommended is forgotten, then fumigate the patient with herbs or safron through the instruments we have recommended for uvula fumigation.
Do this, so it falls in place.
And another way of operating in suffocation of that is that you take a cloth with hot coals and cover it with a covering in the middle of which there is an opening, and fix the end of the instrument to that opening; then apply the suffocation from above; and have the patient close his mouth at the end of the tube, and seal his mouth so that the suffocation is not blown out until you know that the suffocation has reached the bloodstream, for the blood will soon flow.
And if he does not eat, you repeat the suffocation with hot air again and again, forbid the patient from drinking, and have him eat salty foods and herbs, and do not let him drink water, and thus it is necessary that this regimen be strictly observed.
And this is the form of the instrument used to extract blood from the veins when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps in that it has no curvature: Which is placed on the gullet, and its extremity resembles a swan's beak, which is called the 'guant', in which it is sharpened with lime, for this reason, when we encounter any cause, it does not leave.
**Chapter XL.**
In which is the summary of the discussion regarding the prevention and treatment of abscesses.
Abscesses are special spots, of various shapes and sizes, according to the memory of their origin, each described in detail in this book.
And they vary in puncture and section from two different methods: one is for the specific abscess itself, and another for addressing the humidity associated with them.
And the second method targets areas where bodily accidents occur, as abscesses in the head differ from those in the foot, and an abscess in fleshy tissue differs from one affecting a joint, each requiring specific surgical treatment.
And some pustules are such that they do not need to be pierced, but rather allow the maturation of the pus within them or the completion of their course.
Other pustules need to be opened when they become swollen and are not mature according to their course; similarly, there are pustules that are prone to joints, where the pustule appears near a joint, its presence in the vicinity of the joint prolongs the time it takes for it to heal, and often corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that member; or it is a pustule near a major member, and if you delay piercing it while it is still mature, it will affect the main member; or it is near the buttocks, so pierce one that has not yet matured; and do not pierce it when it is dry, but rather one that is prone to the buttocks, so that you do not drain its pus and it elongates within the fissures of the buttocks, creating a fistula, or opening in the term of the pustule that is not healed. Maybe you already know the moment for piercing the abscess, and thus it ripens.
And you know that it ripens when the pain ceases and the fever abates, and then there is a decrease in redness and pulse, and the swelling of the abscess head, and other signs.
And know that you should pierce the site filled with pus beneath the abscess and coming from the healing of the eminence.
And the piercing should always be done through the thickness of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the thighs or feet, and in places of the joints, of the nerves, of the arteries; and, lastly, in all other places equally, where there is no reflection; for in those that are reflected, use piercing according to the member.
Maybe you should wait for the abscess to be in a fleshy location, then it is better to delay piercing it until its digestion is confirmed according to what we have said; for if you pierce it too soon, it prolongs the suffering of the patient and increases the soreness and hardness of its edges, and deepens its infection.
You may make some incisions in certain places on the body as needed, either according to the thickness of the flesh or the part that requires it.
And be aware that you should make small incisions, and in large incisions make deep cuts or wide sections according to the diversity of the size of the incisions.
There are also incisions in which the skin should be cut and lifted, where such a pain occurs as if it were done in terms of a pan and cut, so as happens in cases of gangrene and boils.
Of those that are cut in a section with three angles, and of those that are incised as if in the form of a myrtle leaf, such as in the incisions on the knees.
And of their kind, where round section and half-moon section are administered, similar to those mentioned above.
If that one to whom no such symptoms appear when applying external heat, be sure to pierce that with a shallow or flat puncture.
And if the swelling is great and a lot of pus has collected, do not pierce it at once; after removing some of the pus, wait until the next day and then remove another portion, increasing the size gradually as the swelling decreases.
And especially if the patient is very young, or a woman in labor, or a small child, or an elderly person with weak vitality, for the animal spirit quickly resolves itself towards the release of pus, and thus the illness can be fatal; in such cases, you must perform the operation.
Take great care with this chapter: when making the punctures for these abscesses, be sure to wash and clean them; consider whether the abscess is small or a broad cut, then administer the appropriate remedies; and if the abscess is large, and the wounds from the puncture are deep, you must apply pressure in several places until they heal together.
And if a portion of the skin or tissue is separated from the bone in the abscess, cover it with a piece of fine cloth or thread from linen, just as you would cover wounds with bandages or razors, to maintain its moisture; and tighten that around on the third day; and then treat and cure that area with enguentz until it is healed.
If bleeding occurs during your operation, administer clean water and mix in some linen cloth, and place that over the area where the blood is flowing, and press it to control the flow.
If the bleeding persists, you must administer treatments and remedies as recommended at various points in this text and in division.
If it is during winter, and the abscess is located in a place with many nerves, then you must apply poultices on hot oil and place them over the affected areas.
And if it is summer and the parts are fleshy, then you should apply cool poultices soaked in water and oil or wine and oil, and change them every day as we have said, and be sure to loosen the crust and clean that area and apply what is suitable for its healing until it is cured.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of all hernias universally, but more according to the method of distinction that I have already mentioned about each hernia in terms of how its cure should be handled in particular chapters.
Chapter .xli. (Forty-first Chapter)
On the section of hernias that occur in the groin area of the body.
In the groin area of the head, there are small hernias, which are of various types with layers that are formed; and these have different names.
And from them come drops, and those contain a moisture resembling lemon. And those that contain moisture resembling sweat, and similar to them; and those that are rocky, hard.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, as the extraction of those does not cause any unpleasantness.
And the operation in section of those is that you expect those with an instrument shaped accordingly, which is called an entrom, as long as you know it contains.
If what it contains is moisture, then you cut those apart according to length by sectioning the surface in this form:
And it begins in the section of line B within the line of G. So, after the moisture is evacuated, you scrape that which contains that moisture, and do not leave from that any cause of pain, as troops seen returning, if there remains from that any cause.
And then immerse the affected area in hot Egyptian oil, if present, or in water and salt; fill it with that medicine and leave it for another day, as this corrodes everything that is broken in that layer.
And then you repeat the application of hot Egyptian oil to that area according to need, as long as you are confident that there is no further cause for concern in that layer; once the wound is healed, cure it with oil.
And if there is an abscess with fatty knots, then incise it according to this form: Make a clean incision in the shape of a cross, open it between the two folds of the section and remove that part entirely, pushing your virtue to extract the tunic containing that matter.
If it causes resistance at your discretion, then do as I have initially told you.
And it seems to be done in the case of an abscess by section and cure as we have told you; and the section over a lapified abscess is lighter, because it is of little pain and little humidity.
And sometimes there are these abscesses in the head which, in certain men, have no humidity; which causes are because you must incise an abscess on the head of an old woman and drain it with a hard, sharp, white stone, which cannot be chewed, and if anyone were to hit it, it would bring harm to them.
But in other abscesses that occur on the head, apart from those mentioned above, which appear on the heads of children and require shaving the hair, the section of all these should be superficial.
And stop the perforation of those in the lower part, so that the disease is not spread to the deeper parts.
And then address those affected as best suits the cure.
Chapter LXXIV.
On the section regarding scrofula that occurs in the collarbone.
These abscesses are often seen in the collarbone, armpits, and angles (or joints), but sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the collarbone are often caused by their formation between each other, and all scrofula of these derives from its own tunic, and likewise with the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have mentioned.
The types of these scrofula are abscesses, some of which are stone-like, others contain humidity, and some are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Therefore, when you encounter a case with good disposition for treatment, of which the color is clearly red, and it is more painful at all points, not attached to any nerves, veins, or tendons, and not swollen, be sure to incise it along the dry surface from this point onwards, leaving the body part outside the line of G to the line of B, and remove it completely, extending the edges of the wound with as many incisions as needed, just as we have said in the previous sections, and extract that small portion bit by bit.
And it is more careful that the vein or nerve not be incised.
And the knife should not be too sharp, nor should it fit your hand for cutting, or cause distress to the patient, and you should not cut what is not necessary; because if you were to cut a vein or tendon, it would prohibit your operation, leaving the wound infected with vitriol or other powders that prevent the flow of pus, and aggravate the plague, and leave it untreated until the pain subsides and the plague becomes softened and begins to be purified. When the wound is incised.
Therefore, return to your operation until the assistant has completed it.
And then examine the aforementioned indicated area to see if there are any causes of other small hernias; incise and clean those as well.
And if it is in the root of a large hernia, you must be careful not to incise that hernia from its root. First, be sure that the fold of the skin is tightly closed and does not open on its own, without assistance.
And then fill the wound with warm Egyptian ointment that you have already prepared, and tend to it.
And if you completely incise that scrofula, you will see that you must close the two edges of the wound and allow some time for any excess pus to drain.
If it happens that there is excessive discharge due to the size of the scrofula, you must understand how to incise the base of it, drain it, and then apply a suture and what is mentioned.
And for those scrofulas that contain humidity, pierce them with a superficial puncture at the place where you see the formation of it, and stop the discharge of pus from below the body, as we have said.
And then apply the puncture, you should find some similar things and use them to corrode what is broken down by corruption. And then when you see the wound already cleaned, you must heal it with a generative flesh-like substance until it is healed.
Chapter .xliii.
On the section of the pilot (or edge) of the aperture, make a cut through the gum (or tissue) layer.
The ancients performed this section at the edge (or root) of the abscess, and I have not seen any person in our land who does this.
And this is the inscription from the speech of those people.
One should be cautious in people who have sensitivity, ensuring the extraction of the edge (or root) of the abscess is done carefully; otherwise, it may cause harm due to all the veins and major parts of the affected area being here.
In those who have abscesses in the mouth or throat or between the teeth, when the disease is not in the gums, be cautious of the extraction of the edge (or root) to avoid the loss which is caused by perforation.
Therefore, when we want to treat this, we incise the epiloth between three circles of the epiloth, or four with a small section according to the latitude in that which is between two circles for quantity, and the section should be in ciphas, not in the cartilage, and this location is suitable for cutting, as it is devoid of flesh and the channels of blood are open.
And if the doctor is cautious, he should extend the suture of the wound with care, and then open the suture until it reaches the channel, but avoid the blood vessels if you know any cause for concern.
And then he should incise the ciphas as we have recommended; and it signifies on the section of the channel by the inflammation which is of that very nature, for the purpose of rupturing the hernia and by the removal of the knot.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Therefore, when the time is right for the piercing, add two layers of cloth from the wound's edge, and with that single one, the cartilage should be pierced.
And then administer medicines that promote the healing of the flesh until it is cured.
And we have seen that the entire discourse which we have compiled is nothing but to show that some of these apertures have already been used in the treatment of illness, and the illness has entered into death, and its breath has been cut off, and others are about to incise the epiglot so that the illness may breathe in the area of the wound for a little while, and thus be saved from death.
And for that reason, we will leave the wound open until the evil of the illness is consumed; and this evil lasts for three days. And therefore, at the right time, you will command that the wound be closed, and its cure should take place until it is healed.
And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant holds a knife and cuts into the throat of the patient and makes an incision in one part of the lung, and I was called for its cure, and I examined the mouth as if it were crying out from the dead, and I uncovered the disease and treated the wound which had come from the disease.
Therefore you confessed that she had not cut into any veins or guided the breath, and the air was coming from the wound, and you treated it inside until it was healed by fire.
And do not scold the servant unless it is necessary in your voice, and after a few days return to the improvement of their conditions.
And now I say that in the section of the epilot there is no fear.
Chapter .XLV.
Regarding the section concerning the incision over an abscess that occurs outside the glans, which is called a hernia of the glans.
This abscess, called a hernia of the glans, is a large abscess according to the condition of the body, and it is common in women.
And it is according to two manners: either it is natural or accidental.
And in the natural, it is not susceptible to cure.
And the accidental is according to two manners: one is similar to fatty lumps, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that is caused by the compression of an artery, and in that case, there is fear. And one should not make a presumptuous diagnosis except for the patient who requests it. And you should examine it and investigate it with your fingers, if you find it resembling thick knots, not suspended from any of the veins, then incise them thusly like nodes, and extract whatever is contained within the skin and bursae; otherwise, scrutinize its entire being, and apply treatment to the area in need of cure until it heals.
Chapter XLV.
On the section of the removal of knots.
The knots have various species, and you have already described all their kinds in the previous division.
And it is necessary to distinguish the difference between a knot and an excrescence with careful consideration.
Therefore, you say that in an excrescence there is heat and fever and severe pain until the inflammation of excess substances subsides; and it is filled with putrefaction which ceases fever, pain, and heat.
There is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it accounts for the lion that resides in the body's sac.
And according to the color of the body, its beginning is like a cease and is made also with void, either greater or lesser, and they are according to two species, either fat or containing moisture, and the colors of the moisture are spots, as I have said in the division.
Therefore, when you arrive at the treatment of a nodule, you must expel it and inquire about the beginning of the storm that is called an "intromiss" according to how its form appears in the chapter most appropriate to this.
This is the manner of inquiry about abscesses and all nodules, and it is that you take this storm and insert it into the place most humid which you find in the abscess, and you will turn your fingers around it little by little until you know that this storm has already penetrated the wall.
And then secure your hand according to the measurement of the depth of the wound, and extract the foreign body and consider what has remained in the track of it.
And if the current humidity is forgotten, of any color, then you insert the incision into the superficial layer as I have said in the other wounds.
And if there is no humidity in the track of the foreign body, then you know that it is fat.
And dry it with a section having the form of a cross according to this form: Thus taught, raise the incised area, remove the string from all parts with ease, and examine the wound or sac, if possible, over that place and extract that health from the nodule.
If it is torn during the operation, it is not possible to extract that health, and you should look at it carefully, and then extract it slowly until it does not tear for any reason.
If it does not tear for any reason, whether little or too much, the knot returns according to the best method.
And if you notice that a small part of the tear has occurred, complete the damage with some sharp corrosive powders and tighten the wound, and place a warm poultice over the one that is most painful, and treat the other from the original injury until it heals.
And if it is not large, then you cut both lips of the tear and treat that with this medicine.
If a venous pulse is against it, or not pulsatile, then you cut and apply the place of a three-angled zigzag that is made with vitriol and let that tightness for two days or three until the pain subsides and the swelling of the sanc; and then return to dissect what is broken from the knot.
Chapter .xlvi.
On the forms of tools necessary for cutting and piercing.
Of these are the forms of the instruments, and there are three kinds, of which some are larger, others are medium, and others are small.
The form of the large instrument is this:
The form of the small instrument is this:
They are made of iron, aluminum, and other metals, and their cutting edges are sharpened to perform the operation skillfully in specific locations.
And these are the practices of those experienced, and they are called 'albered', and one of them is known as 'berid'.
And it is of three parts: one great, another middle, and the smallest.
The shape of the experienced one great, form of it:
The shape of the experienced middle, form of it:
The shape of the experienced smallest, form of it:
So therefore for those apertures, ruptures, fistulas, and hernias, so that between them are bones and from others causes.
And thus are made round, thick, leathery ones, also with great needles sewn onto them, and they are done of iron wire, or of iron, or of silver, and the best are when done of iron wire.
And the experience of black plumes is made, which accord that by these fistulas are opened in the cavity of which there are reflections, which shall be reflected to their lightness upon those reflections.
And they are of three kinds, some being long, others medium-length, and others short, according to the width of the fistula and the tightness of it.
Shape of the experienced great plume:
Shape of the experienced medium plume:
Shape of the experienced small plume:
The shapes of the plums are diverse and spicy, some being simple curves, and they are categorized into three types: large, few, and medium.
And of their bodies' humors, there are three kinds.
And of those, there are two curvatures, which are of three kinds.
And they have three curvatures as well, which are of three kinds.
And all of these are necessary in their place.
Shape of a very small simple incision, shape of it:
A large hook with two curves: A smaller hook with two curves: A very small hook with two curves:
A large hook with three curves:
A smaller hook with three curves:
And these are the forms of scalpels that are used to cut and scrape nodules and pustules, and they are of three sizes, namely large, medium, and small.
Form of the large scalpel:
Form of the medium scalpel:
Form of the small scalpel:
The ends of these have sharp blades and the other ends are not sharp, but they are curved in such a way that they can make precise incisions during the removal of nodules without damaging veins or nerves, and through this, the disease is healed and after care is assured with minimal discomfort due to the adjustment required for excorciation of the pustule.
And these are the forms of medicines, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you can see.
They are made of earth and look like rays from which alcohol is produced.
And at the extreme side, there is a hidden point with a spatula, and that cuts into the inside and outside parts, as you wish, so too.
The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between these parts during the piercing of the appositions and do not harm the patient, are of three kinds: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of veins through which the blood flow is obstructed are of three kinds; large, medium and small; the forms of them:
They are made of citric ery (possibly a material used for treatment), round or slightly elongated, and very thin.
And it is necessary that these types of veins, large, medium and small, be chosen so that by obstructing the flow of blood they act quickly when needed, and at first glance, are not medicinal.
I do not recommend using those to obstruct blood in all parts of the body, but only in fleshy areas, just as with the veins on the legs and thighs, and the veins of the arms, breasts, abdomen and genitals, similar to their appearance in moist flesh.
And some times these instruments are made of small blades like scissors from surgical steel according to this form; by which the vein is cut off when performed through phlebotomy, or incision of a vein or artery.
And some incisions are made round according to this form:
Chapter XLVII.
On the care of the mammary glands of men, which are assembled from women.
Some incisions are inflated in the mammary glands of certain men when they begin to feel itching during sleep, then the mammary glands are inflated and assembled from women's breasts, and they become erect, distant.
And for those who wish to do this, they should incise those parts with a sharp instrument according to this form, from the line B to the line G, then remove all the grossness, and fill the wound with incarnate medication, and then adjust both lips of the wound by stitching, and heal what is inside so that it becomes healthy.
If the nipple recedes from its position and becomes softened by its magnitude, as is customary in women, then it should be incised into two parts, above the pus, in such a way that each part contains the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form of the line .B. and .G. And then remove the cord between the two lips of the wound, stop the discharge, and administer what has been said about sutures and powders, as is necessary for the cure, until it heals.
And if you do not perform the incision as required for the pain of the illness and due to the flow of pus, then you should fill the wound with a corrosive liquid and leave it until it corrodes what is broken from the grime, and then treat it until it heals.
**Chapter .xlviii.**
On the piercing of wounds that leave a tingling sensation.
These wounds that leave a tingling sensation originate from the symptoms of scrofula, hard swellings, which contain a pus-like substance.
And of those (wounds) that contain humidity, those with humidity should be incised during the new moon according to this figure: from the line marked G to the line marked B. And once all that is in the wound has been evacuated, you should seal it with a strip of cloth and inspect it again the next day.
And keep the bandage in place and treat it with a suitable ointment until it heals.
And if the wound from lymphatic node swelling and scrofula is, then you should incise it as we have said in the section about treating scrofula generally.
If the plague has spread so that it causes putrefaction, then apply cauterization to it as we have mentioned above.
**Chapter XLIX**
On the sectioning of abscesses that occur through arrow or vein injury.
When an arrow breaks and the string (or cord) is tightened over that which it struck, then abscesses are seen to occur, and the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or vein: for when the abscess is caused by an arrow, a long purplish mark appears on the body; and if you press upon the abscess, you feel a kind of hissing in it.
And that which is due to a vein returns to the general state of the body.
Cutting into this abscess is a mistake, especially when it's left in the armpits, joints, back, and many parts of the body; it is very dangerous, so its cure should be avoided, and one on the extremities or head should be carefully managed.
Regarding those affected by the inflammation of the orifices of the bowels, they should make a longitudinal cut in the colon; then, with scissors, they open the cut and remove the bowels, and loosen the surrounding tissues until it is completely exposed.
Then take the needle and make it penetrate between these parts, and open the bowel with a double thread at two points, which causes the patient to urinate, drawing out both bowels located in the temples.
Then apply the place between the two ligaments with a spatula until the abscess dissolves completely.
And then administer treatment in which the pus is drained until the ligaments fall; and take care to apply suitable ointments to this place until it heals.
If it is an abscess due to the section of a vein, then you must have your hand over this place as far as possible from the abscess, and then insert the needle into the place that you had your hand over, and make it penetrate; and be in that thread double until you extract that from the other side, and then tie the abscess with good ointment according to what I said to you about the ointment of grapes from both parts and both extremities of the thread.
If you are afraid that the thread will break, then insert the fine thread with that needle through the entire abscess after making the first incision with the needle, and tighten your threads in four places.
Then dry the abscess in the middle place of it until when it has become that which is in it, then make an incision into the surplus of the cord, and leave what is joined to it.
And then apply a poultice that you have soaked in wine and oil, and administer the treatment which is made with heat and ointment until it is healed.
Chapter I of the hernia which occurs due to nerve twisting.
Thus, when a hernia occurs in the rear and in the vein, it seems similar to a hernia occurring in the nerves when it happens due to their compression or excessive work, and for reasons similar.
And the treatment is applied in the areas of the assistants or the leg, or in any place where the joints are painful.
And this hernia is severe, resembling the color of the other body, and it appears in their most vital parts; when it is tight due to strong intensity, the patient feels a stupor-like pain in that area.
And no additional swelling is present in the affected limb of the body, and for this reason the chain is left off, and it is painful throughout and does not move forward or backward.
Therefore, regarding those who have this in their joints, it is not covered with iron because the strong pain they experience will cause contraction.
One may use a chain or spike on the head or forehead. If there is little swelling, one may use scissors and cut off that piece from the root.
And if it is large, then hang it with weights, cut it off, and close it up; treat the wound with stitches, and care for it until it heals.
Chapter 1.
On the section regarding the apoplexy which occurs from what happens in the abdomen.
Even some people experience swellings in the abdomen and other parts of the body which are similar to fungi, whose roots are subtle and the heads of which are large; and the edges of these are enclosed, and from them is derived what is small, and from them is magnified what is useful.
And you have already seen one, and in the abdomen of that person there were two parts which resembled fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones, of small roots.
And the edges of those were turned inward and split open, and moisture flowed from that continuously.
Therefore, you should incise those and enlarge the opening in the foot, one side 18 millimeters and the other 6 millimeters.
And the operation in the incision of them is that you consider when the disease is humid, and the color of the swelling is white, moist, with a subtle cut; then you incise it with a broad spatula, and have hot cauteries in front of you to expel the pus, and if pus comes out, cauterize that spot.
If the patient is fearful and anxious, be cautious with incisions; instead, take a faithful plaster of fresh plaster, tighten it around that swelling, in the manner we have said, and leave it for two days.
And then adjust the tightness of the plaster's string; therefore, do not stop tightening the large plaster after it has separated and fallen off by itself through its work.
If the part to be operated on is of a thick nature, in the incision there is no cause for fear or pain, especially when it is in the abdomen.
It is possible that you make an incision into the mass and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then take care of that, once the disease is healed.
And be careful not to assume that you should operate on a part that is of a dark color, with little sensation, and regularly protected by hair, for that is absolutely cancer.
And now come to the remembrance of remedies appropriate for these.
Chapter II.
On the treatment of hernia at the navel.
Hernia at the navel is caused by various factors; either from fissures in the abdominal wall, through which the intestine or hernia protrudes, or from an excess of fluid (edema) or a constricted airflow as mentioned above.
If it is due to an abdominal wall fissure and the hernia protrudes, the appearance of the hernia will resemble the color of the body, and it is usually accompanied by severe pain, appearing in various positions. And if it is due to the intestine's protrusion, the condition will manifest very differently, and when you press on it as we have described above, it may be hidden. In this case, return it gently; it is tightly stuck to its own place, and a lot of effort is required for its reinsertion, along with frequent baths and vigorous work.
It may be due to moisture, it becomes hard and is not hidden when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted or ruptured.
And if it is due to infection, then these signs appear as an abscess turning black and declining in color.
If it is not due to flesh, then the abscess is severe, thick and hard, and it accumulates according to a certain amount.
If it is due to windiness, then the touch of it becomes hard.
And the treatment for it depends on whether the hernia's protrusion is due to rearward wind, or a vein, or windiness; then you must be prohibited from treating it, for in that case there is great fear and danger, as is taught in the chapter regarding hernias caused by wind and veins.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the hernia or the sack, then instruct the patient to lie on their side and be stretched out; then apply pressure gently around the entire circumference of the navel at the place where you felt the pulsation; and command them to remain in that position between your hands on both sides of their body, and encircle a wide spatula around the circumference of the navel at the location where you applied the pressure; and extend the size of the hernia upwards from below with great care; and secure it gently around with a strong thread or catgut in an appropriate manner.
Then, cut open the middle of the hernia that is extended over the ligament and insert your finger into that point where you feel the hernia; if you have constricted or guarded it by the ligament, then you will extract it forcibly and push the hernia inside towards the abdominal wall.
And if you have constricted the sack, then take hold of it with your thumb and cut away the excess.
If it is contrary to your skill or vein, surround that part, and then return to your operation; take two needles and insert them into those two strong fields and pass two needles through the loop you have made around the abscess in a crosswise manner, which you make penetrate; then tighten the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you wish, leave the needles and allow the place to heal until the flesh is extended and falls out by itself; or incise it when it has softened and is curable, and then treat that with something that covers and heals the wound.
And if the prominence of the navel is nothing but flesh or due to moisture, then cover and tighten the abscess as we have said, and remove the pus or moisture that you find in it, and then treat it with something that covers and strengthens the area.
**Chapter LIII** (If the text is structured as a book or chapters)
On the treatment of cracks.
In the previous section, we discussed the types of cracks and the appropriate methods for their treatment using medicines, avoiding complications such as ulcers. We also spoke about the causes of cracks and precautions to be taken during their cure.
And the ancients said that sometimes cracks appear in places where it is possible to completely eradicate them, such as in the skin or in the thigh, and even in other parts of the body, by removing everything, especially when they are just starting to form small.
But when it is old and deep, it may not respond to treatment, as I have neither seen nor heard of anything that has been successfully done for it.
And the operation on it is as we have said: you must first prepare and cleanse the patient from black choler in some cases, and then cut out the crack if a clear protrusion is observed.
And then prepare the patient for surgery, making incisions that cover these areas; and carefully hollow out from all parts with a good knife so as not to rupture any cause of the hernia's pain. And then stop the bleeding without causing further injury, press the areas, and wash out the copious blood with your hand or an instrument that you have at your disposal among the instruments.
If it is against your will to make an incision of a large vein or artery, cauterize it until the flow of blood stops, and then take care of it with the other remedies as it heals.
Chapter LIV.
On the treatment of hydrophobia.
We have already discussed, in the division, the types of hydropic water and the signs of each species, for their cure by medicine.
And that which is cured with fire is only the species of ulcers, and not approached with fire to the species of tympanitis or the species of hypothermia, for that is mortal.
And when you have already treated this species of hydropic tympanitis with medicine and do not confirm your treatment, consider, for if the disease has already been weakened in the patient, or it is that other malady, another hydropic illness, just as in those of the throat or stomach and similar to them, then beware that you do not treat them with fire, for fear is upon that.
If you encounter a patient with vigorous vitality and the illness is only hydropic, not another malady, and it is neither old nor young, then the manner of the operation for it is that you raise the patient between your hands, and apply appropriate pressure to their abdomen with your hand, squeezing out the water at the opening of the anus, and take a pointed spatum according to this form:
It is of two sharp parts long, with an acute tip as with a spatula; nevertheless, it should be in him in some brevity little by little, so that during the operation this does not enter into the cavity and causes harm to him.
And then consider if the generation of hydrops is from hernias, for when you cut along the section away from the navel by the amount of three fingers in the gaps on either side, to the right and left of him.
If the generation of hydrops is due to illness of the intestine, then your section should be left of the navel by three fingers.
And if the generation of it is due to the mass, then your section should be at the right side.
And do not cut your section over the side on which the illness wishes to be, so that the superfluity does not flow to that place painfully.
And then carefully perforate the entire chain with the instrument, and insert it into that section, and raise your hand with the spatula between the chain and the bladder, and excise it; if it is the size of a fingernail or similar.
Then perforate the bladder so that the spatula reaches the desired location, which is where the water is. Then remove that one and insert an instrument of this form: and it resembles a delicate silver tube; made of silver or bronze or lion's metal, in which from the beginning there is a small opening, and on its sides are three openings: two from one side and one from the other; and the end of it is cut according to the shape of a pen, thus:
And at the end of it is a ring, for when the instrument reaches the water, it will immediately rest on the instrument, thus evacuating a small amount of water at a time, for if you evacuate more than necessary in one go, severe harm may befall the patient due to the resolution of their animal spirit, or they might suffer a sudden death.
May you evacuate it according to the quantity of its virtue and according to what your disposition of the patient's virtue of the pulse of his leg and the goodness of it dictate.
And then, after removing the instrument, take up the water which causes it, as often it is retained by the cord which holds the pus from the head of which you have extracted it; I recommend to you that you pierce it according to this manner.
And you should repeat the use of the instrument another day if the disease tolerates it, extract a small quantity of water from it and make this happen for several days in fear; be careful not to remove all the water at once.
If you fear for the disease and remove a great quantity of water, then cure it by burial in sand, wash it with water and expose it to the sun for a long time; and treat it with drying medicines as long as it is healthy.
And apply a cautery to the stomach, and press and extract the water, as I have described in what precedes.
Chapter XXV.
On the treatment of children who are born with imperforate urethras.
Sometimes, some of the children are born with excretion from their mother's abdomen, and the opening of their mix (urethra) is either too narrow or not in the correct place.
Therefore, it is important to address the imperforate urethra as soon as possible after birth using a delicate and subtle method:
And place a delicate lead or iron clamp over the opening and secure it with a thread, for three days or seven.
And when he wants to urinate, let him do so and then return.
And if you do not stop the flow, it is possible that the urine which flows onto the area will not heal this closure.
But the one whose pain is intense should be treated with lead claws, as we have said, for too many days without relief will only worsen it.
For those in whom the pain is not in its proper place, it is said, which causes these people, whose nature is cold and susceptible to injury, are subject to the end of the shameful head of the weapon, so that they cannot urinate during their movements, as long as they raise the weapon with their hand above them; and this is not due to their generation, but because their semen cannot reach the mother according to its rectitude, and it becomes a motley disease.
And the method of operation on it is that the malady be turned towards his side, and then extend the head of the stone with your left hand by vehement extraction, and cut off the head of the stone at the place of the perineum with a sharp knife, as if you were making an incision with a feather, or any other instrument, so that the middle part of the stone comes out resembling the head of the stone and falls into the proper place.
And beware, in your operation to remove the gangrenous flux, for what causes it to happen; hold it with what cuts off the gangrene, and cure the ulcer within so that it becomes healed.
Chapter LVI.
Of the albament that occurs in the prepuce at the head of the penis, and of the corruption, blackness, and adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the penis.
Motas visible occurrences happen to this Albater on the scrotum and are an elevation of raw meat.
And some are malignant, while others are not.
Non-malignant, it requires that you suspend it subtly and remove that one entirely; then place your hand on the affected area with a kind of Egyptian ointment; and apply that, cure it with refined ointment until it is healed.
If the Albater (testicle) is malignant, then you must understand that you administer cautery near its incision and ration it accordingly.
If the Albater (testicle) is within the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis, and one testicle is inside the foreskin while the other is outside, then you must hold the inner testicle at its beginning until it is healed; and when you treat the outer one, be careful not to damage the foreskin during healing.
And they examine the genitals and the dark, inflamed prepuce, so that you understand everything that has become discolored, is corrupting, or is already corrupt; then apply a line to it with honey mixed with flour from crushed millet and dried herbs.
And apply treatment to that as if it were another cure, as long as it is healthy.
If there is a need for bloodletting, then administer cauterization monthly according to this form:
This cauterization is beneficial for two purposes: it aids in bloodletting and in the plague when it is corrupt.
And if the head of the foreskin is corroded and destroyed completely in an instant, then understand that you must insert a platinum tube into the inner part of the prepuce so that the discharge from the malady flows through it.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in those whose foreskin is its own, and no circumcision is required; when adhesion occurs due to a wound or abscess), carefully scrape off the spatum with an obtuse spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely freed.
And if it is difficult to separate them delicately, then you must scrape off the spatum from the head of the penis and the foreskin, and this is because the foreskin, when thin, is easily pierced by its own delicacy.
Then carefully separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a delicate knife, which has already been soaked in water to prevent further adhesion.
And then apply a cooling agent while it is still fresh to prevent further inflammation.
Chapter .lvii.
On the purification of infants and the treatment of what happens to those of circumcision.
Circumcision is not a solution for continuity as with other ailments; however, when it is of our own operation and our own will, and it is done on infants, it is necessary that we assign to this better operation and method the lightest loss possible for health.
Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not perform circumcision in any of their free peoples, since they do not use it in their laws, and this is only because we have acquired by experience the cause for which I have granted the greatest part of artisans and barbers to use circumcision and purification with a new blade and with fire; they use lint with wool and incision with the fingernail.
And you have already tried all these methods and do not find a better purification than with scissors, lint made of wool, which is superior to purification with the fingernail, because the seal of the prepucium in two layers, the outer layer being left, and the inner layer being forced to another incision and secure pain. And the purification which is done by alpecaty, and it is digital, of which surgeons use, is not safe for the incision of the end of the male member, because it goes deeply into the wound.
In surgery, a strange creature, deeply rooted, can easily disobey your operation and corrupt it. And the scrotum of a child is small by nature and moves in such a way that it does not require purification, and I have seen this myself.
Regarding the purification that is done with scissors and thread, my experience has revealed a truth: because the scissors are of appropriate size for the incision, the sharpness above is thus equal to the sharpness below; therefore, when you apply your hand with provided proportion, make the incision according to comparison in one moment; it is done with compression of the thread in a shape containing the scrotum from every angle, at which point no error occurs.
And the first step in the operation is that you must position the child mostly if it is one of those who understands a little, do not do anything but tie the thread to its hernia gently, and leave it to heal on its own within a day.
And then do everything possible to make that person happy, in a way that suits their understanding. And make sure to be prepared with everything in place and not gesture; hide the scissors in your hand or place the thick foot cloth so that the child does not see them or any other tools.
And then insert your hand into the hernia of the patient and blow into the crevice, pulling until the head of the hernia is exposed, and clean it from any impure substances.
The shape of the forceps for amputation, this is the form:
One end should not be sharp and the other should be, leaving no part of the claw uncut, and both edges should be of equal length to two handles.
The error in amputation is because too much force is used, which escapes the intrinsic tension of the flesh, or you must make an incision without breaking it.
Therefore, know that you must extend the one from your finger towards the place of amputation and make an incision according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with a pince and incise it.
If it has been three days and they observe that the swelling is left from the inflamed hernia, then you should leave it until the hernia retracts on its own, and excise it easily, incising it as best suited to your preparation.
And be careful regarding the top of the hernia, as it will not be visible.
And therefore, care for what consolidates the pain from the powders we have discussed in the treatment of powders.
And if it is incised from the scrotum with appropriate care and follows the contours of its parts, then this will not be noticed by him.
And may cure be given to what we have said so that it heals.
Chapter LVIII.
On the cure of urine retention in the bladder.
Urine retention in the bladder is caused by an increase of pressure from either stones or a frozen uric acid, or by obstruction or inflammation, and resembles those we have mentioned regarding the methods of cure in the previous section.
And if it is not dissolved by what we have said, then the cause of the illness should be addressed, and you must administer extraction from it using an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the form: Both silver and thin as a lion's claw, with a needle of fine hair like a quill and half as long, to which a thin cane is attached at the top.
And the manner of urination through this method is to take a folded string and tie it at the end of the tube or handle for good suction; and insert the ends of the string into the opening left by the syringe, and cut them with scissors if any excess cause problems from the string, but rather insert them firmly into the cannula with force. And then attach the syringe to the border and to the white of an egg.
And cease the pain over the bed, and open the bladder of the patient and wash it with oil mixed with olive oil and water.
Then insert the scalpel with ease so it reaches the root of the ulcer; then fold the ulcer towards the opening of the wound; then push the scalpel from that side; then push it until it reaches the bladder, and make sure the ulcer is removed entirely to its source, and not in reverse order according to this procedure, but rather the meat in which there is deformity.
And then extend the urine flow slowly as the yarn dries.
Remove it and use the scalpel for urine cure, do not stop until the bladder is emptied and the ulcer relieved.
Chapter .lix.
Regarding the quality of bladder cleansing with stone and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose.
When there is an ulceration, abscess, or inflammation in the bladder, and you wish to drain water and medicine from it, you use an instrument called a stone (clampcedra), and this is how it is used:
but if its opening is blocked, it is completely closed. It has three parts: two of one kind, thus as it drains.
At the beginning, it is made concave, which is what is pressed, and its quantity should be such that it fills that part, any addition being unwanted. As long as some cause pulls away the humors from there, they should be removed, and when they are expelled, they should be thrown away to the stone (clampcedra) that has naphtha applied in sea battles.
Therefore, if you wish to prevent moisture in the bladder, insert the end of the clapper into the moisture and draw out that water which is pushed away from its cavity, for moisture is drawn into the concavity of the clapper.
Then insert the end of the clapper into the urethra as we have recommended in the surgery; and drive out the moisture by pushing, for that moisture will reach the bladder soon, and the disease arises from it.
The delicate form of the crystal that the bladder is covered with, and this is the shape:
And it should be made of silver or metal, of which the head resembles a small feather, and it leaves the cane within the wound.
Then take the bladder by motion, and place it in the humidity that you wish to crystalize in the bladder, and tie it with strong double ligature of thread, and heat that humidity over the fire.
And then insert the end of the chirurgeon's tool into the ulcer.
And then apply your hand to the bladder with pressure to release the moisture or tension within, as long as that moisture has reached the bladder.
If you do not have a bladder at hand, take a piece of cloth and make a circle from it; then pierce it throughout its roundness; and insert the tool firmly into those passages, turning them as needed; and add the cloth, thus forming a bag, so that you can collect the moisture and fluids.
Then tie it off with the instrument as you did with the bladder, and press your hand against it to ensure that the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter LXX (60)
From the extraction of a stone.
We have already discussed the division of stone types and their treatment with medicines, as well as the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, and the signs of each.
And we have discussed the stone that requires surgical intervention with a knife.
And the stone formed in the bladder specifically is the one that remains in the bladder.
And they have so described it in detail, both expounding and summarizing.
Therefore, it is said that stones formed in the bladder most often affect children; and among its signs, the urine expelled from the bladder resembles water in its clarity, appearing in that sand; and the disease burns its verge, causing frequent pain, and it becomes hardened; and thus it tears the body into pieces.
And healing is easier for children of that age who have reached 13 years, while it is a difficult cure for the old ones. The cure for the old is more difficult because of what exists between them.
And of him whose stone is larger and healing is more difficult; and if it is small, it is contrary to that one.
Therefore, to achieve the cure for that condition, we must begin by changing the disease with Christ, who extracts all the gap that is in their intestines; because that gap sometimes prevents the stone from passing after its inspection.
Then take the disease from his feet and position and massage it gently so that the stone descends to the bladder's opening or sometimes it jumps from place.
And then make the cut between your fingers, prepared, and leave its things aside, so that the bladder is completely emptied and declined towards the parts left open.
And then take care of all those wounds, both deep and superficial.
So if you feel the pressure in the space, then cut into it with a sharp tool.
And if you cannot remove the tight object completely, then apply oil to the small finger of your left hand, whether the patient is a child or an adult young person, and insert it into their rectum. And press the stone until it stays inside, where it was found. And gradually convert that opening into the neck of the bladder.
And then press on that part as I have said before, and expel it from the body outside the place where you cut it.
And then command the minister to press the vesicle with his hand; and command another minister to extend the legs with his right hand above them, and with his other hand to hold the cord which leaves the legs, starting from the place where the incision is made.
Then insert a sharp instrument into the wound, which has this form. And it cuts into what is between the thigh and the legs, not in the middle, before reaching the left side; and make the incision on that bone, and follow the natural line of the bone, making a transverse cut, so that the opening outside is wide and narrow inside, according to the amount that can be extracted from the bone without causing it to break, because the true nature of what is within the bone must be considered, and not its weakness.
And you know that there is a certain stone which has angles and margins, so its extraction becomes difficult because of this.
And from that it is like a lion seed, round, and has a difficult extraction.
So if it is that one which has angles and margins, insert it into the fissure.
And if this is not possible, then cover what you have over it, or tighten over it with a decent gesture, the extremity of which is as sharp as a lime, over which you tighten on the stone, and do not let it slip from your grip; or insert a subtle instrument with a curved extremity between them.
If you cannot do that, then widen the opening a little, and if you see a flow of blood, cut off tightly with a hot iron triangle.
If the stone is larger than one, at the beginning, push your finger into the bladder's opening and cut it; then gently press a little inside; and seemingly, make them break into more than two parts.
And if the stone is very large, it is advisable not to cut it but rather ignore it, as this causes two problems for the patient: either it stops (the stone) or it leads to the continuous discharge of urine, because the affected area is not yet fully consolidated.
You may administer the expulsion of the stone from within, or use a device with scissors to break it and extract the pieces through the patient's urine.
So, having completed your operation, fill the wound with aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it tightly. And place your hand upon that cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in warm oil and water, so that the heat gradually subsides.
Then gently turn the patient onto their back, and do not disturb the dressing for three days.
And when the dressing is loose, wash the area with warm water and oil, then apply a mixture of honey and garlic internally and externally until it heals.
If, in the case of this affliction, there is a danger of gangrene, clean and dress the wound, and it resembles a stone frozen in the bladder (and this is known as the retention of urine), then insert what is commonly called the "tying string" into the plague, and extract that pus, for if it causes the bladder to rot and putrefy.
And then wash the wound with wine, water, and salt, and apply it opposite to all kinds of things that are beneficial for its healing until it is cured.
And during all stages of healing, ensure that you cover and adjust the things you have placed over the area, and apply the medicines that are being used on it.
And if the stone is small and located in the depths of the wound, and urine emission is blocked, then treat it with what you have recommended to prevent obstruction, because numerous attempts through this treatment are often associated with obstruction; and having already tried and exhausted everything, take a steel needle, which is the shape of this:
triangular pointed end, sharp, located inside the flesh.
Then take some thread, and tie the wound around the stone to prevent it from returning to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the cautery, piercing it with ease until the point reaches the flesh. Then turn the cautery with your hand on that point little by little, and continue to pierce until you make the other side penetrate; for the urine will soon be drained.
Then press your hand over what is broken off from the flesh around the cautery's exit, for it is squeezed and drained of urine, and the wound is healed.
If this cure is not suitable for any reason, then leave a thread around the wound, and another thread on top of the wound. Then close the wound around that cautery between two bandages. And then extract it. And then carefully loosen the lint and clean the frozen blood, which is formed in the wound.
And it is not necessary to use fine thread to remove the stone, but only to prevent it from returning to the bladder; and the other thread above, otherwise, when the stone is loosened from its place, the urinary tract returns to normal and the pain subsides.
And this is necessary when you remove the stone from above, that you raise the urinary tract to its original position, or it returns to its proper place, and the pain subsides as we have said.
Chapter LXI.
On the extraction of kidney stones in women.
There is little stone formation in the femur.
If you see any stone in those areas, the treatment is difficult and is forbidden by many methods.
One of their secrets is that strong women often become weak.
And the second secret is that you will not find a wise woman who discovers the truth unless she consults a doctor when she is pregnant, or she is one of those women who have never been married.
The third secret is that you will not find many women who know this art, especially the operation of delivery.
And the fourth secret is that the place of incision over stone in women is distant from the place of the stone, so a skilled incision is needed, and there is fear in that place.
If it is necessary to do so, call for a skilled female doctor, as they are hard to find.
If you are lacking those, seek out a skilled and subtle doctor, or present a well-respected female midwife experienced in the ways of women, or a woman who has been trained in this art.
So present this person, and command them to do everything you instruct, from inquiring about the pain to its onset; the reason being that they should ascertain if the woman is a virgin, ensure they insert their finger into her anus, and feel for the pain.
If they find that, cut off what is causing the pain and then command them to insert something into it.
If she is not a virgin, command the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's vagina and inquire about the pain, while also placing her left hand on the bladder, and examining it carefully.
Therefore, if you find it, gradually massage that one from the orifices of the bladder to the parts below, adding warmth to its virtue so that it reaches that part at the root of the thigh.
Then insert into that position of the body's mass, at the root of the thigh where it is blocked, and focus on that part, ensuring the stone does not get caught below.
And the section should be minimal at first; then insert the probe into that section, and if you feel the stone, adjust the section according to the amount, knowing how much of the stone will be expelled from that.
And you should know that the types of stones are varied: some are small and hard, others are large and sharp, some are smooth and round, and they lack points.
Therefore, you know how many parts there are in it according to what you intend to do regarding it.
And if you wish to stop the flow of blood, apply vinegar mixed with salt to the wound and leave it for an hour until the bleeding stops, then return to your operation until the stone is removed.
And prepare for yourself the instruments mentioned in the removal of stones in men, so that you are assisted by them in your operation.
And if you wish to stop the flow of blood, and know that the expulsion of the stone is from the channel where it is incrusted, then place powder on the spot and use those things like a pulley and descental stricture, and do not repeat this; leave the stone and do not extract it, for in doing so, the malady will be stronger. And then apply the cure.
So when the swelling of the wound has decreased after a few days, and the area is suitable, then you return to your operation while ensuring that the stone is completely removed.
Chapter LXII.
On the section about hernia treatment.
A hernia inguinal is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white cavity, which leaves the opening of the generative organs containing the testicles, and it is called the cavity.
And in some cases, it is within the natural pouch that prepares itself for the departure of the testicle, as long as it is a separate testicle; and it is the opening of the generative organ between the white cavity we have mentioned, and this is not a hernia but a twist.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the muscles, as this matter is discharged into them, and sometimes it occurs due to impact made on the muscles.
And this humidity does not have moving colors, for the color of it either declines to citron or sanguine, or red, or is black and filthy, or is white and watery, and it is that which is most common.
And the signs by which it is known that this addition of water occurs are as follows: for if it is in the white flesh that we have spoken of, then the swelling becomes round, declining slightly in length, with a figure like a bow, and the muscle appears, since the humidity is present from every part.
And if the humidity is in the proper fat layer, then the swelling becomes round and separated from the muscle, and thus one estimates that it is another muscle.
And if moisture is between the bones of the spine and the white muscle, then you will feel pain.
And if you wish to know the color of the moisture, then expect the color of the moisture in the place where you encounter a hard crust; and according to what is observed in the trace of the crust, judge what is contained within it.
Therefore, when we come to the treatment of the hernia, you should know that it is commanded that the patient be made to void their bladder if possible, and then turn them over.
Then place the patient on their back for any reason, even slightly, and wrap them with a cloth.
Then place yourself on the left side of the patient, and command the assistant to follow the right side, extending their finger from one to two fingers' width at the spine's joints and the navel.
And then carefully take a wide cut along the middle of the ligament, extending it from the inner side of the thigh towards the penis.
And make the second cut according to the same measure, at a distance from the line you have drawn through the flesh of the genitals, reaching the white bone thoroughly.
And extract it, observe and take care so that you do not insert anything; your incision should be deep enough to completely remove it, and carefully examine the wound according to its extent, as far as possible.
Then carefully pierce the bone with a wide puncture and extract all the water.
Then separate the two lips of the wound with scissors, extend the bone in both directions, and do not touch the ligament of the genitals, incise the bone in that manner as best as you can. And incise it completely or into the flesh, especially its thin layer, for if you do not carefully scrutinize the incision of it, there is a sure risk that the water does not drain out.
But if during the process of removing that from its location at the time of your operation, you have completed the section of the dissection of the hip, then return inside it, and properly adjust both lips of the hip wound with sutures, and take care of it just as you do with other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find that it is corrupted by another illness, then know that you must tie the vessels that are above the suspension, extract it, and care for it as we have said.
But if water is added in two instances, then know that both are hernias; so incise that part according to what you have done with the other, and if it appears to be a suitable operation for you, then perform it.
And then clean the wound, and enter the sections with a woolen cloth submerged in oil or olive oil; place another cloth soaked in wine and oil outside, and expand that over both legs and the wonder of the belly; lay them on folded sheets and poultices, and bind those with a bandage according to this form:
Then take two sheets of cloth and stuff them with wool according to this pattern; apply pressure to the extremities where they are bound with dry wool or cloth, and add more structure in the crotch area of the pants, taking one extremity from the buttocks towards the legs, and the second extremity from the opening of the pant leg, and place two other extremities on each side over the thighs, and the remaining two on each side over the knees, and adjust all tightness in the crotch area of the pants.
In some cases, this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of sectioning with a knife; this is because you take a thin cut-wedge cautery and make an incision at that point on the legs, and then ignite it according to what we have recommended, ensuring that the white skin containing the fluid becomes exposed, and then take the cautery as follows: And it resembles Greek script.
And then perforate that seal, and light it until all moisture is extracted.
And then extend the seal with scissors, and cut it with scissors, and cut it with a subtle cautery fire; incise it according as you can until you eradicate all of it; and be careful that the fire does not touch you.
And know that this operation is safer and farther from the flow of infection, and better than an operation by sectioning.
If it causes you difficulty to use cautery in the time of sectioning or in the time of burning, or flow of infection, then understand that you must cure what contradiction arises for you through treatment which is appropriate to it as said.
If the disease is severe and does not expect a second operation due to its horror, then perform an incision as recommended; it is at this point that you must verify, based on what we have said about the signs, that this hernia is watery.
Now you understand that you must sever the disease on a raised area, then puncture the abscess in the lowest part of it with a spatula, and stop the incision according to the length of the body.
And it is clear that the opening should be wide enough for all the water to flow through.
Then place your hand over the area, press it tightly, and release it, allowing the water to flow out. Then take care of it until the plague is healed.
If there is opposition to the draining of water at that time, you perforate it: this is not done unless the white pannicle in the orifice of the abscess causes opposition and prevents the discharge of water; then place a pen or instrument into which the water from the cysts is drained, whose form precedes; or apply a small amount of pressure to the abscess.
And you know that water returns, and it is blocked after some months or around those times; and when it accumulates again, it is pierced in the same way as mentioned above, because the disease will also pass its days.
Chapter LXIII.
On hernias (fleshy) and their treatment.
You know that in the operation of this hernia, great danger is incurred; therefore, in my opinion, its discharge should be permitted and it should be saved by a better method.
And they should remember the operation on those and the spices of the apoplexy.
Therefore, it says that the apoplexy arises in the bodies of those whose veins are composed and this is done for various reasons: either by a sudden sharp excess of blood, which flows into the veins, or by percussion.
And the color of the apoplexy varies according to the color of the body, and it does not cause pain in itself, but it is a serious apoplexy.
And very rare is the apoplexy that is fixed, of which the color is dark, and it does not hurt.
And sometimes it is caused by the bending of the arteries or by the swelling of those vessels, so that the memory of the apoplexy is already perceived, or by the swelling of veins.
It is known that what is caused by the inflammation of arteries is called the dispersion of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it should not be touched.
What is caused by the inflammation of veins should not be dispersed due to any cause; compression with your fingers is enough.
And it is also possible that on this species a section is made and on the other meats; and you incise the tendon of the genius, then open the hernia from its parts, extract the white cicatricial tissue, cut the suspensory of the vessels, tie them, and incise the suspensory after cutting that of all the parts of the hernia.
Therefore, if the hernia is already in those meats consolidated, then you must extract the hernia and incise it.
And if there is an adhesion due to any cause in the joint, or between what is between the bones, you must dissolve that entire adhesion and cut it with a round incision.
If the adhesion is due to native flesh in the location of the adhesion behind, then you must dissolve everything that belongs to it, and extract the foreign body as we have said.
So when your operation is complete, fill the wound with wool saturated in rose oil and wine; and take care of it with other remedies as needed until it heals.
Chapter LXIV
On the treatment of hernias that are of the viscera.
It is an aperture (hernia) enclosed by a sac-like structure resembling a bud and caused by the softening of the testes, making it difficult to move and walk due to the pain.
And in the treatment of this illness, great care must be taken regarding that from which it is preceded by memory.
However, I note that they mention operation in that second according to which I perform the first.
And it says that you must cease the illness on a raised couch; then dislodge the suspender of the testicles from its place; and take hold of the chain of the genitals with your hand placed on the testicles that are proven guilty by the pain in the scrotum; and have those other ministers, and stretch them to their full extent with vigor.
Then cut with a sharp knife through the narrow space between the vessels, as long as the vessels remain uncovered.
And then extract from every part as we have said in the extraction of arrows, which are in the temples.
And then insert a needle with a double thread into them, fasten that one at the beginning of the place where the pain occurs, and fasten the other again at the end of their effects. And then incise them in the middle part according to the length of the body, and extract what is added from the putrid and corrupt humors.
And then treat the infection with a cure for other infections in which you wish to prevent the generation of vessels that do not drain well, as it is not harmful for this purpose.
If it occurs that all the vessels are affected, then remove the testicles or tie them off so that they are deprived of all nutrition through the incision of the vessels, and they become atrophied, or tie them off so that they do not grow young with these.
Chapter .lxv.
On the treatment of intestinal hernias.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a tear in the abdomen's wall extending from the blood vessels of the abdominal cavity, allowing the intestines to protrude through the opening.
This rupture can be either of the abdomen or an outgrowth, and these two types occur due to various motive causes: a blow, sudden movement, shouting, the lifting of some heavy object, or similar factors.
The indication of this, when it is due to abdomen extension, is that it occurs gradually over time and not suddenly, and it is a protrusion completely within the cavity, as the abdomen compresses the intestine.
And the sign of the hernia is when it is due to a rupture in the abdominal wall, which suddenly causes intense pain; and it appears as an outgrowth from the internal organs, and this is due to protrusion of the intestine outside the abdomen.
And sometimes the abdominal wall is forgotten, and this is called intestinal hernia zirbal.
And sometimes it is caused by pressure, and sometimes it runs in the abdominal wall gap, and here it is retained, and this greatly impairs the patient's condition, and sometimes it causes severe and intense pain, especially when pressed.
And in the treatment of this illness with herbs, caution is necessary, so that one should avoid the risk of complications in that area.
And the manner of operating on this is that you command the hernia to return the intestine to its cavity within your hand, and then place yourself between its legs, and elevate its legs.
And then narrow the knife, which is the knife of the scrotum, at its attachment, and cut the scrotal cord entirely through; and place on either side of the incision two folds of the section as you need to open the section with these.
And if the section is according to the amount that it is possible for you to cut, then make sure that from that point there is no further injury.
Then carefully remove those bodies which are left beneath the scrotal cord, ensuring that the white, hard bodies in each part are exposed.
Now insert your finger into what is the testicle, where there is white flesh, in that space between the cord and the testicle, and between the second flesh, and thoroughly free it from the adhesion behind the testicle.
And then gently grasp the testicles with your hand, extending the white ciphas with your left hand and lifting the right hand over the ciphas towards the scrotum; command the assistant to spread the legs wide apart, and you dissolve the adhesion behind with a full solution.
And search for any of your sayings that indicate there is no cause for the intestine to be wrapped in the hard white ciphas. If you find no cause for it within the patient, then press your hand on the abdomen below.
And then cut into the opening below the testicles, in order to drain the pus and cleanliness as we have recommended in what we have said above.
And then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound; and place on the infection; and apply the linen we have recommended (and sometimes the white cloth is cauterized, as we have said should be done after incision for fear of pus flow, since this has been seen to happen), and leave the linen until it falls off by itself.
If the case of the patient is delayed, then water should be poured over it and placed on that part as we have said.
And then cure the wound with another treatment for internal wounds until it is healed.
Chapter LXVI.
On Ventous Hernia.
In this hernia, nothing has been seen that indicates a successful treatment for it except by force.
And the first step is to perform the procedure as we have advised for the hernia, which is to place the vessels close to the section with ease; and then dry the middle part around the abscess with something that causes it to heal, until the vessels fall.
And treat the illness as we have said until it is healed.
**Capitol LXVII**
On the dislocation that occurs in the joints.
Sometimes, when the joints are dislocated as we have said, they protrude and expose the area.
And do not insist on questioning the cause of hernias to anyone at all; and if they mention one, it is often incorrect; and it goes away by itself in all cases.
If the condition persists for a long time, there may be an opening in the muscles that allows the hernia to protrude into the thigh; this occurs due to the expansion of the muscle (as mentioned before), which weakens and relaxes the area, allowing it to stick out.
And the treatment for this is with cautery, as mentioned in the previous description.
And in some cases, it is cured by cutting according to this method: for the hernia lies between your legs and then close the place of rupture of the eminence aponeuroses in a certain extent according to the quantity of three fingers width.
And then tighten the white string that is beneath the skin, inside it must be uncovered.
And then take the ray and place it over the prominent location of the string, and press it against the abdomen's point.
And then locate the two prominent points on the end of the string's ray, and align them with one another using the suture.
And then pull out the string's end, do not pry open or extend the hernia, nor cause any other issue as you must be well-informed about the treatment of intestinal hernias.
And then attend to the cure of the wounds, and having incised the pus, cleanse it and restore the wound until it is solidified; for the scar tissue contracts and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
And cautery is better at this location because it is closer to health.
Chapter LXVIII.
On the softening of the cord of the testicles.
In some men, the cord of the testicles is softened due to the softening of the tissues between them, and it is important to pay attention to its care.
Therefore, it is necessary for those who are tasked with the treatment of this condition to have the patient lie on their back, and to incise all the cord that is softened over the natural cord, and then properly adjust two lips in the suture.
And if you wish, in the beginning, to remove the excess of the softened cordage with three or four stitches and a secure suture.
Then cut between the stitches; and carefully tend to the healing of the other ailments within, so that they are cured and the discharge falls.
Chapter LXIX.
On castration.
You know that castration is forbidden in our law, but for the sake of reminding you in this book, I will speak about it; and the remembrance of it is necessary only in two ways: one, so that when asked about its cure by those who encounter it, the physician may know; and the other, because we ourselves sometimes have need to castrate other animals for our breeding stock, just as with horses, dogs, pigs, and similar beasts.
And thus it is said that castration is performed in two ways: either by constriction or by surgical incision.
In the case of castration by constriction, the surgical procedure involves cutting off the testicles while they are still soft and manageable and allowing them to hang down. Then take those with your hand while they are resolved and do not appear to be affected by the touch.
For castration by surgical incision, hold the animal and with your left hand, press on the cord of its testicles.
Then tie the suspension, and cut along each testicle with a section, between two processes.
And then cut away that pus which you have removed from some place. And do not leave any cause over those of the brain, but the subtle illness that is upon the vessels.
And in this manner of castration, done by compression, is better because it leaves no cause for the testicles, so the animal does not desire to mate.
And then tend to the wound until it is healed.
Chapter LXX (70)
On the cure for hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men is according to two manners: one where there appears an issue with the space in the scrotum, in which case it resembles both male and female characteristics, including hair.
And some times, urine flow from that vein in the scrotum.
In women, it is different: for the womb of a woman over the penis has two ovaries like a man's, slightly smaller in size outside, similarly to the vulva of a man and two ovaries.
And the treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one for women. It is because you must understand the tight flesh between which the discharge of that [disease] escapes, and then treat it with a cure for other ailments as well.
And in the second kind of men, from whom urine flows from the vein in the scrotum, there is neither cure nor operation for them.
Chapter 21.
Of springtime and flesh swelling due to causes related to women.
The swelling of the testes is strictly related to natural causes, as it is affected and can be observed with care; in some cases, it is aggravated in certain women to such an extent that it spreads as in men, and pervades into coitus.
Therefore, if you have an excessive accumulation of swelling in the testes with your hand or thumb, and it persists, then dig into it.
And do not stop digging until you reach the root of the cause, especially in the painful area, so as to avoid any flow of pus.
And pay close attention to the treatment for healing the pain, as it is treated.
The flesh that is born hidden within the body's folds, until it erupts outside, appears red and swollen (and for this reason they sometimes call it "chronic gout"); therefore we must incise it as we would a tumor, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter LXXII
**On the Treatment of Goiter**
Goiter is when the thyroid gland of the female is not properly opened or its passage is blocked. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental means due to a previous gout, or caused by improperly adjusted flesh, or subtle and thick deposits.
And it is made either in the side of the mother, or on the ribs of her, or in the lower part of her, and it prevents conception and childbirth, and strongly prevents menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is gained by observing the womb, if the swelling is apparent, then it is likely; but if it is not apparent, then you should seek it with your hand or with a mirror.
If the swelling is very subtle and is felt in both lips, then you should cut and tear it open.
And it should be placed over both soft lips, and then your fingers should indicate the pain in both places at once.
And the woman should be on her back, her limbs extended, and then force both lips apart until that subtle swelling is ruptured and the womb's opening is revealed.
And then take wool and imbue it in oil, place it over the area, and apply heat to the spot daily so that the incision does not heal.
If the tumor is large and thick, then cut it with a broad spatula or with a knife made of myrtle.
If the operation is for the flesh, then suspend it with hooks and cut it.
And these are the medicines that stop the flow of blood from bites, as well as pain and dragon's blood, and roots, prepared in an albumen of egg.
And then administer a wide lead tube so that the plague does not harden less easily.
Hold it for several days and administer water from the dry source.
And then it is treated with other healing methods of consolidation until it is healed.
And sometimes it happens in the natural state of other meats, and then you must cut according to this manner. This is also for gangrene, for the gangrene that is in the flesh does not cause any contradiction when cut in any way.
Chapter .LXXIII.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids, and pain in the tail and red boils that happen in the vagina of women.
Hemorrhoids appear from the openings of small veins, not from those that are larger; and when hemorrhoids have been old and dried up, they cause constant burning pain.
And already have I discussed in division the species of those and the signs of those, and to say thus those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Therefore it is said that hemorrhoids and piles are when they are in the lower part of the body and do not appear in sensation, then in those cases cure is not made with fire.
Those that are in the upper part of the body over which sensation is felt, those are the ones that are cured.
And be careful that you place the woman in a reclining position, extend her legs with forks, or with a rough cloth, and insert those into the roots.
And then sprinkle upon those parts the flow of sacred smoke from one of the burning herbs, thus as with cassia and similar ones.
And then gently stretch their feet for an hour, and place them in cold water.
If the flow of pus persists, then make a incision for drainage and remove the abscesses, stones, and similar substances.
And then take flour of ore and comb it with honey, add wine, and make a plaster with this on the patient's back.
If the abscess has drained, it is good; otherwise, adhere two bandages to the skin and make incisions on the nipples.
And then take wool and immerse it in vinegar or in the juice of plantain or in the juice of nettle, mix with wine, and adhere to the place; and cure the place with a poultice until it heals.
And take care of that which must be healed.
**Chapter LXXIV** (74)
On the perforation of the eye socket during an accident in the head.
Special cases of abscesses that occur in the head include cracks, abscesses, ulcers, swelling, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhages, ruptures, and other abscesses. And you have already described these maladies and their species, the signs of those, and the treatments for them in detail.
And be aware that I shall describe in this treatise of amputation the cautery which you see used for the gangrenes which occur most frequently, and if you wish to know in what manner the operation is performed with the iron, hear me.
Therefore, consider that you should evaluate if the pain of the gangrene in its beginning is sharp, accompanied by percussion and fever, and sometimes that darkening occurs and if you feel a certain sensation there, do not immediately resort to amputation, but treat it with something that aids the maturation until the acute stages of the events cease.
And now know that you should cease the bleeding with a ligature which has two strands; recline the patient on their back and position their feet towards the opening below the abdomen, expanding their thighs and resting their arms at their sides, and tie some to this with suitable ligament.
Then the midwife should stand at the patient's head and administer the instrument with which the opening of the wound is made, whose form will be appropriate for those causes that require it.
And when you wish to use this instrument, be sure to hold the mother's womb with one hand, and ensure that the part of the instrument entering the mother is no larger than the size of her womb, and treat the malady. If the instrument is larger than the size of the mother's womb, then be sure to apply poultices over the texture of the mother's womb so that no part of the instrument can enter into the womb.
And be sure to hold the instrument's edge with your hand, and the person administering the treatment should hold the instrument and rotate the edge until the opening of the mother's womb is fully open.
And when the excitation arises and it becomes hot and moist, then be sure to immediately clean that part with a spatula.
And when the bowels are evacuated, you must place a cloth soaked in warm oil or olive oil containing some stimulants on the affected area, and apply pressure in the direction of the flow of the main vein.
Then remove the cloth from the anus and place it on the penis, clean it with a cloth soaked in water containing lavender.
Then the treatment is considered complete after two days, as long as it has healed.
In some cases, the anus and the affected area are washed with a mixture of honey and water, and then immersed in water containing herbs like nettle or long-stemmed aristology, and finally, return to the previous treatment.
If the infection is deep within the anus, you must be careful with its treatment, following the method we have described above.
Chapter .lxxv.
To teach midwives the manner in which embrioic life should be preserved when it presents abnormally.
A necessary cause is that the midwife recognizes the onset of natural childbirth by certain signs, and when she sees the woman struggling during labor and desires to breathe freely, she is distracted by the pain of delivery, and quickly prepares for the birth of the embryo, then you know this delivery is according to a natural figure, and it is the descent of the child on its head, or suspended or hanging from the umbilical cord.
Therefore, when you observe those signs, you will know that her abdomen is compressed so that the embryo descends slightly as it moves over its head, and it receives the second stage, and is free from those superfluities with good purification.
Anyone who is different in this part is unnatural and unworthy, for when the drunkenness is upon his feet and the body of him is before the head of him and his feet, or his hand is on his foot, or the head of him and his hand, or his belly, and strongly he turns himself over his spine, and resembling the figures of him are unworthy.
For all these reasons, it is necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in all such cases, and beware of errors and disappointments.
And showing all the features of these, and what ingenue is in those for it to be understood by that and to have stood upon that.
When the birth is upon his head by natural effort, and he is vehement on the woman and it becomes a difficult part, and sometimes his virtue is already weakened, then that midwife should intervene, or what women have him, and evaporate the heat of him with fennel and moist olives.
And then I carefully insert the catheter between their dilated and fractured spaces, and make a second incision or rather, through her nail, until I reach what is within of humidity. And then I press the woman's belly as the child descends.
If it does not descend, then cover the woman with a mixture of chickpea flour and fennel flour to help facilitate the delivery.
Then I command the woman, I prepare the herbs, which should be exchanged and made into a powder; and make her snuff it in both her nose and mouth for an hour, so that the child is delivered shortly.
And if both of the child's legs are delivered at the beginning, then you must gently reduce those that remain, little by little. If you do not obey the treatment, then place the woman on a mat and lift her legs up, and position the mat on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall due to the impact.
And if the pains are not relieved and the child dies, then cut open those areas and extract the remains of the child or tie the body to the mother's breast with cloth and remove that equally, for it will be forgotten.
When the child is on its feet, then you should press those down, and gently turn the small body, and slowly take one of its legs and stretch those little ones out.
If he is sitting between the thighs, then command him to release himself, and make him cough up the condition, for it will be forgotten if God wills it.
And if it is not forgotten what we have recommended, then you return the small thing little by little until it takes on that second natural shape, for otherwise it will be forgotten again due to hasty treatment.
And if it is prohibited to do everything we have recommended, then take a mixture of alum and dissolved gum, and grind it well in a mortar for a good percussion, and then apply the cone of the woman, the pus from the bottom of the patient's belly. And then make that incision in boiled water, until the wounds are healed.
And when the wounds have stopped bleeding, then do the fumigation of mint and apply that to him. And after the fumigation for an hour, then you should stop it over a wound, and make him sneeze and open his mouth, and take away that, and press the lower part of the patient's belly with light compression, for the treatment will soon be forgotten.
The situation of the patient's condition hangs sideways from one of his limbs. If ingenuity fails in reducing the swelling of the hand, then elevate the patient's leg and try again.
And if it cannot be reduced, then make the patient lie down, and beat the affected parts with a violent concussion, and then apply ointments and compresses that you know to be effective.
And if childbearing arises, then make the woman lie down on her side, and carefully study the reduction of the swelling, engage in the act according to nature, and command the woman to cough deeply until the swelling is reduced.
The condition is over the collarbone, expanding the patient's limbs and the surrounding tissue to twice their normal size. Nurse should have her hand on the baby's head and gradually turn it this way and that, so as to facilitate its birth.
And as it is and how much it is soaked, then place your attention on the root of it, where we have recommended oil and mud.
Then gradually command the patient to move their legs, and when you have done this, make them lie down on one side and command them to bend their knee, then command them to turn over, and do as I have said before, and let them sneeze in this position. Prepare the exit of the fetus on the side.
When you observe the signs of labor of the mother according to this manner, consider and then insert your second finger into your own palm within, so that it is emptied of moisture.
And if the object is suspended over the face and neck of the patient, you should cut through the ligature so that it does not hold and choke.
Then gently pull the object apart until it stops moving, and instruct the woman to compress it at regular intervals, and if God wishes, it will come out lighter.
Double birth or multiple pregnancy. You should know that twins can be born alive, and sometimes even three or four, which is strange and rare; however, in most cases, they are not living. The causes may be natural, but it is not advisable.
And in these cases, even if they are twins, separate them a second time, and distinguish each one by cutting through the cord around their navel. Some births are successfully separated this way, while others remain attached and must be cut apart; this is a matter for another discussion.
And if some aspects of their condition prove difficult to treat and you reach the point we discussed regarding unnatural shapes, then care for them in the manner described.
And if the midwife is skilled and does what makes it easier and subtler, and acts with delay, and is inventive according to every shape as she prepares him through skillful means leading to health.
A reminder that it is formed in the womb from embryos and aborts.
Sometimes they are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even more, and it is necessary to have verified that a woman who has aborted once should not get pregnant again, and another who is completely formed causes great harm due to the measurement of the wise doctors.
And all of this is in the science of midwifery that she knows well what to do with these young ones resembling that, and therefore she should be very careful about it.
Chapter .lxxvi.
Regarding the removal of what is dead.
When you treat the dead matter as we have discussed in the division of treatment and it does not come out without force, and you are compelled to use manual operation, then consider whether the woman is of sound constitution and free from any conditions that could lead to her loss.
Now understand that the woman should be placed face-up on her back, and her head inclined downwards, and her legs raised.
And the assistant should hold both parts or be positioned on the bed to prevent his body from extending during the removal of the fetus.
Then moisten the mother's mouth with oils and mucus from elder, fenugreek, and fennel seeds.
And the midwife places her hand upon those oils and bandages, then delicately inserts her hand into the womb, and carefully seeks the position in which the incisions are made on the fetus.
And consider then if the fetus is ready to be delivered headfirst, and make the incisions in the appropriate places: on the feet, or on the neck, or in the mouth, or on the palate, or leave the beard, or on the fork of the fetus, or in the suitable locations along the ribs, or leave the hypochondria.
If the delivery is to be over the feet of the fetus, then in the pubic area, or in the middle of the ribs.
And take care to make the incision with your right hand, and pause the curvature of the fetus at that place which is between the fingers of your left hand, delicately insert your hand, and position the incision in one of those locations we mentioned, aiming for the desired outcome.
And then place and hold in the appropriate position another bandage, or the third if necessary, so that it attracts equally, and is not extended according to its rectitude only.
And consider everything carefully, so that the projection of it is alleviated as is done in various cases when eradicating it.
And pay attention to what is between them so that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife should apply some of her chosen herbs mixed with oil and insert them skillfully into those areas where it is retained.
So if the retention of the fetus is released, then the bands should be changed in place with another one that is better; and do this until all the fetus is expelled.
But if the hand is exhausted against the other and it is not possible to reduce it by pressure, then wrap a cloth over it; and extract that one until everything is expelled, and cut off that one at the joint of the hand or in the armpit.
And so you must also do with the other hand and both feet.
If the swelling of the hernia is great, or it causes constriction in its emergence, or it occurs at the head of the water-filled sac, then you must insert between the dense spikes and split the head and extract the water, or find that instrument called an "alundat", whose shape will be similar to other instruments discussed in the chapter closest to this one.
And similarly, if the hernia is naturally of great size: then you must cut that as with a ligature, or take that with an alundat as we have said; and extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is firm and constricted, then it must be split so that the moisture in the foot can flow out.
If it is not complicated and does not violate any rules, then you insert the tip as soon as it is possible for you.
And if the pain from the belly is apopletic or hydrophilic, then you must perforate that part which contains the moisture in it.
If the issue is regarding their feet, then you must gently attract it and direct it towards the opening of the mother (or abdomen).
If it is squeezed in the stomach and foot, then you must extract the cloth that you have wrapped around your hand, and pierce the stomach and foot where the moisture is present.
If other members are frozen and the head is turned, then insert your left hand; if the opening of the mother (womb) is closed, insert your hand into the space between the legs, seek for the head, and pull it towards you, and insert one or two fingers into it, and pull it gently.
And if the opening of the mother (wound) is blocked by an abscess that occurs in it, be careful not to puncture it; instead, immediately administer an infusion of greasy moist substances. And apply poultices; also monitor the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
And if the injury is on their side, as much as possible, it should be incised; and whatever we have said about the living wound should be administered.
And if that is not possible, then it should be incised in the bones, and whatever is extracted should be removed.
And be careful not to leave any cause within the wound after the second treatment.
And when you have completed all your operations, then administer what we have said about the treatment of abscesses that occur in the mother (wound).
And if there is a flow of blood, descend into strict waters and administer the other treatment.
And you have already seen a woman whose belly was carrying a dead child, and now again over that fire another pregnant woman is placed, and the dead child is born from another fire. It happened to him after a long time of hiding in his house; and the fire within him became so intense that he began to shake.
And you were first called to treat them, and you treated them for a long time, but the plague was not cured.
Then you should stop thinking about it from various causes and draw a strong conclusion, take an oss from him, and after some days another oss; and you will be too amazed when there is no bone in the belly.
And then you will consider that they are bones from the body of a dead fetus.
Therefore, you will follow the plague, extract some of its bones, and remove the flesh from them in their proper arrangements, as it has been doing for a long time, curing itself with a small limb.
And you should not consider it strange, but rather that in this there is knowledge and aid to the doctor's art with his hand for administration of cure.
On the shapes of the instruments needed to extract the fetus.
Shape of the lever used to open the womb:
This is the form of a stretcher in which the limbs are joined, to which two levers on either end of two feet are attached. However, this virtue should be applied with great subtlety, either with hot or cold compresses.
And the width of each stick should be two fingers and the margin of both sticks should be one finger, and the length of each is half a palm; in the middle area between the two sticks, there are two adjustments made from that same stick, which are already tightened, their length is the greatest part of a palm and a little less, and the width of each is about two fingers, or a little less.
And these two additional elements are inserted into the mouth of the hernia to keep it open when you apply the prescribed compresses on both sides.
Another similar form, but more subtle and lighter:
It should be made of wood or metal, according to the appearance of forceps. However at the extremity of his leg there are also two additions, and the length of those additions is about a palm, and the width of each is about two fingers.
And when you want to open them wider, you do so by bending the patient's body over the side, opening what is between their thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument, similar to shears, according to the amount you desire from the measurement of the mother's mouth, while the meter ensures it is as you wish.
The form of dizziness that the ancients described:
The form of pushing that it is being pushed:
The form of friendship as it is contained in the great head:
And it is constructed like forceps with teeth at the end, thus when necessary, and sometimes, it is made long like this with forceps in this way, thus when necessary, with teeth similar to those of a saw with which it cuts and sews. Form of few remedies:
The form of an unguit (finger or toe) without a nail:
The form of an unguit (finger or toe) without two nails.
Form of a spatula without two ends, where the head is cut off.
Form of two broad spatulas:
All those instruments, when used in combination and with the addition of various spices, prepared as needed by the artisans, are more easily handled during operation and are more beneficial to people due to their quantity.
And do not concern yourself with those instruments that are already ready, for the necessity of such should never be an excuse.
From the extraction of the second one.
When the second one is retained, you must command the patient to hold their breath, then make them sneeze in a controlled manner, and place your hand over their mouth and nose, and if it comes out, it is bad.
And if that does not help, take a warm drink and pierce the cover with a needle, placing it on the herb-filled mouth of the wound, with hot calamine, rhubarb, chamomile, and aromatic spices such as arabic gum and cassia wood, and holy thistle. All these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the drink, and that one placed over the fire.
And then place a canvas tube in the mouth of the wound, keeping it there until the evaporation goes into the concave part of the wound.
And then perform the sneezing as we have said, and the second time, extract it with speed.
But if this treatment is not effective and the pain persists, instruct the nurse to immerse her left hand in warm oil or an infusion of elderflower, then gently insert it into the wound and press. When she feels the second one, take it out slowly. Then, using the same method, introduce your hand as recommended, and when you find the second one, extract it little by little, according to need, so that the patient does not feel a strong attraction. Once it has been determined that the ribs must be moved to the right and left with ease.
And if the mother's breast is constricted, we have already recommended treatment with sneezing and medication from all herbs.
But if all the causes we have recommended are forgotten, be careful not to repeat the abstraction in the same way, but know that what remains from it to the mother's breast is a matter for women, and then purify it with a remedy of herbs; for this will rot it within a few days and dissolve and disappear.
But when it is seen that there is a bad odor from the head to the stomach, which causes harm to the patient, then at this point fumigations and suitable remedies should be administered.
Some of the ancients already employed inhalation of nasturtium and dried figs as a treatment.
A device used to induce inhalation for the retention of menstruation and postnatal bleeding:
It is made of iron or bronze.
And the fine end is placed in the pit and the broader end over the fire, with the inhalation pause over the arms of the fire.
It should hold that inhalation until the effect of that fumigation is consumed, and repeat another.
On the treatment of the unpierced navel of an infant.
The child's skin is smooth and its buttocks are not perforated, which has already been carefully cleaned and bandaged. Then show the midwife how to perforate it as she has said; otherwise, use a sharp spatula and be careful not to touch the ulcer.
Then apply pressure over the infected wound immersed in wine and oil, and carefully prepare the ointment until it is warm.
If there is concern that it is too deep, then insert a tube into the wound for several days, and remove it when the child's fever subsides.
And it also happens that the buttock becomes infected due to a wound or abscess; then, once that infection is incised, it should be treated with the same methods we have mentioned for healing and bandaging.
On the treatment of fistulas that have formed.
Fistulas that develop in the anus or in the space between openings are characterized by a discharge of pus, often accompanied by swelling and pain.
And it is either a fistula or a pustule.
And when that swelling is chronic and susceptible to moistening by white pus or subtle corruption, in some cases these are the origin of such fistulas.
And these (fistulas) are known to be caused by substances that have exited from there through a passage and due to corruption; some times the patient's condition worsens, and very often they are infected by worms.
And some of these fistulas are found in the space between (organs), penetrating into the bladder, and into the flesh of the penis; and some penetrate between the joint of the thigh and into the opening of the anus.
And in cases where a known fistula penetrates into the anus but does not exit, you should insert the aforementioned finger into the anus and attempt to push or pull the fistula when it is not too tight.
If it is too tight, then insert the attempt of a gentle push or pull with your finger until you feel the tentation or the hair in the finger that you insert.
And if you do not feel anything at all or there is no sign of expulsion of worms or gas during the treatment, as we have said, then you should know that it is non-penetrant and limit yourself to care.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then the meaning of it is the expulsion of urine from that area and the prohibition of urination until that location is medically solidified.
If it is penetrating within the joint of the thigh or within the bone and causes pain in circulation, its sign is that the pain penetrates here if there is no stiffness within the bone, and causes pain in the entire limb; and it will cause pus perpetually; and it does not respond to treatment, nor is it solidified with ointment.
And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is no complete cure; the cure for those requires hard work and the sensitivity of skilled doctors who heal them.
But in those that are not penetrating or recent, healing with iron tools is hoped for according to what you have been advised, and what you have already tried.
And the illness moves between your legs over its bones and raises the patient's legs within them, the thighs are inclined towards the patient's belly, and then it inserts a probe of lead, or iron if there is stiffness in the fistula, at the place where you know the pain penetrates.
And if the patient feels pain around the heart, then you must insert your index finger into the chest.
And if you feel a sudden heat in the chest already for itself making itself known as discovered, or another thing that you feel between the chest and that sinus or flesh, then you will surely know that it is penetrating; and therefore do not work on that, because there is no healing in that, as we have said.
They may still say that it is good for some people, although it may be harmful to others.
And as for the treatment by which recovery is expected in such cases, you must make subtle cauterization according to the extent of the fistula, as mentioned above, and insert that heated instrument into the fistula until it circumvents the chest; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all those flesh parts around the fistula, which are adjusted like a plume of an ostrich's feather, have healed.
And then carefully tend to those wounds wrapped in bandages so that all the attached flesh is thoroughly cleaned, and treat them with medicines that heal and strengthen the flesh, and if it heals well; otherwise, it will not heal in any time through other treatments.
And if the attempt enters and does not penetrate into the small intestine, but there is a space between it and the attempt, which consists of flesh or closed matter, then open a fistula in that place where the surface of the intestine can be seen, dry the intestines from the beginning of the fistula, and let the attempt dry too; thus, through the attempt, it will be freed and removed.
And then carefully change those fistulated meats that are attached to a hollow tube of foreign origin and not torn for any reason.
If the flow of pus appears between you and your operation when you think of those meats, then take a fine tool and cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine, for cautery with fire is good for both: it adjusts those meats attached and cuts off the pus by drying the moisture.
And then carefully care for those with swollen or irritated tissues around the affected joint until the pain gets better, and treat the sore area with hot compresses to soften hard, inflamed, and consolidating tissue.
And such medicines which include strictness and restriction; when the pain is restored, it is healed and you need not fear recurrence.
But if the fistula has already perforated into the anus and is protruding from the surface of the body, then insert a finger into the anus and explore it carefully.
And therefore if the tumor is hard and between you and it there is merely a thin layer of tissue or flesh, and it is prone to penetration, then it is not an operation on it but rather a matter of trust and hope through another method.
The treatment for which there are three methods: first, cauterizing it as we have mentioned; second, drying it out until you can reach the cavity within to apply the cure; avoid any sharp incision because you do not want to puncture the sac containing the pus and cause further damage, and instead let the patient's own will guide the healing process; then carefully tend to that area as we have said, either by elongating the membrane and draining the pus collected below it near the anus, using a probe or another sharp instrument, or through an attempt or another device of extreme sharpness, and surgically close those incised fistular tissues wherever possible; and finally, make every effort to restore all the affected areas that were cut, and if the incision becomes infected and the fistula opening above remains unhealed, puncture it from the anus and let the pus drain out more gently for the patient's benefit. And in some cases, the fistula is finished in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, it is on the side of the anus near the surface of the body and at the margin of the anus, take the probe with a pointed end, which is thus prepared to pierce the skin in this form:
and insert yourself into that wound enveloped in cloth or around those; and then, insert the probe into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
If it penetrates deeply into the margin of the anus very close, then extract the probe from that passage as you have inserted the tip inside the anus; remove the end of the probe and align both ends, then open each one, leaving it for a day or two, and whenever you more deeply insert the probe into the flesh, open it when those parts of the flesh are cut between the two ends of the probe and they fit.
And then treat the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
If the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in some way that you are prepared, either with heat or cold, as long as it does not cause a laceration; and then treat it until it is healed.
The shape of the spatulam with which the fistula is divided: its curvature is sharp on one side and the other part is not sharp, so as not to cause unnecessary damage when you use it.
Of the stitching of hemorrhoids where pus runs from the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids are of two kinds, either they are between the buttocks resembling coal, or those are as if with fat protrusion. And they are small and large, and the sanch [or blood] flows from them at that time in one way, they are numerous, they leave the body, and in the extremities of it.
However, those that are only open at the anus are according to few humors, of which citron water or a little blood flows continuously, and they are according to the body's color.
And the treatment for that which is inside the anus is to order the patient to lie down and press until the anus opens and the hemorrhoids appear before you. Then take care and suspend them with pins or what you have at your disposal, and return the intestines to their roots.
If the pins are not held in place by the humidity of their intestines and the softening of those parts, then take a coarse cloth or woolen string and extract them with your fingers, and afterward cut them and sprinkle some powdered substances over them near the incision, so that they adhere to those places instead of cauterization; or cauterize them as mentioned in the previous chapter on cauterization. And then attend to those other treatments until they are healed.
If the hernia does not yield to treatment, then crisp the malady with a small incision, wash it with water that is in the abdominal cavity and, gently, try to force it out when the hernia squeezes.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, their cause is slight, and it is because you take those with your hand or those with wax, and cut them, and then treat them as we have said until they are healed.
And for those who perform the incision, know how to apply a suture to them according to this method: take the thread wrapped around and pass it through the needle, pull out the hemorrhoids from the openings above, and make the needle pierce in the opposite direction (from the other side), then wrap both ends of the thread on the side beneath the needle, slightly away from it, and tighten the hemorrhoid with a strong stretch, tie off the thread, and remove the needle.
And do it all at once, leaving none of them untouched, so that the excess of blood flows from it.
Then place your hand on the cloth soaked in hot oil or wax; press it against the affected area and instruct the patient to rest. Then remove that cloth and, when necessary, treat the affected area with ointment or other remedies until it is healed.
And since these fissures are old and do not respond to that treatment, you will need to use a pointed instrument or your finger to moisten them and express the purulent discharge, which prevents their hardening; then treat them until they are hardened.
Then you should apply those remedies with a strong reason, as the first enters that causes pain and becomes inflamed; and then take care of those that need to be healed.
You know that hernia, it is crucial, and it is not recognized if it does not appear according to the color of the body, resembling a bone head, and it occurs throughout the body and most notably in the groin and sides, and for these pains you should pay attention.
And so it is necessary to incise what is in the region of the hernia, and hold it with forceps or a hook, and eradicate it from its place; and then take care of that.
And if you wish, apply cautery as mentioned previously in its chapter.
May a verruca be a small, rough, round ulceration on the surface of the body, often appearing in children.
And the treatment for it is to extend and incise that, or to open it with a sharp tool or within a container. And if you wish, cauterize it with fire or sharp medical tools.
A mouse (formica in this context) is a small, feigned or fistulated lump on the body's surface, often appearing red, and when pressed, it feels like a mouse bite, affecting the area around it.
And the treatment for it is to take a sharp needle from a bird of prey or a serpent, make it strong, and press it onto the mouse among the circle of the needle; then turn your hand over the needle as you cut what is in the path of the needle, and place it on the flesh at the point of the mouse's origin, eradicating the mouse from its source.
And if you wish, make this as a tube of horn or iron in this manner:
The beginning of the tube should be delicate, soft (not perforated), wrapped around itself so that when it is positioned over the affected part, its movement is not hindered.
And if you wish to cauterize the wound as mentioned above in the chapter on cauterization, do so according to the method described for cauterizing a wound.
In the form of instruments used for administering cryotherapy.
Sometimes cryotherapy is administered using silver or iron tools that have been melted or shaped; and sometimes it is done with small or large instruments according to those used for the treatment of small children, and for those who have a weak or sensitive constitution, the cryotherapies should be small.
The method for making a large and few incisions:
The upper part of the bag should be wide according to this manner, and its distinction is where the bag is tied in the first place with several times.
And the lower end of it, which is inserted into the anus, should be smooth (not covered) with lion's fur, gently attached; and on one side of its length there are two channels, and on the other side one channel, and the width of the channel depends on the thickness of the rays and can be slightly narrowed.
And the bag in which animal bladder or sheepskin medicines are stored should have a length of one palm.
And it should be perforated through many channels, as it is twisted; and the space between the channels should be as thick as said.
And then carefully insert into those channels a strong thread of crude gall, or surround them with it; adjust the bag to that; and when the bag is paused in its place, tighten it at the top of the channel between two distinct points at firm compression, and carefully fasten that channel: The quality of fastening that channel is to fill the bag with medicine, heated according to the amount of the patient's tolerance, and be careful not to make it too tight or too loose.
Then have the patient lie on their back, elevate their legs on either side, and place a cushion under them so that they rest upon it; then apply the tip of the cautery with oil or egg albumen or mucilage of fenugreek or similar to the anus with ease, and have the minister take hold of the bag and squeeze it twice as hard as possible so that everything within the channel is evacuated into the intestine; then remove the cautery and have the patient raise their legs against the wall.
And if the medicine forces vomiting, take as much as you can; and if he sleeps through it all night, it is more beneficial for recovery.
If you apply your knowledge to the solutions of intestinal problems and vomiting, and the condition improves, then you repeat the cauterization until it is healed.
And if there are hemorrhoids or fissures in the anus that cause pain, then use a gentle and subtle cauterization, with small instruments that children use to cut them.
**Curation of Plagues**
You have already mentioned in the discussion of plague cure what suits the body, and you have also given the cure for some from both arts and medicine according to their perfection.
Therefore, it says that plagues are diversified according to where they are produced by the plagues and according to the place on which the plague strikes.
And the causes for which diseases arise are also diverse, such as the inflammation of a wound, or an incision of space or skin, or striking with a lance, or a club, or an arrow, or similar to those disease-causing factors.
The diseases that are in the parts of the body can also be such as a plague which strikes on the head, or the collarbone, or the foot, or the belly, or the chest, and similar to those members.
And it is often recommended for the treatment of certain diseases to stop that reasoning and regulate over other diseases.
And one should begin with simple diseases of the head, since the remembrance of the compounded ones will come at the commencement of the third chapter.
Therefore, it is said that when a simple headache occurs and it is not a fracture, consider: if it is due to tension or similar symptoms, and the patient has already taken enough medication and it is a severe headache and you fear the progression of the disease towards abscess, then you should immediately perform a cerebral puncture and drain the fluid, and do not delay; extract the pus from the sinus according to the amount of virtue in it if there is no other contraindicating cause for a cerebral puncture, especially if the sinus that has formed from the headache is small.
And cerebral puncture is the opposite of the treated condition; and attention must be paid to the patient's diet, as well as avoiding heavy meals.
If, however, any cause prohibits the procedure, then reduce the diet and do not bring close meat or wine.
And regarding the abscess if it is a cautious apoplexy, apply hot oil or wine in which the patient has been dipped to it.
If you are certain of the abscess, then apply over it, if recent, its sanification and the air has not altered the powder which I will describe, then gently press.
And if the air has already altered it, then apply certain ointments until it is healed.
But if the abscess is large or for the opening of a space and similar, and its lips are not suitable for sealing due to their condition, then adjust them by suturing according to what I will describe about their suture.
If the abscess is already exposed from bone and tissue, and it is not a retention but a small suspensory, then incise it and treat the abscess with medicines and restore the flesh appropriately in place of the wound, and instruct the patient to abstain from foods that are coarse: fruits and vegetables and things of similar shape and appearance, until it heals.
And if you find a bone decayed and not attached to the flesh, cut off all the rotted parts and remove them, and then care for it.
If these plagues are caused by an artery or vein from which pus flows and it is not drained by medicines, then you should investigate the artery. If you find one that is not incised, cut into it with a knife, or tie it off; and if cauterization is required to prevent further discharge after draining the pus, do so.
And if these plagues are simple and small, their cause should be considered minor; so you sprinkle over them this powder, as it hardens before the air changes those.
The method for the powder is as follows: mix equal parts of oil from crushed cloves, dragon's blood, and unextinct caustics; grind it all together finely and fill the plague with it, compressing it tightly so that it sticks to the affected area, and coagulate the pus.
And then tighten it over the poultice and leave it, do not remove it while it is still wet, as medicine does not adhere to it until it is healed.
And at other times it requires only this cautery, when there is no acute pain or inflammation of the dragon.
And this surgical procedure is also carried out on large abscesses when it is appropriate to stop them from opening and tighten them, and they are fresh wounds with their own inflammation, whose air has not been altered.
And if the air has been altered, especially in summer, then you should not apply this poultice to its position but rather treat them with what we have said, either by placing a paste of herbs mixed with water and honey on them until they become rotten; and then treat them with other remedies until they are healed.
If a fracture occurs in a bone, and it is small, then you extract it with your fingers.
And tell the treatment for fractures of the head that are dangerous.
Of the ailments of the collarbone.
If the fracture occurs in the collarbone, its treatment does not differ much from other fractures; however, it is more delicate than a simple fracture of the skull.
If the nerves or arteries of the collarbone are injured, then, if it is a nerve, the treatment should not be aggressive but rather to avoid any cure that causes severe pain; thus, applying liniments and bandages as if they were vitriol, similar to those used for nerve injuries. And do not place any cause on the plague, for the substance of the nerves is affected and its continuity to the brain, which is the source of all members.
And if this is to be treated with lighter medicines, then wash it with water twice, sometimes with rosewater or not, and apply heat when washed with water and the other remedies are applied according to this manner, and cover with moisture.
But if the plague is great, then apply a suture, or tighten the lips of it, and return care to it with powders until it is healed.
But if the plague is deep or occurs in it with a low-breaking pus, then pierce it in the most sensitive place.
But if in the plague an artery is already incised and blood flow results, then separate or dry it, or tie it, or cauterize it if necessity requires it.
If you have already incised the spine of the gutter or completely through, and the veins of the collar are saved, then adjust the lips of the wound with sutures on the canal of the gutter and do not touch it; equalize it and return it to its natural shape, and then tighten that with decent tension, leaving it for a few days; and then treat it with ointment in which there is stiffness and excitement until it heals.
If the plague has already taken hold within the bones, then pierce it, and if there are any fragments of foreign bodies, remove all that you can from them; leave what is not appealing to you within until the plague dies down, separates, and is removed from it.
And if the plague is recent, then sprinkle that powder which has been recommended to you over it. If the plague has caused a fistula, then treat it with water from which the memory of its origin will come in due time, in its proper chapter.
If it is a lance or a sword that caused the wound and the depth of it indicates a severe injury, consider more carefully if the plague has an open wound (or an ulcer) when examining the patient; then you will know that the plague is deadly.
And if there is no depth to the wound and the plague is recent, then you should apply powder to it in the first hour; do not tighten that bandage so as to prevent the pus from returning to the depths of the wound and harming the patient more, rather apply a poultice attractive to the wound, and repeat this process twice daily.
And if a suitable poultice is not available, then apply cut vegetables to the wound's surface to draw out fluid; and make the patient sleep on the wound so that the juices flow freely from it.
If the illness has passed three days or more without causing spasms or tremors of the heart, or tightness of the chest, and other favorable dispositions appear, you will know that the illness is cured; then treat those who are still ill until they are healed.
If the healing of the illness is prolonged, and it remains open for a long time, you will know that a fistula has formed; then treat it according to its nature.
And if the illness is due to a wound or cut in the joint or muscle, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it with stitching if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
If the illness has affected the bones, and there has been an incision in the joints, then you should compress the illness and pull out the detached parts, if they are separate. If they are not separated, leave them as they are until the plague can be removed, for their extraction is alleviated.
And for other accidents affecting the other parts of the body, the young treatment in healing is the same as what we have said.
Of abdominal ailments.
The condition that occurs in the abdomen is either great, or slight, or moderate.
And minor disruptions are difficult to achieve in another manner, and I note that their reduction is more difficult if you do not promptly introduce them to their place, as it opens and swells, making their insertion difficult.
And therefore the best disruption is to lie down, for in this position it is not difficult to return the intestine to its place, as it is difficult with both of the aforementioned types.
And you should know that the suturing of the abdomen is done in four ways, but two sutures are common to all other wounds of the body.
And the other two sutures communicate with other wounds, but nonetheless they are more proper for the suturing of the abdomen.
And I recommend to each of you exposure and declaration.
Therefore, it says that when the wound is small and there is no cause in the intestine for it to protrude, and it becomes difficult to reduce, then this is in one of two ways: either because of the lack of disruption as we have said, or when the intestine has become swollen due to the coldness of the air.
And therefore when this occurs, you should know that you need to soak that which you immerse in a sponge or cloth moistened in warm water, or take water with sand, or gravel, and wrap it around the hernia until the inflammation is resolved.
And in some cases, they use a solution of vinegar and water, which is better than just water in resolving the inflammation.
And when you see that the inflammation is resolved, then moisten the hernia with water containing high amounts of aloe and mullein, for it removes the pain from it slightly.
But if the pain is completely gone after this treatment, then cut the disruption with a small instrument with which hemorrhoids are incised.
And the first treatment is better when it does not involve cutting, and there is no need to apply excessive heat or starvation.
Of the instrument, consider its form:
In one part of the sharp sword, and the other part not sharp, and the tip is slightly blunt, but it's not due to lack of sharpness of the blade.
And therefore when the hernia is enlarged and has protruded, it should be reduced to its natural form in its proper place, if possible over that, because it is better.
If the hernia is extensive and located in the lower part of the abdomen, you should make the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; but if it is located higher up in the abdomen, you should raise the patient's head and foot higher than the hernial openings.
And similarly if the hernia is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, you should pause your intention and consideration for a moment so that the opening in which the disease is located is higher than the other.
And thus it is that you must administer this in both great and minor ailments.
And in minor ailments, apply what you have prepared, and then make the medicine be administered between your patient's thighs, where it has its origin entirely in their hands, and adjust the lips of it, and then carefully examine from one side to another, seeking any cause that might be hidden, other than the suture.
And this is the common method of suturing: take the needle, or count one needle according to the quantity of the width of the wound; then lay it near the extremity of the tear on the little finger, and tighten the needle once, but do not insert both ends of the thread into both extremities of the cord, leaving the cord free within, except that you cause the thread to penetrate from one side to the other; thus you have added both extremities of the cord and both extremities of the phalange, making four orders.
And then carefully tighten the thread double around the needle, sometimes from both sides together, and add the two lips and the wound by a decent addition; and leave the thickness of the thread and attach another needle to it, just as if it were the first needle; and do not stop doing this until you have filled all the contraction of the wound with needles.
And the needles should be of varying thicknesses, between coarse and fine, for the finer needles cut into the flesh more gently; and the thicker ones are difficult to insert into the skin, hence it is necessary that they be both fine and coarse.
And it is necessary that the needle be placed in both ends of the hernia gently, so that the flesh is not cut too deeply and the hernia opens before its consolidation.
And the stitches should not be too long so that the hernia is not blocked from healing.
And then insert the ends of the needles so that they do not pierce the patient during their sleep; place pillows over the incision on all sides, which have the ends of the needles; and leave them there until you know that the disease is healed.
And these types of suture have needles in a certain way that is most convenient for small wounds, where just one needle or two are enough to close the wound.
However, the second type of suture is as follows: you administer a suture to all four extremities, from the tailbone and two extremities of the thigh, at once, with an needle in which thread is tightly wrapped, both in fineness and thickness.
And then, when you have penetrated these four extremities with the needle, return the needle to its original entry point from which you began, so that the thread retracts and draws the wound closed, making the suture like a drape in which the drapes are tightly bound.
And between each stitch, apply enough of the poultice to the thicker part of the finger.
And this stitch is known to men.
And I have used this stitch to treat a man who had been struck by a sword in his belly, where the wound was about the size of a palm and located around two palms below the navel; it was a rupture in the middle part of the intestine. And after twenty-four hours, I reduced that swelling that had formed due to the wound.
And the wound healed completely within fifteen days or so, and he was cured. And I treated him for many years, and he lived in good health.
And other doctors had judged that he would not be cured; yet by chance, for you see, I did not use any poultice or medicine on the wound, but simply applied warm compresses twice a day with frequent washing of the area in honey water until it healed.
There are two kinds of suture according to the account of words.
And so you begin to suture the wound, and insert the needle from outside towards inside.
And therefore, as the needle penetrates the wound and reaches the other side according to its rectitude and length throughout the body, leave the tip of the thread in which you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate from the other side, from inside out, into the other end of the member.
And when you have made the needle penetrate, make it penetrate again into that same endpoint of the member from inside out; leave the tip of the thread on this side, and make the needle penetrate into the other end of the opening from inside out.
And make it penetrate with that penetration by which you cause it to penetrate into the body at the end of the mirror, which is in its opening so that all of it penetrates.
Then begin with these cuts on the side of this organ and cut with that end which is from the body, in the other side opposite to this mirror's extremity, through which it penetrates, and reduce it back into the cavity, and with the end of the instrument against this other extreme of the mirror; then extract from the needle which is part of it.
And do this once and again, and do it again and again until you have closed everything that is outside according to that example.
The sum of this manner of stitching is that you stitch with a skin stitch, by which I mean stitching the flesh, once from the side of the end of the needle, and then in the other direction until it is completely closed.
But the second kind of suture, which is truly called Gallic, and this is of speech about it and for its reparation, is that you sew according to the second layer to which some physicians sew it, thus adding all parties to its natural party; and apply the extremity of one to the other extremity of it, and the extremity of the mirror to the other extremity of it, and this is done as you have your repair.
Take care that you keep the needle at the extremity of the mirror in your hand, and make it penetrate the layer inside in that sole, and leave two extremities of the cipher; then turn back the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside in both extremities of the cipher.
Then turn back those threads, and make some of the layers penetrate from inside to outside in both extremities of the mirror other than the opposite side.
And this manner of suture is better than the common light suture, and it is a suture of which precedent remembrance is made.
This is the speech of Gaul.
And they may say, "The stomach suture is corrected with two needles; then you insert a thread into some of these, and begin to introduce the needle from which the thread comes, and make it penetrate within the other side opposite the sutures of those which are joined together.
And know that when there is disruption in the middle part of the belly, the suture there is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
The play of medical treatment for plague is judged according to other plagues.
Which causes, when you perceive the new plague in the presence of its discharge that alters the air, and reduce the intestine and sew it up and prepare it properly, then pause over that flesh-colored powder.
And if the air has already altered the wound, place your hand on that area, burning the engorged parts present until they harden and discharge pus, and become healed and improved; and then treat that wound as is done with other wounds until it heals.
If you do not have the necessary medicines on hand, then focus on this treatment as soon as possible, since it begins to get better with warmth, compression, and changing positions twice a day, just as it has been taught to you, until it heals, so that you do not need other types of medication for simple ailments.
If you fear that the wound may communicate with other parts of the body, then cover it with lion's wool soaked in high-quality oil or olive oil and place it on the areas between the angles and leave them like this.
And if pain or putrefaction is felt in the intestines, since it is seen to worsen, then apply a black, stiff-knotty vine to it, especially if the inflammation has been caused in the intestine and it is felt to be protruding from its cavity.
And you should know that hernias in larger cavities heal more easily than those in smaller ones.
And the hernia called "gugnu" is difficult to heal because it does not receive treatment from any plague that strikes it; this is due to the large number of veins in it, the magnitude of those, the subtlety of the body of that part, and the nearness of it to the nature of nerves.
If what you process from the plague is the fabric, and you manage to clean it, reduce it according to your method, which reduces hernias equally.
If it has spread to the space and turned red or black, then tighten the thread over the area that is discolored from it, in order that pus flows out, for there are veins and arteries in the fabric.
And then cut into this, which is another kind of membrane, and place two extremities of the bandage hanging from the part where the hernia has been opened, so that by pulling on the fabric and the emission of the hernia's arm, the attraction of it will be alleviated.
Remembrance of hernias when they occur in the intestine.
When there is a rupture in the intestine and it is small, it is possible for some people to have it restored, as you will see that which was previously plagued in their stomach by the lance and was the plague on the right side of the stomach, it was an old plague with a fistula, and had issues with digestion and flatulence.
Then you should pursue the treatment for it as if it were not confirmed in the healing of the hernia, but rather focus on the internal area that ignites health and the location is consolidated.
And having observed the location already consolidated, understand the disease you are dealing with in him, and do not disturb any further this ill-accidental event in his belly; and do not force anything for this ill accident, break up its healthy dispositions by eating and drinking, and soon immerse it in water and exercise it as it says.
And some experienced ones have said that when this plague in the intestine is small, it should be tied according to this manner: you take a hook of great size; then adjust both edges of the plague and place one hook from those that open mouths over both edges of the plague; therefore, when it is taken hold of those and tightened its mouth, cut off the head of it, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
Then place another hook near the first, and do not stop doing this until you have made enough hooks for all the plague.
Then return it and close the plague; break off those attached heads within the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
And it is possible that the hernia is thin and delicate, made from the hernia of an animal, finer than a needle; so take the end of these hernia fibers, completely naked, and close the end of them with a needle, wrapping it, and insert that fiber into the needle and stitch with it, and return that to its rupture.
And this method of stitching with catgut is nothing but a second way of trust and hope.
If the disease is great and widespread, especially if it is in one of the delicate hernias, then it requires careful treatment, for there is not a simple cure for it.
On the cure of wounds and fistulas.
You know that every wound and abscess that hardens and ages becomes a ulcer, and it is not healed and persists for a long time and does not disappear, then, in any member, it is generally called a fistula, and we call that our wound.
And a fistula is, in truth, a cut that is hard, white, and without pain, and has a concave shape just as it does with external wound; for this reason, they call it acute pain, i.e., disease.
And it is in some people's bodies a moistness that burns; and often the moisture is discharged in a few hours. And sometimes this moisture is abundant, and sometimes it is scarce, and sometimes it is thick, and sometimes it is subtle.
It has already shown all those causes, their signs, and the cure for them through medicines in detail.
And so, I will now tell you the cure for a fistula that is caused through surgical operation with the hand.
And you should know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; some fistulas penetrate great veins and arteries, or nerves, or the skin, or the intestine, or the bladder, or any of the ribs, or any of the spinal bones in the back, or any of the joints composed as are those of the hand and foot; and from those arise fistulas close to the main member and similar ones.
And therefore, of these fistulas, those following this manner are among the illnesses of difficult healing, and do not receive cure, and occupation with them is work and ignorance.
And if the depth of the fistula does not allow access to these places that are mentioned, and you await and rely on its healing, and you wish to come to an understanding of it, then take a probe or a needle, and if the fistula is according to rectitude, question that part with them.
If the fistula is twisted, then investigate that part with a delicate probe, for the weight of their body's flesh is lifted and bent to straighten the twist.
And if the fistula has an extremely horrible odor, it is not within your power to mean anything about it with a probe.
Then purify the orifices for their horrible nature, for the moisture by which you purify that one must also be applied to the other orifices and their flow.
And you must inquire most carefully, according to what manner it is within your power to know if here you find bones or nerves, and whether the concavity of the fistula is distant or immediate, or it is a fistula that only has an horrible odor and lies entirely within your strength, with all of your questioning, questioning the illness, and finding the cause of the pain through your compression with your hand over the area, and similar signs and accidental causes in the abscess.
And when you have considered and ruled out all those causes, you will see the cure according to your knowledge: for you consider whether it is a fistula appearing near or far from a joint, or of a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or in one of the places that are characteristic of you.
You then examine the fistula according to what has been said in its description, remove whatever is in that flow and corrupt flesh, and cure it where it originated, whether in an opening in the flesh or from tissue and similar things, and treat it until it heals.
If the fistula is of great depth and is accessible, you should incise it as deeply as possible with your knife, and clean it of all corrupt flesh; then wrap some linen in sharp medicines and insert those into the cavity of the fistula that you have understood through the incision.
And do this as it has been seen that sharp medicine corrodes everything that is broken in the cavity of the fistula of corruption.
And then restore those that apply heat, which generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
If it is not healed by this, then you should cauterize it as we have recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and it is necessary to be certain about this, then you should examine it and dry it as we have recommended; but do not neglect any cause from veins or nerves or from major limbs, as we have said.
If the bone is exposed and there is no corruption or blackness, then cauterize that until the corruption is entirely eliminated; and then tend to the flesh on it until it is healed.
And if the arm is not healed and discharged in this way as it should, you will know that you have not achieved the complete eradication of corruption; then uncover it again and carefully perform the reason for its healing and purification with the last strength you have, and restore it accordingly.
And therefore if it is healed, it is good; but if not, you will know that that corruption is in the deep, distant part of the body, which has not been reached, and so for you there remains nothing but to cleanse that.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is within your possibility to throw it out, then you throw it away with subtle forceps that are suitable for this.
And if there are many bones, carefully perform the extraction of all of them, and do not leave any cause for concern in your strength.
If any cause of discomfort arises from the humors, and in their incision there is no fear or error, then incise these ties or flesh if they are here, and dislocate the bones.
If you are not prepared to separate the bones from your patient, then place your hand over the affected area so that the pain reaches the bone, but do not allow it to penetrate beyond the muscles and ligaments, and be careful that the pain does not become chronic, and ensure that the incision you have made during the operation remains open.
Previously, if you are hesitant, apply a hot compress or one soaked in Egyptian oil, or any of the green oils, because when these ties and ligaments are softened by them, the bones can be separated more easily, and this attraction is relieved.
If it is a large bone such as the femur or thighbone or similar, and what is corrupted of it is only the surface, then quickly apply this medicine just enough behind that dark and corrupted area, and soon restore the wound.
If the part that is corrupt is extensive, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it becomes necessary to completely cut out that part within the area where the corruption has set in, and then cure it once it has healed.
And I recommend to you that you enter into the patient's thigh to hold that in place, exemplifying and assisting with your operation.
Focus on a young man around 30 years old who experiences pain in his thigh, and the source of the pain is a separation within the body, specifically within the muscle tissue of the leg, before it reaches the thigh, and it is due to a severe infection or abscess, not an external cause.
And therefore, the duration of his suffering increases due to the error of the doctors, as the abscess becomes severe, and it causes hot, horrible ulcers on his body, all filled with pus and the humidity of the body.
And then a multitude of doctors have been studying this affliction for about two years, not focusing on the sap but on the art, as you have been called to do so.
And he saw the hernia and the matter flowing from it through the entire body; and already the condition of that man was completely rigid, and the color of him was yellowish.
And then he inserted the probe into one of those hernias and succeeded in bringing the probe to the bone.
Then he carefully examined all the hernias and found those that were causing problems from every part of the hernia.
And then he carefully cut and incised over one of those hernias until he discovered a separation in the bone, and he found that part corrupted, and it was already hard and corrupted and degraded; and a part of the hernia had already penetrated and entered into the mesenteries.
And then secure what I have discovered and prepared from the exposed bone.
And I believed that it was not in the bone itself but that corruption which I had removed and secured, and I had already drained it.
And I then paused the restoration of the illness with consolatory medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
And I then iterated and re-exposed the bone according to the initial discovery, and I found continued corruption in the bone.
And I secured what appeared to me as that corruption, and then I had made it perforated in order to effect its cure and restoration, but it was not restored.
And then I exposed it again and did not attempt to cut the bone in one piece but made incisions little by little and performed its restoration, and it was not restored until I had extracted some of its marrow, and then I restored it using medicines, and it was somewhat consolidated and healed.
And further intervention in the operation of excision is not necessary unless for the arrangement of the hernia's folds and due to the lack of patient tolerance and fear of death, as it becomes unconscious at all hours due to excessive evacuation syncope.
And thus it is healed by complete cure, and nothing is in place of the hard bone; its disposition in the body is well arranged and restores its virtue; it is guided according to its dispositions and does not cause contradiction in walking or harm in any way.
But if there is a prominent bone in the body that causes trouble, then you should do this according to this method: take a strong ligature and tighten it at the end of that prominent bone, and ask someone to stretch it; make the second ligature slightly thicker than the first one; then bring it close to the flesh left over by the bone, and extend its tip so that you can pull the flesh away from the bones, and uncover the flesh in the place where you want to cut so that the saw does not damage the flesh.
And place a stick or table beneath the bone, for when you do this, the saw is not hindered from cutting through the rotten flesh.
And be careful that the sawing over the corrupt place is done little by little, because if the corruption is within the bone's concavity and does not appear in its sensation, it may require another cut.
If the bone is corrupt and not prominent, it is often a continuous break from one side to the other, and the corruption is in the middle or at a side, then you must expose the flesh from all parts; and place a stick beneath, and saw first the part with the initial break where the corruption has entered, until the other break is also exposed.
And the sawing should be according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in a joint, pierce that corrupted joint, and bind the bone where it continues from the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in them according to reason but by contrivance.
And if the corruption is in the chest of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; nevertheless, you must inquire about the corruption and how it appears to you, open that up, and remove it according to any disposition possible for you, and in such a way that, when it does not cause you pain or affect nerves, it is rectified.
And you should know that there are various saws and chisels for cutting bones, depending on the position of the bones, their preparation, thickness or thinness, and rarity or hardness; so it is necessary for you to prepare a suitable instrument for every operation.
And you will know that this operation signifies to you regarding the kind of instrument of which you stand in need; since you have great study and long experience of the manners of this art, and are a witness to the ways of ill health, for when you have already tried these things on yourself, it is fitting for the instruments for every ill.
And in the end of this chapter, you will be taught the number of instruments which you will use with examples as you proceed to your restriction, which you will test on others. Form of saw:
Form of another saw:
Form of another large saw:
Form of treatment: The head of this treatment should be in the form of a starred key, and its points are in the form of barbs.
And it is not advisable to tighten the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or if the opening is too wide.
Form of the minor scalpel:
Form of the broad scalpel:
Form of another saw appropriately made: it should have a curved shape with sharp teeth and its handle should be firmly gripped, while the blade is carefully forged. Form of it:
The shape of the razor with its concave edge:
The shape of another razor, more subtle:
The shape of another razor with an extremely curved end:
The shape of a small razor resembling a tent:
The shape of another smaller cutting tool:
The shape of another cutting tool; this one resembling a ray, with a serrated end, and used in various places to cut through bones:
The form of the ray which is suitable for the treatment of one who is pierced by bone:
And the end of it is triangular and of a sharp point.
And it is made of iron from India, and in a way that all the causes we have mentioned of razors, scissors, and saws are covered.
Of the incision of the extremity and of the locking of the bones.
The extremities can be affected either by an intrinsic or extrinsic cause, and if the treatment you have administered for that corruption does not bring relief, or the corruption worsens to the point where it threatens the life or causes severe damage to the member, then you should incise that member within the area where the corruption is located, so as to expel the evil and prevent death or further harm to the member.
And the sign of that which happens is that the member becomes black where it has been wounded by fire, or you may find the darkness extending to the point where the ulcer has reached into that member which it affects and severs all the body; so make an incision there accordingly.
And similarly, it is caused by the corruption and percussion of certain poisonous sources such as from a scorpion's sting or a viper's bite or a similar one.
And if the corruption or percussion is in the extremity of the finger, you make an incision into the finger and do not give space to the corruption for it to spread into the hand.
And similarly, if it affects the hand, you make an incision at the root of the finger and do not give space to the corruption until it has taken hold in the fist of the arm.
And if you change your mind, you will incise the arm into the elbow at the joint.
And if another corruption or change in the environment affects the elbow, it will be the patient's death; and to treat another cause of this with medicine is a matter of virtue.
And similarly, if there is corruption in the foot, you will incise it into one of the joints.
And if you take hold of the foot's edge, then you will incise the entire foot. If it is possible to enter within the toe, then you will incise the leg into the joint of the toe.
And if the corruption has already spread to the toe, then in it there is only dismissal, and you leave the patient to death.
And the method of cutting or severing a member is that you tighten the ligament at the part where you wish to cut, and tighten another ligament over the area; and the instrument extends a ligament to the parts left behind, and the minister extends another ligament on top of it; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments without causing a wide gap until all the flesh is exposed; and then it is cut or severed.
And it should be covered with clean linen from all sides to prevent any contact with the wound, and so that the injury is aligned and dressed carefully.
If bleeding occurs during the procedure, you should cauterize the area carefully, or apply some powders to restrict the flow of blood; and then return to your treatment until it is complete.
And then attach the affected member to a support at the appropriate level, and care for it until it is healed.
And I advise you to pay attention to a man on his foot, this illness that you and I have recommended, which is caused by the dark color appearing on his foot due to an adjustment that resembles the burning of fire.
And that corruption is first caused in the deep tissues of the foot, which tend to affect the entire foot.
And then that man prepares himself for this illness by seeking treatment with poultices that the patient applies to the affected member, due to the severity of pain and the inflammation caused by it, and he cuts into the foot at the joint, and fire heals.
For a long time, that illness caused corruption in the deep tissues of the foot indicated.
And then it struck me, and I realized that I should perforate and draw off that excess fluid with something that would serve as a medicine, then apply purification to the body of the patient; and the excess does not recur, and we begin to move on to another deep tissue that we started with the foot.
And the physician applies the scalpel to the patient's hand, and you do not want to perform this operation hoping for the resolution of that superfluity, rather you must persist in the incision of the patient's dead hand, because the virtue of the illness was on the verge of resolving.
And since he has left me, he has returned to his land and convinced me that that man had prepared and incised his hand completely, and he is healed.
And I have not related this story merely to provide aid regarding this illness, but also to explain its meaning and the way in which it should be understood.
On the cure of wounds and the quality of enema therapy with medications.
When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged as far as it collects pus, and it subsequently ruptures and perforates, and the pus comes out of it, and the place left is hollowed out as if by a pipe, and the skin above it remains intact, and is not subject to further corruption, and does not press upon the bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and is not named a fistula.
However, if the space is prolonged such that the corruption completely engulfs a member, it is then called a fistula and does not heal.
And the treatment for it is that you cut that cord entirely as it is twisted, especially when it has become subtle and is made with a cloth, and ensure that it does not adhere to the area due to its corruption.
If you hope that the cord will adhere and that that corruption does not succeed due to its last effect, and if the cord has passed through the skin, then treat it with a cleansing enema.
And it is that you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the arm that it affects has a foul odor, then cleanse it with an Egyptian medicine made of oil and wine mixed equally, and placed in a vessel, and heated over fire until the medicine becomes hot and reaches the desired temperature.
And then, take from him what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; wash out the affected sinus with it, tighten the openings of it, and leave the medicine in it for a period of two hours.
And then, remove that foul matter; do this for several days until the sinus is purified and the wound healed.
In some cases, enema with ash water can be used when this medicine is not available; take the ash of bones, put it in water, and then collect that and use it for enema within a period until you feel that the sinus has been cleared.
If the patient does not tolerate Egyptian medicine or ash water, then use an enema with honey and water mixed with one-third of a finely ground herb (possibly a reference to a specific herbal mixture), for the honey has purifying and washing properties, and the water helps adhere to the sinus, especially when the water contains no excess of astringency or dryness.
And after you have done this several times and feel that the swelling has subsided, clean the area with warm water to remove the matter that causes the flesh to form there.
And indeed, you should take a solution of dyes and dissolve that oily matter and apply it as a sting; or clean the area with certain medicines in enemas, which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
And if the orifices of the swelling are narrow, through which the catheter for the enema cannot pass, then gradually enlarge it with a small knife, and apply hot compresses wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicum ointment until it is enlarged.
And if the orifice appears wide, then you should close it with stitches and leave it in such a position that the amount of liquid in the enema is increased.
And if the opening of the patient from which the arm exits is elevated above its parts, dry it in the lowest place on them so that the arm runs within them, because when the arm is compressed in the depth of the sinus, flesh will be generated inside.
And if it is not possible to dry the sinus within the environment of the bone in the lowest place as you wish, then pierce that prepares the member so that the arm can run from it lightly according to what you have prepared and no cause for the compression of the arm remains.
He who is above the opening of the sinus, which purges at all times so as to draw out what is collected in it from the arm. And so that you may know if what flows from the arm is much or little, or digested or undigested.
And so consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is in an abscess.
And when your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that has collected over the opening of the sinus has become adhered, or a strong adhesion has formed, on certain days you loosen it, and on the third day, after loosening the infection, change the bandage and renew the ointment.
If it is a sinus that has created a narrow space with a subtle virus, do not be alarmed by the adhesion of it, for healing in it is its own, for it is from some men that flesh grows slowly in their wounds, and from others, the opposite occurs.
And if a blood clot in the vein is suddenly dislodged, you will know that the vein does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the vein persists and becomes prolonged, then adjust the treatment with drying medicines, since these medicines are moist in their nature and virtue, they become dry when added with oil.
And the last part of the treatment is to take drying oil mixed with rosin and apply it over the affected area, then wrap it with a cloth and continue the treatment until it is completely healed.
And it seems to work in the same way when there is no pain: apply drying oil mixed with myrrh and aloes, add frankincense, burn them all and reduce them to a powder over fire; then wrap this mixture on cloth and press it onto the affected vein; use the same method with honey that you have noticed to be thickened.
And at times, certain herbs such as long and sliced lilies of the valley (lilies of the valley), chamomile, and centaury are administered, and these simples are mixed or adjusted, crushed and filtered and powdered over honey which has been collected; and use it.
And if the inflammation persists and is not healed by this treatment, you will know that the corruption is in the flesh of the patient, and it has affected the bones or other hard members or their connections; then you treat it with fistular treatment, as it is said above.
On the treatment of pannarics (skin rashes), oozing wounds, and added incisions of the finger, and sectioning.
Panarics are an apostema (skin condition) that begins with the nail of the finger or toe, and it strongly affects other digits, and as it progresses and its treatment is delayed, it becomes either a cauterized apostema or corrupted, and pus oozes within that corrodes the root of the nail, and it severely corrupts the entire nail, and its corruption reaches the bones within, causing a foul odor. The end of the affected finger takes on an extreme appearance, and its color turns dark.
And therefore when you have dealt with it as we have said in the previous section and do not confirm your treatment, then you should cut away all the excess that is pressing on the joint and apply a cautery to the wound close to it, for cauterization provides relief in such cases.
But if the bone is strong and the joint healthy, and the extra fluid in the joint already compresses the flesh inside, and it begins to hurt and inflame, then you should make a slight cut at the angle of the joint that is pressing on the flesh, and push it apart, cutting the flesh easily, and place something hot over it containing medicinal, non-corrosive substances until all the inflammation has subsided; then treat it with an ointment.
However, if the corruption has already spread to the bone, then you should cut into the bone and extract it, for no time is there health where the bone is corrupted.
And if you observe corrosion and decay in the said part, then incise it with one of the knives according to the memory of its pain, and then care for it until it is healed.
If it is necessary to perform percussion or incision on the nail due to severe pain, at the beginning of the procedure, cut off the nail with a sharp, sec-cutionary knife across its top, and be careful that the cut does not penetrate into the flesh remaining under the nail, as this could cause intense pain and lead to the growth of excess, adherent tissue in the area; then treat that spot with something to alleviate the pain.
However, this adjustment, which is natural in the bodies of most people, is entirely flesh in some, primarily bones in others, or entirely in their nails.
And some of them originate in the inflammation of the joint, or it is their nature in certain parts of the body. He who is born into this world without knowledge of it will not suffer, but he who is born into strong joints is prone to pain.
And of those who are born fleshly, the cut is shallow, for you must insert your instrument into their skin at a slight angle.
He who is born with the problem at the joint's root finds cure difficult; therefore, be careful to avoid its removal.
In the case of those born with such knowledge at their root, be careful to make an initial cut into their flesh in a circular motion around the bone, and then use a suitable saw to close it, ensuring it heals properly.
The consolidation that occurs between the joints due to repeated use or by nature in those who are born without it, or as a result of hernias or fire burns or similar conditions, should therefore be carefully removed so that the joints return to their natural form.
And then place between their sheets some linen soaked in warm oil so that they are not consolidated too quickly, and separate between them or place between them a thin sheet of lead until it is consolidated as required.
And if consolidation seems to occur in certain parts of the hand, then dry that consolidation according to what is prepared and suitable for the shape of the member.
Regarding the incision of veins, there are varicose veins.
Veins become varicose, which are thick, twisted veins filled with excessive melancholic fluid, which occur in most parts of the body, especially in the legs, more so in those who walk, work, or bear heavy loads.
Therefore, it is necessary that you administer a purge to the body from black choler sometimes with strong expulsion, and also draw blood from the patient's basil vein.
The treatment for their fever is according to two manners: one is to make an incision and drain the black pus, and the other manner is that the vein is raised and all of it is extracted.
The incision is made in this manner: first, the leg is soaked in hot water until the thick pus is resolved, which is foul from the thigh, then tightly hold the patient's thigh to the upper part of the infected area with a bandage, and make an incision in one, two, or three places along the vein, widening it, and raise the black pus with the upper part of the leg, towards the area above, and below, until all the pus is drained, as much as you wish and as often as necessary, and this tolerates the strength of the illness.
Then close that one, and order the patient to avoid foods that cause black bile.
And repeat the treatment through phlebotomy when the veins are filled and this causes pain to the patient.
Maybe: "And their elevation is according to this manner: You who lift the patient's leg, if it is stiff and covered in hair, then immerse it in water and soak the leg with warm water until it becomes flexible and the veins are dilated; or if it is exercised through a strong workout, then do so without a bath until the member is heated.
And then cut the cord at the right of the vein, either in its length or at the end, and if it is very low, you should tie it.
Then, cut the cord with scissors and extract the vein from all parts until it appears healthy, and you must assess its condition as you observe that disease declines to blackness.
And so, after you have extracted and removed the cord, you will observe that white is the vein.
And then you insert your fingers into the space between that is elevated and free from the cord, and suspend it with a light touch of a sharp instrument.
Then make another cut at an angle to the first one, and carefully separate the cord from the vein until it appears.
Then elevate that one and incise it in the rear section, after the talon, and extract it, lifting it up until it is removed from the second cut, and then extract it from the section above that one.
And do this until you have extracted the one from the highest or most superior section among all the cuts, ensuring that all are removed; and then incise it.
And if you do not adhere to extracting and elevating it, then insert a strong, double-threaded needle into the space and extract it, or insert the fingers into the gap and turn your hand over all parts where it is stuck. And be careful not to cut; for if it is broken, it will be difficult to raise that part and it will come back to harm the patient through that wound.
And when all that is removed, you will place over the affected area, dipped in wine and rubbed with both white and unwhite oil, and treat that until it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted without twisting in which it is wrapped around the parts, and it is not according to rectitude as we have said, then you should make an opening over all the part of its twisting and at the places where it wraps itself, and raise that whole part until it is lifted.
And be careful not to pierce the vein and do not harm it, for it will be difficult to raise that; and use your prudence in that.
The form of the injury which is dried out:
It is not cut sharply like ulcers, nor of extreme acuteness so as to affect the vein; and it has great flexibility, for if it were subtle, it would pierce the vein because of its subtlety; as we have said, there is sufficient thickness in it.
Of the extraction of the vein of the thigh.
This vein is generated in the legs in hot regions, as well as in the fields of Arabia and in the rear lands of India, which are dry and have little vegetation, where there is neither grass nor open spaces.
And very little of it is generated in other parts of the body, apart from the legs.
And the process of decay is such that it comes from within the body, bringing snakes, worms, and maggots, which are born between the feces and flesh.
And the sign of the impending arrival of gout is this: a sudden inflammation occurs in the leg, the affected area becomes swollen, and then the vein begins to protrude from that swollen spot, resembling a plant being torn out root and all.
And when the extreme of gout appears, you will notice that you must wrap around it a piece of lead as heavy as a dragon's weight. Within this lead, a small dragon resides, and you should remove the lead from the leg.
And whenever gout arises from any external cause, wrap it in lead and note its progress. If the pain persists, you should incise a part of the gout and wrap it; do not cut too deeply until it is completely drained, for if you do, it will contract and enter the flesh, causing abscesses, pus, and bad ulcers in that spot.
So that it can be treated further and extracted little by little, until it is completely removed from the patient's body and no cause remains in their body.
And from this vein, some people have noted its length reaching up to the hand and fingers, and I myself have seen it extend to a length of 20 palms.
And if it is cut open during treatment, then insert the ray into its tract and pierce that long tract through the body, so that everything inside is evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the area for several days using medicines; and then take care of it for the healing of abscesses.
This vein is sometimes very winding, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot, and it causes great pain, and it is known to branch from any painful area.
And so treat it as we have said in the previous division and pay attention to what has been mentioned above.
Regarding the section on worms generated under the skin, it is called bovine inflammation.
This malady is called bovine inflammation in some countries, as it causes visible swelling in the animals and is characterized by the presence of a small worm that originates between the intestines and meat. It spreads throughout the body, causing pain and eventually breaking the intestines and expelling the worm.
And the generation of these worms is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, which cause the appearance of worms, serpents, roundworms, and ascarians in the stomach.
It is feared by its malignity, for when it enters the body and rises to the head, it attacks the brain, severely damaging it and even destroying it, as one can observe.
And therefore when you want to cure and extract it, it is not done unless you understand its movement and appearance, and then you grasp what is above it and what remains below it with a strong grip, and then dry it and extract that.
And if it is embedded in the flesh and does not cause severe pain, then apply a hot cautery at the place where it resides, and the main reason to fear is the corruption of it which corrupts the place as we have said.
If you try to cure that which has been affected at the root of the wound, then tighten over the brow with a strong restriction, and dry it, and extract that; and take care that the patient uses purifying medicines for their body to evacuate corrupt, bad humors, and be wary of foods that cause putrefaction.
On the subject of pain relief.
This illness is called naphria in our land, and it is a pain that appears in some members, and then changes from one member to another.
And you have already seen that second one that I recommended to you. You have been called to tend to a sick woman in a village, and upon examining her arm, you discovered a small inflammation in the vein at the wrist, which had been broken an hour earlier. As it swelled, you noticed that it changed color, appearing almost like living silver as it moved from place to place.
And then, after removing the pain from that area, he placed pressure on the muscle, and did so for an hour.
And then he repeated the same process on the other side, until he had achieved success with the other arm.
And I then reassembled myself, turning over the entire body as I had seen it, and was too amazed by the permutation of the disease and the speed with which it moved from one member to another. And I had already seen this in my own feet according to that manner, but I have seen many which cause great pain to be exchanged from one member to another. I have not seen this in the feet as in the woman.
And I do not think this is in the feet but rather because the woman was old, with a dry body and visible veins, and in this state, the sensation of that changed wind is apparent.
And it is necessary that this regressive treatment does not appear in those who are healthy and have moist bodies with veins barely visible.
And when you wish to cure them, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not apparent to you as we have said, tighten over that part and let it rest slightly and dry over that area until that airiness is eliminated and cauterize the place.
If you do not know how to use these shoes, then cure it by removing the cause of airiness from the body and by applying things that expel wind, and bind those foul-smelling pills and serpentine pills and similar ones.
Extraction of arrows.
Arrows vary according to species and the parts of the body they strike, for their diversity lies in some having sharp points, others small, concave, or dull, all being solid; and some have three edges, while others have wings, and some are fletched.
And among the signs of the patient is when an arrow strikes in it and passes through the bone, especially in the skull above which it occurs due to violent effusion of blood, scotomata, vertigo, pain in the feet, inflammation and pain in the tongue, spasms, confusion of speech, vomiting of bile, and severe loss of words, and is destroyed voice; from the site of the plague there appears white humid discharge resembling powder, and blisters similar to the consistency of flesh.
And if these symptoms appear to you, then abstain from treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is protruding.
If the arrow enters the heart, so that it is close to the left breast, and you feel a sharp pain in the area where it is lodged, not a weak pain; and strongly feel the movement of the arrow similar to the pulse, and the flow of black blood, and chilling from the extremities, and shortness of breath, and fainting; then know that death approaches with all its might.
And the symptoms when the arrow has pierced the lung, are a sputum of blood from the wound, and the vessels near the collarbone are enlarged, and the patient's condition changes, and they exhale with great difficulty, demanding forceful breathing.
And if the arrow pierces the skin in the area of the foot, and the pain is close to the small ribs, then it causes great pain with violent sighs, and all the muscles of the body are weakened.
And if the arrow hits the stomach, it will cause intense pain from the intestinal distress caused by an undigested food.
And if the arrow pierces the abdomen and becomes lodged there, it causes a tear in the organs or intestines, or a hernia, which is irreparable, and there is no hope of healing from removing the arrow.
And if the arrow hits the bladder and causes it to leak urine outside, and results in some discharge from the body, and causes intense pain to the patient, then know that this is a mortal wound.
The other parts, such as the face, neck, head, shoulders, elbow, back bones, hip joint, and leg, can also be saved with careful handling when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a poisonous arrow.
And I will tell you about what I have observed regarding these arrows, so that you may understand this concerning the treatment of wounds.
The cause of which is that when an arrow strikes the lacrimal nerve of a man in the side of his nose, and it is extracted from him in another way, leaving the grays of his eyebrow intact, he recovers, and there is no further damage to his nose.
And another arrow was extracted from a Jew, which had struck him in the grays of his eye, leaving the eyelid intact, and the arrow was hidden and could not be removed from there except for a small tip to which it clung, and it was a great arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, capable of penetrating a lion without leaving an auricle.
And the Jew recovered, and there was no further damage to his eye from this unfortunate event.
And extract another arrow from a Christian man who had been struck in the gullet, which was an Arab arrow, and it is that one to which only ears are attached; and then I incised it between two guides, and it was already submerged in the gullet of the man; and then I gently removed it, and thus healed the Christian.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who had been struck in his stomach, and I thought he would die from it; so, after we had passed XXX days without any change regarding the state of his bowels, I incised into the arrow and put pressure on it, and thus he was healed, and no further harm came to him.
And I saw a man in whom an arrow had been embedded in his back, and the wound was deeply seated, and after setting fire to it near the surface of the skin, I extracted the arrow from the root of the injury.
And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had been embedded in her stomach, and the wound was deeply seated within her bowels, and it did not change regarding its position, and the woman suffered no great discomfort from any of her natural functions.
And he sees another man whom an arrow has struck in the face, and the wound is severe; when the arrow is removed, little pain is felt, but many similar marks remain.
And he extracted the arrow from the man of the king's princes who had been struck in the middle part of his nose; it had already inclined to the right side a little, and the entire arrow was hidden.
And you were called upon for the cure, so close the wound of the arrow within three days.
And then he examined the wound of the arrow very closely; and then he inquired about that attempt subtly, and felt nothing; but he did feel a slight prickling behind his right ear, and then he hoped that that prickling was from the end of the arrow.
And he applied a plaster to the place with an absorbent and digestive effect, confident that the location would reveal itself to him so that he could locate the place of the arrow, for it would dry up over that spot.
And do not be concerned about the location of the injury where the arrow has struck; continue to apply the plaster over it for several days without any adverse effects; and as the wound heals, break up the swelling from the removal of the arrow over several days until you feel the arrow within its sheath again and I attend to this.
And then you should focus on treating the acute corrosive wound for several days until a fire opens up, and you should gently pull, and with a gentle touch, remove the tip of the arrow, which is stuck to the wood.
Then you should adjust the opening of the wound using that acute medicine until I visually see the tip of the arrow, and I spend time on this for periods of time over four months.
Then, as the wound becomes enlarged, I attempt to insert forceps, hold them there, and do not be concerned with their appearance, then I will no longer need to subtilize or invent in that regard until one day, through the ways of invention described at the end of this chapter, I manage to pull it out; and once I have restored that wound.
And some doctors believed that the cartilage of the nose would not be restored, and they restored it, and the disease became solidified, and the malady was healed entirely, and there was no deformity in it for any reason.
And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some arrows, in order to provide this rule and meaning regarding what has not been said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of that one are not understood from the narration, nor do those comprehend the book.
And the skilled artisans speak a little about what is present, and much about what is absent; and they find new operations and new instruments necessary for the descent of foreign causes in the art when accidents occur.
Therefore, you say that arrows are not expelled from the members in which they are embedded, but according to two manners: either by attraction of the place into which they have entered, or on the contrary side of the other part.
And that which is thrown out from the place where it enters, or is shot through a fleshy part, and is pushed out and removed.
And if you do not pay attention to the time when eating, soon you will leave it for some days until the flesh around it decays and the attraction of it and its exit are alleviated.
And similarly, if it becomes stuck in the bones and you do not pay attention to your diet, leave it for some days, and it will eventually be pushed out due to its attraction and movement on a certain day.
And if you do not adhere to your diet for some days, soon you will need to puncture the path of the arrow in that bone at a subtle point where the arrow has spread, and then extract it.
If the arrow is already embedded in the body and lodged in a nerve, you should investigate that attempt, and if you feel any sensation, then apply certain stimulants to attract it.
And if you cannot reach it due to the tightness of the swelling and the length of the arrow, here neither nerve nor vein is present, then make an incision over the swelling until it is enlarged and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
And if there are auricles that need to be removed, then you must cut the flesh in which they are embedded from all sides with all the tools you can use; and devise a plan on how to remove the flesh around the broken auricles and their twists until it becomes possible to free them.
And when you perform the extraction of the arrow in any location, use a twist of your hand and forceps from all sides until it becomes firm; and with the greatest care and subtlety, avoid breaking the arrow and make its removal difficult and thorough.
And if you cannot reach that of your hour, then wait for a few days until the parts around it in the flow of blood become relaxed, and then repeat the process when it is alleviated. If you experience difficulty with a flowing discharge of blood, then administer what we have said about treatment in its chapter.
And observe your skill in incising veins or nerves, or strings, and administer remedies in every possible way to facilitate the escape of the arrow; do this with ease and tranquility, delay and firmness as much as you can and as recommended by yourself.
And therefore, contract the arrow so that the malady aligns according to the figure by which you aim the target of the arrow, for it is more beneficial. If this is not within your ability, then administer what is within your abilities according to the figures.
Consider arrows that are launched against the opposite party, or those that have already struck any part of the outside parties, or make the end of the arrow limp due to the pressure from above the designated cord and turn it towards [the affected area]; then apply it according to the quantity in which the forceps grasp; and shoot it, for it is made light for easy insertion.
If it is retained in the bone, then you use a sharp knife according to the direction of the arrow that penetrates into the bone, and amplify its pressure, then extract it.
And if it does not leave after several days, then repeat the procedure as often as necessary.
And if the shaft of the arrow is in that area, then you push it towards it.
If the shaft has fallen and you want to give a pulse, then insert your finger into it, if it is soft, press firmly into the concave part of it on the side of the arrowhead, and push it towards it.
If the arrowhead is concave, then you push it strongly towards the shaft, as the arrowhead is pushed away by that.
And if the arrow is embedded, you must press all your concave flesh where it truly is, if you can, and tend to that part as seems best.
And if the arrow strikes the foot, or the belly, or the bladder, or the side, and it is close enough that you can feel it through the skin, and it is possible for you to remove it without causing injury to a vein or nerve, then remove it and treat the wound as necessary, and bind it until it heals.
Form of forceps used for extracting arrows:
Their ends should be shaped like an awl, made with a sawtooth design to grip the arrow firmly so it does not slip.
And these are made in various sizes, large, few, or small, according to the amount of the arrow's thickness and fragility, and the width of the wound, and the tightness of the flesh.
so that the arrowhead embedded in the concave extremity is removed and pushed out.
On phlebotomy of the veins.
The veins suitable for phlebotomy, of which there are sixteen in the head, are two pulsatile veins near the ears, called the temporal arteries; two veins on either temple; and two veins in each eye, known as the lacrimal ducts. There is also a vein in the middle part of the forehead and one at the tip of the nose; two veins in the neck; and two veins on either lip; and two veins in the tongue — these are called the alaric veins —; and there are two veins beneath the tongue. When the veins that are flebotomized in the arms, one is a cefalic vein, and it originates from the wild latz; and the people call it "the vein of the head", it is sluggish, and it is the median vein, composed of a branch of the basilic vein and another branch of the cefalic vein; and the people call that vein "the vein of the whole body," the basilic vein is the one that terminates in the domestic latz and is called "citular," while the common people call it "the abdominal vein"; the end of the arm, and it terminates on the axilla, is where flebotomy is performed, and it is the vein that appears on the skin through a clear manifestation; and salvatella, it is the vein located between the auricular vein and the smaller one near the pit, situated on both sides.
And on the foot and leg there are three veins; one of these is left at the curvature of the inner side of the wild latz; the second is superficial, and its location is left at the camba of the domestic latz; the sciatic vein, and its location is left at the camba of the wild latz; and on the camba there are other veins similar to those.
The treatment of veins that are close to the ears is for ancient cataracts, migration, and ulcers, as well as old head ailments.
And the method of bleeding is as follows: it should be done at the base of the patient's head, and the head of the patient should be rubbed on both sides in the area where the veins are closest to the surface, gently applying pressure; then tighten the bandage around the head, securing it between the two areas where the veins are located just above the ears; and if you want to confirm this by feel, try it.
Now take the sharp scalpel and insert it into the vein in the neck until the incision reaches the bone. Then lift your hand above the vein and bone, and incise the vein with a sharp cut. And the length of the incision should be about two fingers wide, or as necessary; and make the cut deep enough as you wish.
Then bind it strongly with poultices and leave it until it is healed.
And it has already been mentioned at the beginning of this treatise about the incision and cauterization of those parts.
However, of the two veins and arteries that are located on the temples, the jugular vein is an ancient and severe evil, causing frequent headaches and acute excesses of fluid in the eyes.
And the technique of phlebotomy on these parts should be as follows: restrict the patient's collar tightly until the two veins appear, and their pulsation is clearly felt after a little time; and then you will have succeeded.
And then, raise the cord above the vein as indicated, insert the sharp phlebotomy instrument here, and elevate the vein; also cut it as you have done with the other two veins; and allow the blood to flow according to the quantity of your need.
Then, tighten the compression around the patient's hernia, place the hot compress over it for an hour, and leave it until it is healed.
And now, having recalled them, and made the incision, and drawn them into the beginning of the opening.
And thus, the application of phlebotomy to the vein on the forehead is appropriate for ancient maladies of the face and migraine, and also to bleeding and foul ulcers.
And the quality of the phlebotomy should be according to what you have recommended; so, for the disease that constricts its own collar, place a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument called a "fossor," whose form is suitable for this.
Stop the puncture that is at the top of the vein in the pit and press it with a lean or other tool in the manner of the vein, and let the blood flow according to the amount you wish; then remove the puncture from the hernia and strengthen it until it heals.
In some cases, the flesh is opened through a lateral fluotomy, but it is not understood that this fluotomy of acute extremity is like other fluotomies, as it is from a different extremity, and the fluotomy on the transversal side, because the bone is strong and would easily break during a subtile fluotomy.
The squeezing of the two veins that are the lacrimal ducts of both eyes due to itching and crusting on the eyes, as well as facial ailments.
The quality of the fluotomy is that it tightens the collar around its own area, then you perform fluotomies on those areas, and you stand over the top of them.
And the flap surgery is performed according to the transverse direction along a slightly narrow incision, for in the area there is little flesh; and if the flap surgery is delicate, then its extreme edge is cut off.
Then make the patient urinate as much as necessary, rest on that side, tighten the bandages for a night, and then loosen them.
The flap surgery on the nasal vein is useful for high fever and severe vomiting, and for facial pains and migraines and redness that occur on the face, especially when it has been long-standing.
And the advantage of this flap surgery is that it tightens the patient's collar and places their nose with the left hand, taking the delicate flap long and positioning it in the middle part of the nose according to its straightness, because the vein does not appear sensitive here, and because the pain begins to flow soon.
Ensure you complete the procedure of phlebotomy gradually with your hand, allowing blood to flow according to your need; then close it after a night, as it is restored more lightly.
However, the use of phlebotomy for both young and old should be restricted to draining excess blood and starting treatments, and healing leprosy, motas (mottling), and corrosive ulcers, as well as with potent remedies.
And the quality of the phlebotomy for those is that the illness withdraws from each part near its root; and the practitioner is over the patient's head, and the patient lies on their side.
Then make small incisions in the vein of the leg with phlebotomy, allowing blood to flow gradually; and remove it from the wound according to its volume or as needed; then close it as you do for the other veins.
And then carefully loosen the ligament and tighten both veins with a gentle pressure to prevent further inflammation, and place a bandage within the sheet where the wound is healed.
And regarding the jugular vein phlebotomy, it is useful for small aphthas and pustules in the mouth, gingival decay, bad ulcers and fissures, as well as bad ulcers found on the nose and around the anus.
The quality of this phlebotomy is that it stops the disease in its track, tightens the neck with a bandage, then turns the patient's lips inside out and examines two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; each vein is identified by their darker color due to the smallness of the vessels in that area, and they are incised with a sharp knife.
If there is any doubt remaining in your mind, and you are unsure which vein to choose, then you should proceed with the incision on the larger one of them, and extract the pus that is present in those veins.
And it appears as if there are two veins on their lips.
When both veins that are on the tongue are cut, it is then appropriate to perform a phlebotomy of the cephalic vein at its origins, which are in the throat, as well as for conditions affecting the uvula and oral cavity.
The quality of phlebotomy involves following the disease between the patient's teeth before the sun, lifting the tongue, placing it to one side, and observing both the left and right veins, as well as noting their color, which tends towards blackness.
And so perform phlebotomy on each one; and be careful not to finish with your hand in phlebotomy of those, because those are arteries.
And your veins that are flebotomized in the groin, through which the blood usually flows in all men, the flebotomy of them is done according to two manners; either by applying a flebotomy mitt or olive oil with subtlety declining; or cutting with a flebotomy knife, and this is called arteriotomy, and this is the form of it:
both the width of it also with times, and it is necessary to open the concave veins full proceeding apparently thick, and to those that contain great rough clots.
And this flebotomy is of smaller size and has more delicate ends, and it is appropriate for flebotomy of delicate veins that contain subtle blood from citrus.
However, the youthfulness of the flebotomy of the basil vein, which is one of three veins: here we extract the blood from the diseases that are left in the gullet and the collarbone, and from this, the foot and the belly are dried.
And it is necessary for the flebotomist, when performing that flebotomy, to be very careful and cautious in that area, because if he leaves the artery there or makes a mistake in the flebotomy puncture, he will cut that artery and cause bleeding of blood, so it is important not to flebotomize that area with a sharp flebotomy, but rather to cut it carefully with a less sharp instrument.
And if the basil vein does not appear by clear appearance, then you must know that you leave that one and change to another, or find some branch of it; or flebotomize in the place where it ends in the arm, because that is manifest; and cut it with a less sharp instrument as we have said.
If you wish to perform a flebotomy on the patient, first cover in front of the stricture of the arm you are working on until you locate the site within the elbow, and then apply pressure over it; then bring the arm close and cut the vein with a concave section for the flebotomy as we have said; and be careful to avoid striking the artery with the percussion.
And when you observe, with tension of the ligament, an inflation in the place you have marked with your hand, then that inflation is inflammation of the artery, and therefore avoid it.
And if you observe the blood flow in the flebotomy as with an ear of a child, and the bleeding is slight, then know that it is from the artery; and then cut and tie off the vessel over a long space; and if the bleeding stops on its own, since it has been severed, tighten the arm and leave it.
And observe the patient from the moisture of their body, be very careful with them and do not harm them for a few days until they are healed.
If the gangrenes do not separate, and it is not appropriate to apply medicine to it, then you incise the artery if it appears to you; because the end of it is contracted and the gangrene is separated; or you take a piece of rust from iron, and make that, and take one third of it and tighten it over the place of the vein with a ligature and poultice within the next day.
And if the gangrene is separated, then it is good; but if not, treat it with the water mentioned to the recollection of the place of the powdered gangrene's flow.
And the removal of gangrene from them is difficult due to the location of the plague and the possibility of vein ligature in the arm.
Regarding the dark vein, phlebotomy is useful for draining blood from the upper part of the head and leaving it from the lower parts of the body; therefore, as we have said, it is composed of branches of the basilica and branches of cephalica.
And be mindful of the phlebotomist who has excessive fear of phlebotomy, because when they withdraw blood, it can affect a nerve; then, in the puncturing of phlebotomy, they find the nerves, which causes numbness, and healing becomes difficult, and often the patient does not recover completely. This nerve excites feelings; if it is hidden in some men and is subtle and not evident, you must know that when you perform phlebotomy with your hand, cut the vein without affecting the nerve, and avoid damaging it with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein along its length.
The advantage of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it drains blood from the head and relieves pain in the legs.
And in this case, if you wish to perform a phlebotomy with a olive or myrtle needle, it is the safest for all veins, as it does not harm any arteries or nerves.
However, in some cases, a strong inflammation occurs in certain individuals when not performing phlebotomy in the first percussion, so do not pay attention to that particular inflammation.
The first sentence translates to: "The first of which you should know that phlebotomy is not administered except for the preservation of health and in hope of recovery, and it is performed on one of the veins located in the arm: cephalic, median cubital, and basilic; it is done at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter, when signs of replenishment appear.
And phlebotomy should be performed on the third day or, if it is the first day, three hours after sunrise.
Phlebotomy may be administered at any time of day or night, whenever it is convenient and necessary, whether in the morning or evening.
And it is important to note that phlebotomy should not be performed on children under 13 years of age, women who are pregnant, and the elderly who have already passed 60 years old.
And if anyone wishes to be freed from some condition in any way, it is necessary that he purify his bowels before performing the bloodletting with a lion's claw, if there is a significant fissure within them, so that the veins do not throw off the excess fluid during the bloodletting of the bowels, which are clean, and do not affect the main members.
And let the patient not be subjected to bloodletting without sacred knowledge and fasting, nor should they escape from illness or madness until this is thoroughly examined, nor from hydroptic ailments, and it is better that bloodletting be performed with caution in the case of colic, vomiting, abdominal pain, multiplied urination, defecation, work, exercise, or any cause that weakens vitality, either in the body or in animals.
And it is necessary to consider the subtle aspects of humors in relation to this, if the pain is severe, from food and drink, and from medications, if it is possible for him to do so.
And then immerse yourself in a bath, unless some cause or exercise prevents it, so that the inflammation is reduced.
And stop the phlebotomy on the patient's leg at around the third hour of the day, as we have said.
And pierce the foot of the patient so that it is guarded from all evil animal accidents on that day, if there is distress, anger, fear, and from all bodily accidents, if there is excessive work and strain, heat and similar conditions.
And at his bedside, ensure the presence of causes for the cure of which people usually suffer, aromatizing and scenting them with balms and similar things according to the possibility of each.
And follow the phlebotomist on a cushion that is clean, other than the one from which the patient was phlebotomized.
And then extract the arm, and with your hand, the flebotomator, make two or three strokes; and tighten the ligament with a strap and envelop it two times.
And the tightness should be tempered, for the tightness when it is unequal, or the tightness is excessive, then forbid the flow of the blood; or if it is towards softening, then forbid the complete cessation of the blood flow.
Then apply the tightness, and ensure that whoever has been flebotomized rubs their hands together between each other until the veins are swollen and visible to the touch.
And the flebotomist should apply a small amount of anti-inflammatory oil to their flebotomy, and then place their left hand indicator over the vein, allowing the location for the flebotomy to be revealed, so that the vein protrudes slightly, and the pressure is relieved. Since veins are what carry blood, when the flebotomist pauses the flebotomy on a vein, it contracts due to the flebotomy, and the flebotomist removes their instrument; and if the flebotomy cuts the vein, it becomes narrow.
And therefore, it is necessary that the fleubotomator (bloodletter) be ready and skilled in all these cases.
And after performing the fleubotomi (bloodletting), if the vein is swollen at once, it is successful; otherwise, you repeat this another time, leaving that place slightly or applying pressure with a compress, if the location is not apopthetic.
If the location is apopthetic or the illness subsides, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not strain the limb, as it will quickly re-develop the apoplexy, nor immerse it in water.
And then repeat the fleubotomi if necessary.
And if the opening (wound) is small and the flow of blood is subtle, and you fear that it will not reach the desired amount, then repeat the fleubotomi in that place according to its rectitude and adjust the opening a bit, and apply pressure before the location becomes apopthetic, because in most cases, a slight opening (wound) is sufficient.
It may sometimes happen that the abscess has already formed, then do not hesitate over it, as it does not excuse any cause; and apply some oil to any part of the wound, because it soothes the body from pain. And it is better at this place than oil and other oils.
And it seems that the application of oil in any form of phlebotomy, where phlebotomists drain veins, is a well-known practice to prevent body inflammation and pain, and it is considered a wise and skilled procedure when one of those operations is performed at this place, because the inflammation subsides and the pain is alleviated when it is severe.
And if a large abscess is formed at the site of phlebotomy, as it often happens due to various accidents, especially when there is no significant bloodletting but only bleeding from the vein, and you wish to drain it, then apply a sponge infused with water and salt, slightly heated, and press on it for an hour, as it will dissolve.
And then make sure that you do this immediately after the blood flow from that vein has stopped or by using another vein.
And if after some days a blackness or green color appears, do not pay it any mind; and if you wish, apply some external cause of alum and myrrh mixed, or some other similar substance.
And often, after some time, abscesses and swellings appear, requiring flebotomy of the affected area.
And therefore place your hand over that area; and if you feel softness there, you must apply compression to it; for that swelling is a sign of ill health and evil. And thereafter be careful to avoid any cause mentioned earlier, as strong blood flow will come from the affected artery.
And apply plaster to the area of tightness so that it becomes hardened, and take care of the other treatment until it is healed.
And be careful to extract the pus from everyone according to the amount of its virtue and according to the dominant color over the pus as it appears.
If the pus is black, leave it to drain until it becomes thin; and if you break it up and it is thick, leave it to drain until it becomes subtle; and if it is hard, then wait for its acuity to subside.
And be mindful of him who is full and strong and requires extraction of pus all at once; in such a case, enlarge the venipuncture of the vein and make the venipunctures wider.
And for him who is weak, do the opposite; extract it in multiple stages and make the incision narrow.
The best approach for venipuncture is the transverse section, not the puncture.
And this manner of flibotomy avoids the flow of blood and the incision of nerves, and is more laudable and safer than flibotomy according to length and breadth.
And to which it is accustomed for syncope to occur after flibotomy, and know that you must cure him before the flibotomy with a small amount of wine infused in milky or simple oxymel, and draw out the blood from him in three or four draws.
And if it is a cold and congested condition, then take before the flibotomy wine infused in myrrh or in honey-based syrup aromatized with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and others, or in aromatized and highly scented syrup.
And if syncope occurs after flibotomy and it is due to the sudden release of a great deal of blood, then know that you must take in small amounts of beef broth and fragrant syrup; and use aromatic substances such as alkanet, and apply a cold compress to their foot at the affected area.
And employ other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter of fainting for evacuation.
And here he should extend his arm and dissolve the swelling a second time, addressing the part from which the flebotomy is done for maximum evacuation, and its virtue being cold, it evacuates the small swelling little by little, according to the quantity of virtue in continuous days.
He who wishes to extend his arm and dissolve his swelling a second time, and whose body is strong, should do so approximately seven or nine hours after the first flebotomy.
He who wishes to move the swelling from his body in the opposite direction of the initial declination, should have it extended on the second or third day.
As for the body in which there is much swelling that has already been scraped and is acute and causes fever, it should be evacuated of the swelling at once and a great amount of it should be drained, and the perception of the pain should be intensified until fainting occurs, since you will have preserved all the conditions of flebotomy; and you should place your hand on the pulse of the body to prevent death from syncope, as these attempts should be made only when the flebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And be careful when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, after the orifice of the vein has already been closed and it becomes difficult to extract the blood, press upon it with great force and gently extend it slightly, for this is too harmful.
If the lay (or bandage) is stuck within the flebotomium, secondarily due to the cohesion of blood in the orifice of the vein; or if it stops because of the heat of a typhic or saggy compress, continue to make gentle compression until the blood has completely drained out.
If the vein is infected, do not touch it until the infection has subsided.
And if it becomes necessary to evacuate the blood a second time, and there is no other choice, you may bleed them at that place or on the other arm into another vein.
And the vein called the "funnel of the arm" is punctured in place of the fistula or basilica when they are not found or are concealed, as it is composed of those parts.
And the quality of the fistula is that the patient inserts their hand into the affected area until the wound becomes inflamed and the vein appears prominently.
Then apply pressure to that stricture with a narrow strip; and perform the fistula according to the transverse cut, not longitudinally or according to width.
And it should be a wide opening, and your fistula cut should be such that you perform the fistula on the joint of the hand with a small incision.
And if the flow of the blood is blocked, then insert your hand into the affected area and stop the blood from flowing in the water until you achieve your need.
If you were in the summer days, then you are excused from the movement of your hand in the cold water, and in winter, the body of the sick person is most rested in cold water.
And the surgery on this vein is more safe than on all other veins, because it has neither pulse nor nerves.
And the phlebotomy of the saphenous vein on the right hand is indicated for liver diseases.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is that you tighten your hand strongly on it, since you have placed it in cold water, while the vein is swollen and well visible to the eye; then cut transversely; and if you puncture it from top to bottom, it will not bleed again.
And be careful not to sever the hand completely during phlebotomy, because then the nerves of the digit will be exposed without any flesh.
And then repeat the hand in the cold water and let the blood flow through that, for if you do not repeat the hand in the cold water, the blood will clot in the opening of the vein and is prevented from flowing.
And once the blood has been extracted according to the amount needed, you should place your hand over the vein with oil and salt, so it is not solidified haphazardly; and in a similar manner, attend to every thread meticulously.
But the healing of the fistula made by that hand on the left side, is appropriate for the ailments of the right side.
And do similarly in the fistula of him/her as you have done in the other.
And the healing of the saphenous vein in the fistula is for ailments that are on the outskirts of the body, as well as for ailments of the uterus, and to retain menstruation, and for ailments of old ulcers on things and clothes, and similar to the ailments.
And the procedure of the flebotomy is that the patient immerses their foot in water, and friction is applied until the veins appear; then a bandage is placed over the joint of the foot, and the location of the vein must be identified precisely from this point, and from there it branches out on the surface of the foot in many directions.
And therefore the vein is cut open widely or the leg is elevated after the hernia has been reduced, as this is better and more beneficial.
And if you perform a flebotomy on the surface of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are left there on the surface of the foot, and place your hand over it while performing the flebotomy, taking care not to cut through them.
And both the flebotomies are successful.
If it is forbidden to urinate, then you should massage the patient's foot in warm water and let the urine flow out until it is evacuated.
And if the flebotomist fails on the first attempt, then they should try again in another place, since the spot is clean; and do not fear any harm from it, as long as you take care of the nerves as we have said.
And do the same for the other foot equally.
And for the sciatic vein, the same place we have mentioned is where you should insert below the knee at the point of attachment of the wild branch.
And the incision of the flebotomy is at the hip joint when it's for drawing blood cautiously.
And the quality of the flébotomy is that it allows the disease to enter a bath, quickly and firmly seizing the patient's leg from the thigh, across their ankle, in one long thin bandage, so that only this appears.
And when it appears, you perform a flebotomy on that part according to each available method and according to the cross, which is best; either incise it with an incision or cut it off with a secition, as the location of the disease is dry.
It is in many people very painful; and if you find it, and it does not appear in the touch of all, perform a flebotomy on one of its branches, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot instead of the little toe and the ring finger.
And be mindful of the nerves, and let the serum flow from the wound as much as you wish.
And then carefully release the constriction and place your hand over the site of the phlebotomy, squeezing gently as it is healing.
Of ventilation and the qualities of use of those.
Ventilators can be of metal, or of horn, or of glass.
Ventilation is performed in two ways: the first involves lancing and draining pus, and the second involves only ventilating through lancing.
And this ventilation, which involves lancing, is also performed in two ways, either with fire or without fire.
And the ventilators that are applied through lancing and draining pus are in twelve places on the body, of which one place is for ventilators, and it is the last opening at the top of the head; and another opening at both sides of the nape; and ventilators under the mandible below the mouth; and two venturi openings; and two-brass vents; and two pin openings; and two cloth openings.
And the extraction of blood should not be from large veins but from small ones scattered in the flesh, and for this reason, it does not cause weakness due to phlebotomy; nor should bloodletting be done with fire or hot coals in any illness caused by accumulation within the body until it is entirely evacuated.
If bloodletting is necessary due to illness or continuously, we should begin it at the onset of the month and its end, as well as in the middle of the day and at any time that seems appropriate.
And therefore when pain occurs for any reason among those, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, then they command ventilation to be performed rather than waiting two or three hours past the day.
And the immediate relief from ventilation of the neck is that when it gives weight to the head and what sinks into the shoulders, it becomes clear that this is an appropriate evacuation of all the body.
And this ventilation is at the site of phlebotomy of the head.
And it is not advisable to use any that has a foul odor or catarrh, as it causes great harm.
And for that reason, one should not use those on the feet, and on the tops of which are deep injuries.
May he who is continuously pressing down on it be relieved; and for that reason, see to it that you command the bellows handler to place his hand lightly over the parts where the pressure has been applied, lest relief not come about.
The use of bellows (ventozacio) instead of lancing (fleubotomia) the dark vein (vena fusca) and basilic: and thereby you treat asthma, and the constriction of the airways, and the rupture of the muscular wall of the airways, and cough, and congestion.
And see to it that the bellows is not pressed down too hard, for if it remains in place for too long, it causes weakness in the body and stomach.
And the bellows application to the forehead (alhagdahan) treats accidental pains in the head and eye, and migraine, and pressure, and pains in the roots of teeth; and it is instead of lancing (fleubotomia) the basilic.
And be sure to order the fanbearer not to press his hand during the scarification so as not to pierce the artery and cause a flow of bad blood.
After scarification, apply alcohol to the mouth and to the corruption of the gums, resembling the conditions found in the mouth during phlebotomy from other parts of the body, specifically from both lips.
However, the fanbearer who performs the scarification on both plates should apply a headband, which is made by drawing warmth from the body.
And the scarification within both incisions near the phlebotomy of three veins, namely the basilic, popliteal, and cephalic, draws blood from all the more easily accessible veins in the flesh, as well as the smaller veins from the other, larger veins, so that it attracts to them.
And instruct the bellows to not blow too strongly during the incision, for the place is already devoid of flesh, and leaves its nerves and arteries exposed.
And it is a bellows which is blown over openings and applies air to hemorrhoids in the rear end and to pus-filled ulcers.
And you should instruct the bellows to be a powerful one, and of iron, for the place requires strong cutting; and its intense, forceful, thin blasts should be used for incision.
But the bellows of the legs should be reduced in size for delicate operations, as they draw blood from throughout the body, and cause pain to old wounds on the bones and joints, and the bladder; they provoke menstruation and breathing difficulties, and serve in place of phlebotomy for two veins, and on the gallbladder and two nails.
Nevertheless, these weaken the whole body and cause fainting in many men.
And from the openings (or 'ventozas') of the chest, the healing is also directed to the openings of both legs.
And the quality of the position of the openings is that it stops the opening at the beginning by a visible view and sucks by a temperate suction, and does not prolong the position of the openings, but rather releases them slightly, and retains those tightly, and allows the humors to come to the place by their own occurrence. And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the place turn red and swell, and the pain of the wound appears.
And then you make incisions and repeat the suction little by little, and consider the disposition of the body.
For that man who has tender skin, take care to scarify him once, but not too deeply, so the place is not ulcerated.
And command the bellows to increase the scarification depth slightly, and apply suction with ease.
And if the swelling in the vein is significant, you must scarify twice, for the first scarification opens the way for subtilization of the vein and its liquidity. In the second, apply the scrutiny acquired from the extraction of the large vein.
And if the vein is very infected, then its third scarification will achieve the final result.
Lastly, when we want to extract small or thin veins, one scarification is enough for us.
If we want to extract a hard stone, make a deep incision; and if we know that the stone is large, then we must make an incision deeper.
And the term "scarification" refers solely to the depth of the cut.
And if the stone is large, hard, dense, and its pores are very narrow, then the places where the suction cups should be placed must be softened, opened, and resolved; if it is in summer, then use oil of aloe or violet, or pressed oil from chamomile or st John's wort or any similar ones; and if it is in winter, then use birch oil or linden oil or camomile or sage, and to those similar.
And if the excess is thick and stubborn, use oil of amber, or balsamic oil, or aloe oil, or anise oil, and similar ones.
If the leech is of ample size and has tender flesh, it should be prohibited from oil, and to these places where leeches are applied, the leeching should be done with watery solutions or with water infused with salt, or with water from a couch (a type of herbal infusion), or similar.
And that one whose leech has a lot of humidity, washes its leeches in wine or in water mixed with myrtle and sumac and similar substances.
And for those whose excesses are thick, wash their leeches in old wine or in water with fennel, which is greater galangal, or from anise decoction, or chamomile, and similar things.
And be it known that leeching should be avoided immediately before a bath; and it should be administered shortly after the bath for one or two hours, and the leech should rest close to the area being treated.
What is it that must be done to regulate the flow of blood after phlebotomy before letting the patient breathe?
When beginning the treatment: if the phlebotomist or the one who has had blood drawn is irritable and has acute pain and inflammation, then you must take actions that cause coldness, such as milky vinegar, endive in wine, laytuguas (a type of herb), secanabin (possibly a reference to a cool compress), julep (a medicinal drink), and similar things.
And they should abstain from food such as chicken, young meats, spiced foods, and similar things.
And for those whose condition is severe, they should take in drinking warm almond milk, or milk made from the seeds of cannabis (hemp), and sumac, and use a mild-smelling wine between meals. And it is recommended that they consume little wine and food, abstain from chicken, lamb, pork, and duck, and eat smaller portions of fish and fowl.
And it is important that during the day of ventilation and phlebotomy, the beverage be greater than the food.
It is important to provide beverages to certain individuals with typhilaria, or early arthritis, with alcohol, musk, or nutmeg, especially before ventilation or phlebotomy, or immediately after, so that the main parts are comforted and the pain is alleviated; and one should not allow them to take that scorching heat.
All the openings that are a form of lancing should be openings that are stopped in the liver, and on the stomach, and on the navel, in the places of the joints, and the opening of the anus, as these members do not suffer lancing upon them.
And it is not desired for those with joint pain, but rather the attraction of the body's pus, thus stopping a ventosa over the breast in flux of pus from the pus of the nose; and they use that to dissolve the stuck ventilation within the member, just as they stop it over the stomach and navel; for that rarifies the member and opens it up and removes pain as it resolves the ventilation.
And now rests upon the wounds when accidents occur in their compression or pressure, for by virtue of strong attraction, it improves the compression and eradicates the pain from its location.
It seems to work when it rests upon the liver and gallbladder, requiring ventilation in those enclosed spaces.
And these ventilations are administered using suction, sometimes only, and occasionally with fire.
And sometimes, they are administered full of heated water in the liver ailments.
And this is because the ventilation should be filled and produce much pus, it is only water or water in which suitable herbs are steeped.
The form of the ventilation administered with fire: its opening should be about two fingers wide, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the suction should be half a palm; and in the width of it, at the place where it is in the circle, half of it, the point should be small according to the quantity that fits inside it with an needle.
Prepare an aromatic roast of rosemary, citrus, sage, lemon, onions, and garlic so that it does not harm the member from its position over it.
And place across it a hot iron or a piece of wood where the candle is held over the fire.
This is the greatest cure for that which we have discussed; its effectiveness varies according to the ailments and the condition of the patient who uses it.
And the suction cups for children and the exhausted should be different from those for young people and those with robust bodies.
And the method of placing this cup over the member is to extend the heat from the fire with a decent amount of firewood in front of a small candle made of wax, and then place it over the center of the transverse bar at the exact spot of the suction cup, so that the flame surrounds the area without burning the patient's body.
And then place your hand over the affected member, and apply it to the area we mentioned, as soon as you have the wind and do not suffer from indigestion that affects this area, and the heat causes vapor to rise on that path, then the pain will be quickly relieved.
And then reinforce the bandage according to their method, and repeat this if they experience any pain from it.
Use a suction cup that is applied to the pleurisy without any cross-hairs or path, and do not administer anything but fill it with water, and place it over the affected member only.
And this is the way to do it: And this suction cup, the larger it is, the better, as it can receive a greater amount of water.
Chapter .xcvii. (Note: 'xcvii' likely represents the roman numeral for 74)
Bloodletting instruments are not applied to most parts of the body but only to those parts where it is impossible to place cupping glasses, due to their small size, as well as to the nose and similar areas; or to a part devoid of flesh, such as the nose and others like it.
And the quality of using those that you have found as bloodletting instruments in the moist wounds of a patient.
And it is appropriate to lie the patient down both day and night in moist water until they become lethargic, without causing any pain in their belly; and then empty the body at the beginning with flebotomy and cupping glasses; and rub the patient's limbs until they turn red; and let them rest.
And when they are full and the case is resolved.
And if it is possible to suction the area with a cupping glass, it is more beneficial for healing.
And if that does not help, wash the area with wine mixed with hot water, and then press and massage it.
And if the fever persists and there is a risk of blood loss, you should immerse a cloth in hot water and place it over the affected area to stop the bleeding.
If the fever has spread, you can apply powdered vitriol or substances similar to those used for sty-causing infections, as long as it aids in the removal of the fever; or place compresses with cooked fava beans over the affected area, leaving them until the beans adhere to the skin and the fever subsides.
And, if necessary, repeat bloodletting, when it is possible to change the bands.
If bloodletting is contraindicated, you can rub the area with fresh fever or insert a needle into the spots where fever arises; then place compresses, as those who feel any fever soon afterwards will benefit from it.
And when you wish them to close, sprinkle a little aloe, or salt, or ash on them and press at once.
Thus begins the process of recovery: restoration. This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine; it deals with the restoration of broken and dislocated bones.
Oh, my child, know that those who boast of this chapter are the ignorant doctors and the common people, and those who at any time have not studied the books of the Ancients or read a letter from them.
And for this reason, this way of understanding in our land is hidden; and you should not forget it at any time; I have not set forth what follows unless after a long study of the books of the Ancients and an examination of their understanding, I extracted science from them.
And I have dedicated this work to the study and experience of my entire life.
And I have already described in this chapter everything that my knowledge encompasses and upon which my experience is based; so that you may condense it and free it from the encumbrance of elaboration; and I have concluded it with a summary at the end of explanation; and I have illustrated it with examples at the conclusion of declaration; and I have structured in it various forms of the instruments that are administered for treatment, as has been added to the declarations made earlier, as I did in the two preceding chapters.
**First Chapter**
A summary and collection of various fractures of bones, of those which must be considered before we begin the remembrance of limbs lost and their diverse conditions, if any. Therefore, let us state in the prologue of this chapter the sums of speech; and the chapters to those who understand them, at the beginning, the artisan is forced and stands in truth over these; so it is you and those who are prompt to know or learn this noble art from you.
And therefore it is said that when you encounter any fracture or dislocation or twist or injury, you should act at once with fleubotomy or remove the affected part, or in some cases, if no other cause is evident, with the debility of strength, or it is the one to which the accident happens, or weak from decrepitude, or there is a time of intense heat, or intense friction.
And then it is advisable to be content with your own food of dried herbs and flesh of fowl and crabs; and avoid thick meats and filling yourself with foods that clog the veins of the leg, as long as you are careful to prevent apostema and if you do not fear the effusion of material into the member.
And then return the patient to their original state, to which they usually return after being corrected.
And therefore, when the broken bone begins to be healed, you should ensure that the patient is nourished with nourishing foods of moderate and not too heavy or dense nutriment, such as foods prepared from wheat cooked in water, and rice, and beans, and meat, and veal, and fresh fish, and similar foods, and according to this regulation, there is a formation of coagulation in the fracture more lightly and better.
And you should know that bones crack when they are in the first stages of decay and in old people, it is not possible for them to continue and consolidate according to their nature due to the withering of their members.
Nature nevertheless adapts and amends the broken bone from any similar cause of gout in which a thick substance adheres and strengthens that part, so that it becomes glued and tightly connected, until the end of strength and firmness, just like fire at the beginning, and no cause should prohibit that from its work.
And for this reason it is necessary to restrict the patient's diet, food that has weight and stickiness and thickness, as we have said.
And you should know that the species of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for a fracture of the bone in the leg is different from a fracture of the bone in the head; and a fracture of the bone in the foot is diverse from a fracture of the bone in the arm; and similarly, all other members are diverse among themselves.
And remember all species of fracture, explained in their respective distinct chapters.
The great diversity of fractures within itself. And the species of bone fractures are diversified within themselves; for there is one type of curved fracture, another when it occurs in them like stars; and sometimes they are fractured according to the length of the bone: thus are the stag-like and star-like fractures, and others that proceed and do not proceed, as is done in writing, and there is the fracture with pain and dislocation in the head, and the small fissure fracture.
And for all species, there is a specific pain or torment inherent in their restoration according to the distinct memory of it in their places.
Sign of fracture of the bone. And this is known as a bone fracture: it is a deformity of the bone, and that protrusion and appreciation of it in the sensation, and only of it when you compress that area with your hand.
And therefore, when there is no deformity in the location, nor does it cause any pain when you touch the bone due to movement or the illness does not produce much suffering, then it is not a fracture.
It is possible that it is a deformity or a small fracture, where you do not feel pain when compressing with your hand, and then it causes pain over time; apply remedies of which you have memory appropriate to the location; and be very careful due to a slight tightness.
And you should know that the location, when it is curved and not divided into two or another thing that does not happen in it naturally, when the entire part of its counterpart has been torn apart, then you must begin from your hour to correct the position of the body that has suffered an apostema caut.
If it has suffered an apostema caut, then you should leave it for a few days until the apostema ceases; and thereafter, use splints or any other means of support that you can devise to facilitate healing and prevent further damage.
And you should know that the restoration of the body and the healing of its bones is easier than the treatment of the joints where the damage has occurred naturally.
And it is important to strengthen it according to the recollection of the body's memory.
If the bone is fractured in two parts, it is necessary to extend this member from both ends, whether it is the hand or the foot; or use a splint with your hand if the member is small; or use two ropes or one rope and a splint.
And your position in which you support the member should be equal to its natural form, while the parts are stretched from the twisted member, then you perforate so as to cause their return to those additional aids cleverly and according to each way that you can do in their places.
And beware that according to your strength, you do not harm the patient with your operation, nor cause any damage; and perforate yourself according to your power, applying one bone to another in its best form.
And be sure to touch the affected area with your hand at an opportune time, and if you encounter any other cause, correct it and engulf it with the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid violent stretching and compression, as foolish doctors often cause apoplexy with their treatments, or cause contraction in the member, as we have seen this happen through the operations of their misguided efforts.
And the quality of the stricture of the member that calms is what you should know; for you must understand that broken members vary in their fragility, size and form.
And regarding those that are small like the arm and its bone structure and similar to others, know that their envelopment should be with very thin cloth.
Those who have a swelling as with cloth or leg, must ensure that it is wrapped tightly and firmly, for the tightness of each wrap connects the large member and strengthens it from every side, so that nothing enters it.
Then, as you begin, start the patient's evacuation of feces, apply suitable lubrication to it, over the site of that fracture with three or four wraps according to the member's size; and tighten your hand slightly on the ligament.
Then, approach the part that is most painful at the site of the fracture, and tighten gently, avoiding the strong pressure that you applied to secure the site of the fracture. Then, gradually extend the wrap at the site of the fracture, and gently loosen the tightness little by little, until you take from the site a significant portion.
And then take another bandage and wrap it around the affected area, ensuring it is properly wrapped; and observe the bindings at the point of fracture; and your operation should be on the tightness of the bandage and softening it according to what we have said about the first bandage.
Then place between the bandages a piece of leather or cloth to hold the curvature of the fracture if there is any; otherwise, do not place anything in it.
Then place another bandage over these star-shaped bindings properly arranged, if the area is not inflamed or infected, and bind over the swelling and inflammation; and leave it for a few days; and then tighten the star-shaped bindings.
The bindings should be of different types, skillfully made; either from canvas, or from wood, or from palm fronds; and their size should be according to this form and figure.
However, ensure that the pad placed over the fracture is thick and wide enough, slightly larger than the other pads; consider the length of the splint according to the member's size and shape; then tighten the pads with another wrap as per your initial tightness; and place it gently above them according to the stricture we've discussed, keeping in mind that the tighter the stricture should be, the further it is from the fracture.
And consider that the threads should vary in thickness and fineness, and be numerous; if the threads are thick, as you've seen during some operations where thick thread pauses the string of a cord, it's a great error when the tightness is not equal.
Subtle threads are not suitable, for you will not be able to achieve the desired tightness, and you won't know if there's less than a finger width between pads.
And if the disease is limited to the ends of the bones, then tighten the bandages at those sites, leaving a woolen or linen cloth between them until it does not cause any damage.
Sometimes fractures are themselves a plague, causing disruption in the spine, and you should remember this according to the second chapter's particularities.
And you should know that even if all members are broken, they cannot be bandaged to the bones on the first day; this is because when a member is large, it does not allow the bandages to rest on it for too long, so they should be changed every few days or weekly, depending on your caution regarding the onset of gangrene.
And this is the manner of the plasterers to which the ancients restored, which are placed over fractures and dislocations and twists.
A method of plastering as a means of restoring a fracture, suitable for complex cases and particularly for women and children, since it does not involve applying heat or friction: take flour powder from a mill, which is the essence of flour that prevents the movement of the grindstone against the walls of the mill.
And if that does not work, then scrape off the old plaster from the surface, and do not make it too thick or thin, and use this method.
Another method of plastering to restore fractures and dislocations and twists: prepare a mixture of assafetida, labdanum, acacia, enula, and myrrh, all ground from dragon's blood, in equal parts; add frankincense and aloe in equal parts; mix thoroughly with either lichor or egg albumen if the patient's condition is severe; this plaster is of good composition and restores broken bones slightly, and gives strength to most people.
Another method of plastering for fractures and twists: take mige (mistletoe) and alder bark, each in equal parts; myrrh and aloe, each one-tenth part; acacia, 60 parts; Armenian wool, 20 parts.
Despite all these treatments in mortar with a strong composition, they are strained, they are filtered, and they are applied with water or egg albumen and are administered.
A method of plastering for joints and bones separated from their places, and to relieve pain in these and in cracks and fractures: take fine wool and immerse it in a mixture of vinegar and oil, and place it over the area.
This plaster, however, is not effective for restoration, it prevents abscesses and expels pain precisely.
Another method of plaster that restores closed bones: take fig leaves and poppy leaves, dry them, mix them all together and make a plaster from them.
A method of plastering is used to aid in the restoration of broken bones and when you desire a resolution of the inflammation of an abscess: take roots of mullein, chamomile, and violets, flour of arse, all parts equally; crush them together and mix with wine, if the member is not scalded.
If it is scalded, then apply that to the affected area with cool water from cilantro or plain water and use a compress.
Another plastering method for stronger resolution in cases of severe abscesses, for the restoration of the member: take roots of mullein and its seeds, and also ballastice, melilot, violet flowers, chamomile, all parts equally; crush them together and mix with hyssop water or distilled water or wine, according to the quality of the member and the rest of its color.
However, Hippocrates does not specify in his work that it should be placed over the affected member unless certain preparations of wax and oil are made, and no other causes are present; and it is recommended to be between coarse and fine.
When a fracture is seen in a limb, after its restoration and the causes of its drying out due to lack of heat are sought, this is done with myrrh, ointments and similar substances as if for those causes that we have recounted.
A method of applying a plaster for injury and pain: take equal parts of chalk, horsehair, human hair from scalps or sparrow feathers, and salt, mix them together, make a paste, and apply it.
The amount should be according to how much the bandage covers and then remove it slowly if there is no pain or discomfort or if the bone is not broken, you should not hurry in its removal. And if there is severe pain or pressure or swelling at the site, you should immediately remove that part of the plaster or bandage and stop the treatment.
And take a cloth and sponge from the sea, wet them in boiled water, and apply that to the area until the pressure and pain cease; then let the member rest for an hour; and place over it woolen cloth soaked in vinegar or rose oil, and keep it there for a night, ensuring safe from gangrene, and letting the inflammation of the member subside, and alleviating its pain.
And repeat that delicate restriction and apply a small plaster without straining from your initial constriction, and do so gently until it heals.
And if the gangrene, redness, pain, swelling and all other symptoms have already subsided, and you find it in need of a plaster and restriction again, then repeat the same as you initially began.
And if no such cause occurs to the member as we have said, then do not remove it for three or four or five or seven days; and in some cases, everything is left for twenty days, according to your judgment, due to the relaxation of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and it approaches the coagulation of the flesh over that.
And now adjust the tightness more than in your first adjustment, tighten around the hernia's food supply, according to how the recollection of it precedes.
If you find the location of the fracture already dried and weakened but not covered, then know that the nutrition must be prevented from reaching that area; so drill into it with a tepid water embrocation whenever you encounter it; and do this every three days; and slightly loosen the tightness, and by this operation, direct the nutrition to the member, and in this way, the healing will begin.
Here is the translation of the text:
And you have not seen anyone do this, so it is all the more reasonable that you should not do it.
**Second Chapter: On Fractures When They Occur in the Head.**
The types of fractures are varied, and their shapes differ, and the causes are diverse. Some fractures occur due to the impact of a blow that completely shatters the bone within its joint, leaving the bone fragments dislodged, as if they had been broken off; this type is called compound fracture. Another type occurs when a space in the bone is cut, penetrating the flesh, but the fracture does not go all the way through to the rear of the bone; this type is known as simple fracture.
And the severity of these two types of fractures can vary, from minor to severe, and they may be either compressive or destructive; their cause is a blow or sudden impact on a hard surface, similar in appearance.
And this fracture, whether it is penetrating and already brings the panniculus close to the bone, or it is on the surface of the bone, the pain from these two fractures can be great or small.
And this fracture is damaged in the bone, at the subtlety of the hair's root, and that's why this specific type of fracture is called a capillary fracture.
This is a fracture caused either by an accident or by the impact of a stone, which makes some layers of the bone move inside, and it occurs in the concave area, just as it happens with the ribs when they are struck, and it's the movement of their entry into the cavities inside.
And it is most commonly caused in the bones of children's skulls, as well as adults' humerus bones.
And for all these complex fractures, they are thus treated as if separated bones. And then return to remembrance of all that is in its place.
And I recognize all these types of fractures by detecting them and examining their attempts, as well as the state of the corrupted flesh that is on them.
The special capillary is known for what is discovered above the bone when it is exposed, and it is cleaned, and pressed upon it, as the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, one must consider the beginnings of the patient's ailments, and if you examine their symptoms by what they signify, it is as if there is vomiting of anger, and expansion, and loss of understanding, and speechlessness, and fainting, and acute fever, and oozing of pus, and burning of those areas, which resemble similar symptoms in higher dispositions. It is deemed that one is not cured.
And if you experience unexpected accidents, you hope for healing, then you begin to treat them.
Which causes, since the illness has come to you at the beginning as it comes and this is in the winter days, then know that you must study the appearance of the bone according to all dispositions on the fourteenth day.
And if it is in the summer days, then know that you must keep watch over the bone facing it on the seventh day, as what is left of the bone becomes corrupted by the panicle, and accidents happen that we have mentioned.
And if the fracture has already reached the panicle covering the brain and it is in small parts and inflammation, then know that you must incise the divided and inflamed part as I have mentioned to you.
And it is that you cut off the patient's pain, and discover over the bone according to custom and manner as possible according to the figure of the plague, and that it be lighter on the patient.
And if you experience a fracture of the bone, pus or abscess cautiously, stop it with something that covers it, and it is advisable to place cloth soaked in vinegar and salt on the affected area, and let the pain rest until the abscess subsides and be certain of the flow of pus; then begin with the circular motion around the bone and the removal of the abscess.
This is according to one of two surgical methods.
And one method is that you cut the bone with a straight incision tool, and this is its form: Then administer another incision tool to it, slightly wider than the previous one; and this is its form:
Then administer a yet wider incision tool than the second one.
And you will need to use various incision tools, some of which are wider than others; and some of them shorter, with the last ones being very sharp and made of iron or steel.
And use their aid to facilitate percussion over the incision to prevent injury to the head and damage to that area.
And if the bone is strong and hard, remember that you must pierce around the circumference of it before administering the scissors, which are called non-deep cuts.
And they are not called this way, but rather those that do not reach the end of the bone to which it belongs, so that at the cut, its extremity or edge is rounded on the side that leaves the sharp part of it, resembling a small circle or margin, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take a great number of these cuts, each one suited to the specificity of each bone, provided that in all parts of the skull, the sharp end of which should be considered, both its length and brevity are according to the amount of specificity of this cut.
And this is the method for three kinds of treatments: When drilling through the fragmented bone, place the treatment instrument on the bone and twist it around until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the instrument to another location and apply it where it best reaches the depth or thickness of the ray.
Then you should cut with scissors what is between each fragment of the bone, making a thin wound over it, as we have said, to remove the bone, or with your hand, or with any other tool, using whatever instruments you have prepared for this purpose, such as pincers and forceps.
And be careful that the scissors do not touch any part of the healing process.
So, once you have drilled through the bone and it is separated from the healing process if it was previously attached, extract it, take care to scrape and clean it on the roughness of the bone with a tool similar to scissors, but be sure that it is more delicate and finer than the other scissors.
And if you break any part of the small or delicate bones, take it with ease as you must from your tools; and then apply a remedy to the wound with linaments and bandages as we have said.
And another way of operation is light, without pain, which cuts through Gaul and lauds for great praise; and this is the speech of it: It is necessary for you at the beginning that you begin to uncover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most violent and manifest, while you have discovered that part, and have paused and left it with the extremity of this slow and gentle cutting tool, of which this is the form:
And the lenticular cut is round and does not enter any cause, and the acute cut is in two parts forward in length, thus when you have done; that the lenticular cut be adjusted to the shape of the face of the acute cutting into the bone.
And then carefully strike with a small mallet upon the incision of a dislocation until the bone is completely separated, thus freeing it; be certain of not causing damage to the surrounding tissue that you might fear in any way, and if the medicant was the most foolish of all men and the greatest ignoramus among them; certainly, he would be sleeping.
If, however, a rupture occurs in the fascia of a muscle attached to a bone, cut through it at its attachment using a curved instrument, and free it from its adhesions, for it is freed from its pain and suffering.
And if the fracture of a bone does not penetrate into the fascia, and what is detached or remains attached to the bone is the fascia itself, with its asperities and subtle textures, then smooth those asperities and eradicate those subtleties using finely sharpened razors that you have prepared in various quantities so that it will be possible for you to apply them in any location the most appropriate for their use and the most correct according to how your operation progresses with that fractured bone and its shape.
And be sure to administer in your treatment the reason why you scrape the bone at the beginning with these instruments, and then use them appropriately on the subtle pus of it, and do not cease to do so continuously until you have administered the true pus and the subtle pus of all those affected.
In any of the other small cracks or subtle fractures, be sure to administer treatment according to what you have learned for their rectification.
And it is cause that not all those who have studied this art are equally proficient. And let us focus on what he has written regarding major fractures.
And if the panicle is contracted when you dislocate the bone, then take a cloth from it according to the extent of the wound, immerse that in hot oil, and place it over the wound; then take another cloth folded or doubled up, immerse that in vinegar and oil, and place it over the first cloth, gently pressing it so as not to damage the skin; and then apply a poultice with hot water, and do not tighten it unless the wound requires it.
And leave this treatment for one or two days until you are certain of the abscess being healed; then remove that and administer medicines as necessary to promote dryness, such as lint and flour, powder from herbs and aristology, and similar things.
And you should make this powder from the medicines and sprinkle it over the wound when they are dry; generally, administer to that person all medicine of proper quality from which he/she abstains and does not bite.
And be careful according to your virtue that the wound in your treatment is clean; and let there be no infection of pus or other; nor do you add any violence to it; for when it is properly applied to the panicle of the brain, it corrupts that and destroys it, and causes evil malice towards the illness.
And it happens in the brain, when it is purified of its humors and more so when the treatment of it is delayed, and it becomes black on its surface; and therefore consider whether accidents to the illness have occurred, which we have mentioned, knowing that these are all harmful to its treatment.
If it does not happen to be a dark color due to the medicine placed upon it, but rather because of that very medicine which causes this darkness, then take some honey and rose-scented oil in equal parts, and with these lines wrap a cloth, and place that over the affected area; and then apply the healing spices suitable for the cure until it is healed.
It appears that the text you've provided is part of a medical treatise from the Middle Ages, written in a language akin to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Without further context or a complete text, it's challenging to offer a comprehensive translation. However, based on the excerpt given, here's a line-by-line translation into English:
On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
You know that the nose is not broken in one place but rather in two superior parts or sometimes in one of those small bones, so that it has two bones in it, because the fracture leaves a cartilaginous part, and it is not broken but suffers from attrition, tortuosity, and sinusitis.
If one of the two parts is broken, then you must insert a small object into their nose to hold that fragment in place, and with the help of an instrument, fix the fracture from within, but also push it gently from outside, until the nose returns to its natural shape. And do this for your convenience, and be careful not to cause pain during your operation on the patient's wound.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and does not affect the inner part, then you must equalize the pressure at the edge of the wound where there is an increase in swelling.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you must do it thusly.
And on the first day after the fracture, attempt to restore it if possible; otherwise, apply heat or cold for seven days to maintain rest in the affected area.
And insert a strip of cloth from silk into the nostril, if the fracture is in one part, or two strips, if the fracture is in two parts, making sure each strip is thick enough to fill the nostril cavity.
And some of the ancient healers used to soak the strips in a bath, and change them daily, but I will not do this; instead, I will wrap the cloth with egg albumen mixed with flour powder; and leave it until the bone is healed and the cartilage strengthened.
And in some cases, the nose may be inserted into a place where there is no opening, due to the swelling of the tissues and the pain, preventing inspiration.
And this treatment is not necessary; and if you wish, do it, and if you prefer, use openings.
And if, after using a poultice, the nosebleed persists, apply a new poultice with fresh and warm vinegar or honey.
If nosebleed does not occur after using the poultice, cover it outside with a paste of sesame flour and powder of crushed cloves mixed with egg white, and then hold the nose gently without applying any pressure.
If the bones of the nose are broken or fractured in small pieces or if they are disjointed, then separate them and extract those that are appropriate for these; and afterwards with the cut, treat it with what adheres and consolidates, and apply suitable poultices.
And if an internal plague occurs within the nose, you must cure it with warm moistures and administer lead enemas until it is completely healed.
**Chapter IV**
**On the Restoration of the Jawbone when Cracked**
When the jawbone is cracked and the fracture is not accompanied by severe pain, observe whether the fracture is only on the outer side, and not split into two pieces but curved inward at the site of the break. In such cases, its healing is light.
And so, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your right middle finger into the patient's mouth to support it, and similarly, if the fracture is on the left mandible, insert your left middle finger from the outside to gently push and align the fractured parts together.
And if the fracture of the mandible is already separated into two parts, you must ensure that you administer extension to both parts according to their correct position so that they can be properly aligned.
And if you experience a concussion of the teeth due to disruption, strengthen those from which you hope to save a thread of gold or silver or cedar; then place a cerot over the broken mandible, and place a doubled cloth over it, and lay a large sterile drape decently cut, or a piece of gauze of the same length as the mandible; and then secure it from above according to your ability with the ligature and the application, as long as it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and refrain from eating or drinking anything sour.
And if you estimate that the shape has already been altered in some way, then on the third day, you should remove and dislodge what has been changed and correct it; apply a powder from a mill, or white of egg, or flour of sesame, since you will have removed the cerot, and place a new bandage over it.
And so, once this annex and the dressing are in place and the bone position is not altered, leave it until healing and strengthening of the fracture occurs; for this fracture usually heals in three weeks.
And if there is a recurrence of the post-operative infection, administer what we have mentioned as treatment for this infection until it heals, and then remove that infection.
And if the fracture is severe, consider whether it is a complete separation of bone or just fragments, then you must carefully determine which bones should be removed using instruments for their removal.
And if the wound of the fracture is narrow, then you should widen it through flapotomy according to the extent of your need.
And then, once you have removed those fragments and it is not yet healed, open the wound again if it was narrow; otherwise, place a new dressing over the wound, and change it as needed until it heals.
Chapter V.
On the restoration of the fork when it is broken.
When the muscles cause the fork to break, the fracture is usually in one of three ways.
Depending on whether it is broken, separated, or separated into two parts that do not occur by accident; and it is more difficult to restore it; or it happens that there are complications, making restoration difficult.
And for that operation, when the fracture is its most complicated, you should have two assistants; one should hold the broken fork and another should extend the leg at the site of the break.
And then reduce the fracture to its proper form until it is not prominent nor concave.
And if you need more extension, notice that the padding under the patient should be of fabric or wool, and its size according to your need; then extend and elevate the splint and secure it with your hand while reducing the fracture as necessary.
And if you cannot extend the end of the splint to the desired position, as it has reached its limit, then have the patient lie on their side, and place a cushion over their musculature, slightly larger than necessary.
The attendant should press on the musculature at the joint, lifting the splint's end towards the ceiling, and then correct the fracture, reducing it with the hands.
If you feel stiffness in the furcula (hyoid bone) and it is painful, then know that you must cut into it and extract those stiffnesses with ease.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you make an incision of it with one of the scissors that you have prepared for this purpose, since you had left the furcula with the instrument that serves to cut; and this is the form of the instrument: a chisel or a steel blade.
And it is similar to a spoon, of which this is the concave shape; and its size according to what you have needed from it, according to the size of the bone or the weakness of it.
You may adjust the length of it according to what is possible for the operation; it should have two ends, with one end wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound, which you have incised when removing the sagacity of the bone, is wide and there is no danger of infection, then you adjust both lips of the wound with suture.
And if the disruption is slight, or you fear infection, then you cover the wound with bandages and poultices according to the amount of the wound's disruption.
And if an infection occurs, then pour wine mixed with rosin and oil over it and place a bandage on top.
And as long as the bone's star is not broken; and so that you may observe the illness each day, when the ligament softens or you see the star already damaged, then correct it and tighten the bandage.
Then place the patient's sleep on their side, and during sleep at night, keep a small cushion under their hip; so that by that, be raised the assistants of the patient from the side of that injury, and thus is elevated the fracture of the furcula to the elevation of the muscle; or the arm of the patient bent at the neck of that.
And do not untie the bandage unless it occurs in the immediate vicinity or abscess within 12 days.
Then renew the plaster if you have seen the face of the injury to it, and adjust in the tightness and restore that, and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the furcula is coagulated.
And it is strengthened and eased according to the need in 28 days, and in some cases in men it is cured in less than that time.
**Chapter VI**
**On the Restoration of Shoulder Fractures**
The blade of the spatula is broken in the lateral part of the patient, but it is not completely fractured, only the edges are damaged.
And therefore, when the lateral part is broken and it is broken in the middle part, and it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture, you should prepare it and reduce it back to its natural state in every way with the help of an instrument as best as possible.
Then place a powder made from wheat flour and honey on the wound; also, use a duplicate cloth dusted with powdered drugs; and place a thin sheet of tableware over it according to the size of the spatula or a little more.
If the sheet is concave in any part of the spatula, then you should fill that concave with a stopgap and then adjust the sheet equally.
And then tighten it strongly over the moistened tongue with a gentle pressure on the sheet until it is not removed from its place.
And consider the consistency each day; whenever it becomes softened, tighten it again and adjust the sheet if it is removed from its place.
And keep the patient on their side.
And the spatula will be restored in ten days or twenty-five days.
And therefore, when this number of days is completed, you will dissolve the ligament, and you will know for certain that it is from the bones whose beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed from the location of the infected bone and place a lock there, then you split it open and hold it, and act as we have said regarding the fracture of the fork-shaped spine of the rib in an apoplectic case.
**Chapter VII.**
**On the Restoration of Fractured Bones.**
Sometimes the bone breaks in the middle of its location and healing tends to fail; but the ends of the bone can still be healed, though they are fragmented and shattered.
And among the accidents of bone when the middle part is broken, it inclines to dislocate and causes great pain, difficulty in moving, coughing, and severe vomiting; and it is manifest in the cavity of the broken bone and not hidden from sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient be placed supine on their back, and place a cushion between their shoulders; then press their muscles, adjust their ribs to the contours of two ribs, and be delicate in the operation of it and in the positioning according to every way possible and appropriate for it, so that the shape of the bone recovers.
Then apply a plaster and stopgap using a thin sheet of sap or cloth and similar materials, wrapped in a drape; be delicate in binding that over the broken bone so as not to harm it; occasionally adjust the bandage according to the curvature of the back, and tighten that which is too loose; constantly consider the bandage at all times, and when it softens, tighten that.
And if it becomes necessary to cause the displacement of that which is causing corrosion, pressure, pain, or abscess in the area, then you loosen and remove that and eliminate the plaster, rectifying what occurred by way of healing; reduce the bandage, if necessary for that; and adjust the stricture until it heals.
Chapter VIII.
On the restoration of broken ribs.
You know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur casually but in serious places that affect the back; and regarding their ends, away from the point of impact, it does not cause strain to those parts, only because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of him is not hidden from the sense, you must inquire into his condition by touching them.
And the restoration is such that you treat the fracture as it presents itself, according to the possible manner, within the limits of what covers it, and then apply a plaster and strengthen the broken bone with a splint, if necessary for that.
If the fracture of the ribs tends to the parts inside, it causes the patient severe pain and piercing, just as piercing occurs in those who have pleured, and because the bone is exposed; and it causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of foul-smelling blood; and this is a difficult cure.
And now, the ancient remedies are ingeniously designed for that most intricate matter.
And from their experience, they say: "Protect the patient from foods that cause inflammation and gas, so that the belly becomes inflated and extended, and the hernia is pushed out.
We might also recommend this to prevent any minor complications from turning into severe ones, if it should happen; and if it does happen, you must already provide aid.
They also said that some should be stopped from belching and that one should apply something with strength; it is similar to reasoning, but nevertheless, there is fear that the wind could push excess matter to the area due to weakness.
They also said: "One should cover the area with wool that is previously dipped in hot oil, and place poultices between the ribs until it is filled, making a seal when you wrap it according to its shape; and then one should treat the illness with food pleurisy cure and medicine.
And if the disease causes severe constriction that does not yield, and the bone punctures painfully, fear for the illness; then cut open at the site, expose the broken rib, and apply pressure with the instrument that preserves the integrity, the recollection of which is preceded, and cut through the bone to facilitate extraction.
And it is appropriate to adjust the two lips of the wound if it is large, with stitching, and treat it with plaster until it heals.
And if an abscess occurs inside, cut it open and apply poultices in rose oil and press upon the site, treating the illness with what covers the abscess within.
And one should raise the side on which they sleep until it is healed.
Chapter IX.
On the restoration of the fractured spine of the back and neck.
Sometimes, the bones of the neck fracture, and they should be treated carefully, resembling the vertebrae of the back. And when this happens to anyone and you want to know if they will recover, consider that if their muscles are already relaxed, numbed, and dead, and they cannot move or stretch them, or feel pain when pricked with a needle, then you should know that they will not recover, and in such a state of weakness, it is fatal.
And if they feel constriction and pain in the joints and pricking, then know that the pressure on the bone is alleviated and the disease will heal with treatment.
And if you see the vertebrae of the neck resembling this and want to know if it will heal, consider the patient's feet.
When you notice that it has already softened, pay attention to those parts where the condition occurs in the most affected area, and when you lie on your side, you gain breathability and control over its will; sometimes, it reoccurs on its own side, and they want to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is fatal, and from then on, do not bother with its treatment.
If no other cause occurs, the condition is better and more easily resolved.
And the treatment for it is to make an incision at the seat of the abscess with a hot cautery that is dipped in rosin or some other oily substance, and place it over the affected spine several times until the abscess is sedated by the cautery.
And now place one of the comfortable and effective bandages firmly over that area, and instruct the patient to rest and maintain tranquility, and not sleep on the side where pain occurs until it is healed.
And if it is necessary to remove the skin from a bone or any part that has already separated, cover the wound with a dry dressing and support that bone; then adjust the two edges of the wound, either by stitching if it's large; and carefully treat the affected area with poultices until it heals.
If the last part of a bone is broken and it is the end of the limb, then you must insert that piece of the left hand into the hole on the right side, and with your other hand, hold the broken bone in place as tightly as possible; then apply a plaster and bandage over it, if necessary, and keep it strong.
And if you feel broken bones in them, then apply pressure to that area and support it; treat the wound with the appropriate treatment until it is healed.
**Chapter X**
On the restoration of the bowel.
The bones of the bowels are often broken, and if they break, the fracture of them is nothing but communication in the extremities of those parts and are sharp at their length and decline to the inner parts; and it causes pain to the patient at the site and puncture, and the limb becomes stunned when it is fractured.
And the restoration of it is that you place your hand over that area which is above the fracture, as the figure of it.
And if the fracture is at the extremity of it, then you should fold that according to what you have been taught by a similar process so that it resembles its natural shape.
If the fracture is in the long part or has already declined to the inner parts, then make the patient lie on their stomach so that you can prepare for the restoration of that fracture. And so when you have wrapped it, apply the plaster to it, and then place upon that board of wood or cordwood, tighten with strength over which you do not fear a fracture's puncture nor the star's removal.
Wrap the concave area with something that fills it completely, according to its tightness, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or side.
If an abscess appears cautiously, stop the extension of it and its restoration until the abscess has subsided, and apply to it what was previously mentioned; then return to the restoration of it, and tighten it thus with a cover.
And if it occurs in the bone's joints or is fractured, then treat them.
Chapter XI.
On the restoration of the broken assistant (or 'adjutori' in this context).
The adjutori is what lies between the thigh and the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, its restoration is in one of two ways, of which one is to take a piece of rough wood according to this form...
And both ends of the ligament are seen, then it should be suspended from an elevated place.
Then follow the patient's pain over a side; and afterward, cast out their broken arm over the wood until it reaches the curved part of the wood where it is attached.
And afterward, suspend it over some heavy cause or, if the minister extends it to the parts below, then the doctor should apply pressure with their hands until the fracture returns to its place.
And another method is to have the patient lie on their back and raise their head with their hands; then command two assistants, one to hold what is above the fracture with his hands, and the other to hold the pus from below them; each of them extending themselves accordingly.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, tighten your grip on the fracture with ligatures and on another ligament, and each of the two ministers extends themselves in opposite directions.
And therefore, if the fracture is close to the extremity of a muscle, you should stop half of the ligament over the tendon and the other side below the fracture towards the shoulder.
And similarly, if the fracture is close to the shoulder, you should stop the ligament at that place and over the shoulder.
Immerse that in easy water and work with it; when it is immersed according to the depth and applied properly, tighten it carefully so as not to cause gangrene.
If gangrene occurs, loosen the tightness after the seventh day and place a cloth soaked in vinegar and rose oil over it to calm the abscess, and then tighten it again.
And the method of tightening is to place a plaster over the fracture, then wrap new cloth around it; adjust the arm on that support, and keep your hand open over its muscle.
And unwrap the cloth and tighten on the arm support to keep the arm in place without any movement if there is no cause for it from the broken bone.
And then use stitches.
And it is that one should place over the fracture a beam that is both wide and strong compared to the other beams; and it should space out between each beam the width of the finger, and the length of the beams according to the break with three parts from the whole length.
And then strengthen over the beams with the tightening mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And it is that the tightening over the fracture site should be more tight. And the further the fracture is extended, the less the tightening should be.
And thus, depending on the position of the beams and the tightening as we have said in the time when you restore the member to its proper place, so you proceed.
And if you fear gangrene, leave off the tightness and the strings within on the seventh day as we have said.
And thereafter, consider the dressing in all parts for three days to prevent any further occurrence of pain or inflammation; or restrict the food that reaches the member due to an excessive tightness; and thus rectify everything as we have said.
If you are certain that nothing further will occur from it, do not loosen the ligature but leave it as is for three days or more.
And the patient's rest should be on their back, and their hands on their stomach.
And place a warm compress filled with wool on the affected limb, and consider at all times during the night or day that the bandage not be loosened or dissolved from the broken member, or that the dressing become soft, thus rectify it according to your ability.
And hold the diet of the patient as ordered before, so that the diet is subtle at first and then gradually becomes stronger; and now you will notice that the patient's diet becomes thicker.
The custom of the assistant and the leg support is that they should be tight for 10 to 12 days; and now you will notice that they become looser and baths should be administered and they should be treated with ointments that correct it.
And if the fracture is old and infected, you will not loosen that ligament and stitches within one day or two months.
Chapter XII
On the restoration of the broken arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the forearm and the upper arm; of these, one is smaller, and is what is known as the little finger side, and the other is larger, and is where the little finger joins the upper arm.
And if the main or minor fissure is cut open, it is usually done at one time, but many small ones are cut together.
And when the small fissure is cut open from above, its restoration is easy, and its healing is much easier.
And when the fissure of the intestine is cut open below, the fracture of it is severe, and its healing is difficult.
And the most severe case is when two bones are cut together.
Therefore, if the bone that is cut is the small fissure from above, it is appropriate for the doctor to restore it, as its small size facilitates its reattachment before it heals.
If the large fissure is what is cut, then it requires greater extension to heal properly.
And if the two incisions are together torn, then be sure that you press the extraction most strongly.
And be sure that you hold the shape of your hand for the restoration of it and the extension of it spread over a cushion, and the wrist of your hand on top of them, more than all the others, and the acuteness of the pain is below all the others, and the patient lies on a carefully prepared bed.
And place another cushion in front of him at his height or turn it to the side, so that the illness does not get worse.
Then the minister extends his free arm below his waist with his hand or according to his ability, and another minister extends above it similarly.
Then the doctor aligns the bone inside according to the best shape that he can achieve.
And if in the healing of the bone there are delays, you will pierce and reduce all the weight to its place with your virtue.
And if there appears a separated condition that affects the bone and it does not respond to your hopes of restoration, then you must end it and hold it in the manner we have mentioned above.
If the fracture is severe, you have already dealt with this particular case, and so take care of that.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, you shall line it with a cloth made of rose oil and white wax, acting with caution between expertise and subtlety, and tighten the cloth over that slight gap until the abscess yields; then remove the plaster and apply a new one prepared from powder of flour mixed with yolk clay, and place more bandages; and let the bandage be the one that is pressed firmly upon that fracture.
And you should know that the names of the bones in the arm are seen in the major arrangements, either in a single fracture or in two fragments together.
Then apply your pressure over the site of the fracture with greater force and vehemence, and as the tightness around the parts above the fracture or lower parts increases, lessen the pressure slightly according to how the recollection of pain in the beginning of the chapter precedes it.
And the bandages that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough, and the thread used to secure them should be of medium thickness, as we have recommended.
And consider the member and its ligament after some days. And if any cause arises that requires correction, as you perceive a problem in the member, then apply water to the member until the pressure ceases.
And allow the limb to relax until it rests, then gently return the restriction.
And if the restriction is already softened and the bone has returned to its original state, resembling those before, then correct everything with your virtue.
And consider whether the nutrition to the limb is prevented from reaching it due to excessive restriction, for then you must soften that a little and allow it for some days until the nutrition flows to it, then gently strengthen it.
If the patient does not experience any of the causes we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to loosen it within approximately 2-3 days or around those times.
And then the hand of the patient should be suspended by their virtue of active movement, and they should sleep on their back.
And you should know that this fracture is healed in 30 days or 33 days, or much sooner in 28 days, and all of this depends on the arrangement of the circumstances and the disposition of the virtue.
**Chapter XIII**
**On the Restoration of Fractures of the Hand and Finger**
You should know that the hand and fingers often suffer fractures, and these do not heal properly unless the underlying causes are addressed.
And when a hand or finger experiences fracture or dislocation, you must ensure the patient remains calm and lie them down with the affected limb extended. Then, gently support the hand over the injured area.
Then, the physician should carefully extend the broken bones and align them so they grow together properly.
And then cover with a clean bandage and stoppers, otherwise infection may occur; and lay the sheet over it according to the extent of the area, and you have already wrapped that in linen cloth.
If the fracture is in the joints of the fingers, then make a cut on the inside of the palm and make it look like a length of cloth, and command the patient to tighten that part of their fractured finger; then wrap a long strip of cloth around it.
And the cloth wrapped around the body should be like a sheet in which it is lifted, so that the body is applied to the palm; and tighten it according to how much it covers.
If the fracture is in the external parts, then cover with a sheet and another sheet on the other side of the palm, so that the hand is covered and supported; and tighten the bandage, thus as it is revolved to the right position between the said ligaments.
And if you suffer a fracture in one of the joints of the fingers, then if it is the little finger, it should be wrapped as it is covered and then tightly tied to the palm, and if you wish, place a small right splint beneath it so that the fracture is elevated and not aggravated.
If the fracture is in other joints, for example in the middle finger, or index, or little finger, or ring finger, then it should be wrapped around the affected finger; or all fingers can be wrapped together according to their sequence, which is better; or a small splint can be placed beneath it, as we have said for the little finger.
And consider, in your restoration, and return that person to a safe disposition, with due consideration for the post-operative state—in contrast to what covers when any cause of those occurs, as described in the narrative of it.
**Chapter XIV**
On the restoration of a broken hip bone.
The hip bone, being mobile, often breaks and is perceived as pain according to its position in relation to the surrounding areas and the dominant inflammation.
And the restoration of it is done in this way that the ligament is tightened over the fracture and another ligament is placed around the fracture, and the patient is positioned on their stomach and face down.
Then the physician extends the ligament to its proper position according to quality when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
If it is necessary to open the hip joint, then the ligament should be pulled towards the opposite side at the socket of the thigh, allowing the extension to occur, and another ligament placed around the fracture.
And if the fracture seems to be extensive, then make the proper ligature on it and extend the splint to the affected parts.
Then the doctor should equalize the bones with both hands while returning them to their natural position and joining them with a good connection; he must ensure that he covers the area with bandages and compression, otherwise the member may be affected. If it happens in the infected member, then leave it for a few days until the infection subsides, and later return to your treatment.
The bandage should be done thus: it must cover the fracture with a hard cloth, and fold it two or three times, removing the excess; then wrap the splint until it reaches the thigh and the root of the bone.
And insert a long strip of cloth between the thigh and leg close to the joint, bringing the ends of the cloth from the joint higher than both parts, then turn over the leg and thigh again removing what is superfluous from the bandage.
Then place your hand over the thigh at the location of that fracture, and place one stick on the bones of the leg.
Then fill the space between the thigh and leg with soft cloth to prevent constriction.
Then begin with a strong constriction around the middle on the location of the fracture using three or four layers, and as you move farther away from the fracture site, your constriction should be less severe and lighter and more flexible.
Then extend both ends of the cloth to the joints while it reaches the toe's cavity, and tighten both ends of the sticks from the other side to prevent the ligament from moving from its place.
And then carefully apply the compression to that area, ensuring it does not cause damage or inflammation to the affected member, and if any cause arises from those, then take care to remove it, rectifying what happens immediately, as we have said before.
If there is pain in the bone that causes it to be weak, then cover it as best you can; if not, wrap and treat it, and cure what preceded the recollection until it is healed.
And in some cases, this fracture of the thigh is so severe that it cannot be adjusted with bindings, as we have said in the aid and support for the leg.
However, in the restoration of it in this manner, do not cause the patient to limp; and if it is restored alone, then apply the other leg as necessary, but it is important that the limb that was injured does not limp.
And you should know that the condition is severe in 40 days or a month or two, and all of this depends on the variety of complications and other dispositions.
**Chapter XV.**
**On the Restoration of the Broken Rib of the Right Side.**
You should know that the fracture of the rib on the right side often results in a prolonged healing process, frequently accompanied by inflammation and stiffness.
If it happens that the fracture results in only a crack or break in its parts, then this is considered a minor injury, but it can still be a source of great pain and discomfort, which has been the subject of much discussion.
And the restoration is such that it should be equal to what was broken in its parts, and this should be added and connected as much as possible by means of alignment and ease of construction.
And then apply a plaster and press it onto that round stain, if you need to; tighten around it with a tight bandage as appropriate.
And then consider all the dispositions that we have recommended for other fractures, thus taking care and similar to those that oppose any accident that is appropriate for its healing.
Chapter XVI.
On the restoration of the broken leg.
You know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is thick and is called the thigh bone; and the other is thin and is called the fibula.
And it happens in some cases of fracture that occur to the two bones of the arm, and for this reason restoration is made to them equally as restoration is made to the arm as a whole, and the operation on them is one.
And if two bones are broken together, the leg is completely shattered.
And if the bone of the ankle is broken with a subtle crack, the leg is shattered in front.
And if the bone of the ankle is broken with a strong crack, you will hear a pop, and it is one of those causes that are not easily healed.
Then apply extension, compression, and traction to the bones according to that agreement.
However, if the fracture of the leg is clean without displacement, extension should be less and more gentle, and it will be beneficial for your virtue.
And in the leg is any cause for operation on the arm, and when you align the bones and complete the entire operation, you will take pieces of hard wood where the causes are left alone, and they are made entirely of palm branches; tie them from those to which a slight roughness is required, do not harm the hands, and let the length of those be according to the length of the leg, and from the outside to the deepest part.
And then wrap each leg separately in two layers of cloth according to its length, placing one at the junction of the thigh and the other at the opposite end, ensuring they remain within the base of the foot.
Then attach the two splints at three points on each extremity and in the middle position, as this structure prevents the leg from bending at the joints, and it stays in place properly.
And now a splint of wood is applied according to the length of the leg, and it is placed over the limb to prevent any movement.
Especially ensure that this is done in the case of a fracture, and when such pain is truly severe.
And you should consider each leg daily, examining it for any issues, such as dislocation or inflammation, or other similar causes. If a problem arises from one of these, then rest the limb until it is healed.
Chapter .xvii.
On the fracture of the talus bone and other bones of the foot and toes.
The talus bone does not always fracture entirely; sometimes other bones of the foot do, and the toes rarely fracture but may suffer atrophy due to their position.
And if the bones of the foot do fracture and those bones become dislocated among themselves, then the patient's foot rests on the ground prepared thus as they recover.
Then place one foot over what is elevated among those bones, and apply pressure to them, and squeeze them until they return to their places.
Then apply a plaster and stop over it, and place the sole of the foot on a small table with two ends.
And then stretch the foot gently with a proper structure, since you have wrapped it with bandages and other causes from which it needs relief.
And after three or four days have passed, you will loosen the ligament, as you will find the bones entangled, either broken or dislocated, and the operation on them is as well known to you.
But if someone says it is broken, then restore them, entangled as they are with your skill and expertise in the restoration of said parts of the body. And then place the said broken bone gently according to its length, and slightly on one side; and return the foot to this table which is properly adjusted for you, and stretch its structure gently.
If what is broken of the bones is two or three or more parts, then you should place each finger gently wrapped in a linen bandage, and tighten the table at the bottom of the foot, and stand on one of the table's heads to hold the foot's belly properly.
And it is convenient for you that you do not forget to consider all the causes which are told to you in the other fractures of the accidents that we have mentioned; and be wary of every accident that could affect it.
Chapter XVIII
On the fracture of the condyle of the femur, the os of the penis, and the scrotum of the man.
When the condyle of the femur is broken, it causes a severe pain in the knee, and you should incline it slightly towards the torso, and hold it behind.
And the midwife should fill the condyle with something, and it should be done in the condyle of him likewise with hope; and the woman should be cut open, and slowly raise the legs of the child one by one, so that everything is removed until it is before the opening of the condyle with hope, and the broken bone returns.
And then place poultices on their back, and when they want to urinate, facilitate the flow and collect the urine, then reduce it and return it according to the same manner as before, and return them to their initial position.
And do the same for seven days or around those times, as it is restored.
And if you wish, take a bladder of sheep and stretch over the patient's body a tube of canvas; then insert the entire bladder into his scrotum, and blow air into the tube until the bladder is inflated within the scrotum, as the rupture returns.
Then it should be filled with heat and left for some days according to what we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the thigh of a man or woman is broken, then apply in the restoration and healing of it what we have recommended for the hip bone.
And what is right is not hidden in these nearby fractures that rarely occur, especially for one who has some study and understanding of this my book; for that fracture signifies to you in the best dispositions for treatment and restoration, and therefore understand well.
If the fracture is in the arm of a man, take a cloth from above and place it on that area; then wrap it with a drape, and have it wrapped up, and leave it for three days or around those times, and it will be healed.
Chapter XIX
On the Restoration of Bone Fractures When They Are Infected
It is convenient for one to whom a fractured bone becomes infected, and especially if the bone is large, such as the bone of the hip or a similar bone, that you cauterize and cut into it immediately if the conditions for flebotomy indicate it, as we have said above.
And if the disease exudes pus, then you must hold to its retention as if you were sprinkling ashes over it with a fan, unless another cause is present.
And then it begins to restore the fracture in that member on the third day, and do not prolong this, if you do not risk an abscess.
If an abscess does occur cautiously, then you must delay the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess has subsided, and do not approach it on the third, seventh, and tenth days, for you might cause worse accidents.
If the bone is broken and protruding from the uncovered wound, then you must be careful to perforate and reduce it, using your hands as easily and with as little extension as possible.
If the extension is not within your preparation and the condition of it requires your own hands, then you must reduce it with your own hands, using a suitable instrument; an instrument that is made of metal, with a length of seven or eight digits, and whose width corresponds to the extent of the wound; and for this reason, it is necessary for the doctor to have several of these instruments of different sizes for the treatment of all types of fractures.
And it should be made in such a way, with a slight roughness, so that it is not folded too much during the operation.
It should have a sharp point at its edge, so that the margin is in its extremes; and it should be made to extend from above with a thick tendency, and from below to fit the spaces within.
And this is the shape of it:
It is called "voluntary mouth of the hernia" in Greek, thus it is a rare case.
For the part that requires the acute end of it to be elevated above the edge of the prominent bone.
And it should be done at once so that the bone returns to its place, and no further complications arise.
And so try to intertwine the ends of the fracture between them, and if the end of the broken bone is thin, and you do not take the instrument by good assumption, then you must insert the end of that bone into the instrument as it has power over it.
If you are unable to reduce the bone to this completely that we have recommended, then cut it with the instrument that convenes to him from among the incisors that we have said; or saw that part with one of the saws in any way possible to you.
And then rasp that which remains on the bone of roughness and small cuts.
And when the bone is reduced and the patient experiences severe pain, knowing that the bone has not returned to its natural place, then you know that great improvement has been conferred upon the patient.
When your restoration of the bone is complete and you apply a black astringent cloth, especially in summer, do not place it directly on the wound or any other cause where there is oil, so as not to cause putrefaction and corruption.
And then you administer stones at the appropriate time during the complete restoration of the bone, and leave the wound uncovered so that you can incise the tissue with scissors and use bandages according to the size of the wound.
And be very careful not to strain the wound towards the fracture, as you have seen foolish doctors do this, leading to death or corruption and severe pain in their patients, which is unhealthful. And if the stiffness is light, flexible, different from the stiffness of other fractures,
And if the plague is great or a severe illness, and you are concerned about further bad accidents that we have described, and you feel pain in that place, then do not press down on it, but rather wrap it with a tight cloth of hard sheets and strengthen it with those.
And when the plague has begun for a day or two, and there is swelling in it, then remove the cloth that you had placed over it, and apply some medicine, such as we usually use to treat plagues, with ointments containing tetracycline and similar substances.
And it is necessary for you to wash the wound and observe the plague each morning and evening until it is consolidated and healed, and ensure that the member is prepared in such a way that the infection flows from it to the parts beyond with ease.
If the plague passes many days and is not consolidated or separated from the limb, then you should know that here are only temporary remedies to prevent the plague from spreading further. And from those parts that are separated, remove and extract them; those that are not separated, put the instrument and cause pain, pierce to incise those according to what is possible for you.
If it happens that the plague is covered with sores or ulcers, or any other kind of corruption and putrefaction, then you should apply to each one of these what suits them for their cure, which is preceded by a description in its chapter.
And regarding what I should say and what you should do: when the swelling breaks, it protrudes over the member along with the bones of the thigh and the supporting structures, resembling those of the larger members, and you must not attempt to drain it, nor extract it, as you might otherwise cause death; after cleansing it, let it heal on its own for a period of about 5-10 days, and treat the plague if you have observed it, but leave it alone if not.
Chapter .XX.
On the treatment of hernia that occurs in the scar tissue of a fracture.
Various complications occur with this hernia in the scar tissue of a fracture, especially near joints, and it is hindered by the shape of the member; thus, it prohibits the member from its natural function.
Then consider if the hernia is recent and administer those medicines that have stopped it thus far, such as aloes, senna, digests, cramp-relieving herbs, and others; take some or all of these, and apply those with a styptic quality, or white of an egg, or sour milk, and press them onto the hernia in a compressive manner.
And if the tightness does not relax for several days, then release it and apply another treatment, as long as the hernia persists; or use a plate of lead laid gently on the area, as lead has the property to reduce any swelling in the members.
If it is already given that the joint is in a twisted and tight state due to necessity, then divide that by the most appropriate part of it, cut off the excess and prominent parts, or quickly remove them until it is healed.
**Capitol XX1.**
On the restoration of a fracture, once restored, it is appropriate to wrap the delicate member tightly according to its nature.
When a bone fracture is healed, it is appropriate to wrap the recovered limb tightly, but this should be done for only a few reasons: namely, excessive healing of the ligament and its binding; due to an excess of tightness in the ligaments that prevents proper nutrition from reaching the limb; excessive accumulation of fluid; inappropriate movement at the wrong time; or weakness of blood flow in the affected area due to exhaustion or debility caused by the illness.
The treatment for this involves restricting the patient's diet, making their skin supple while increasing the flow of blood to the affected area, and applying baths, needles, and joy (possibly indicating massage or other soothing techniques) to it.
They then apply pressure to the limb to facilitate the flow of nutrients, or continue washing it with lukewarm water, until the nutrient flow is restored and the limb returns to its natural shape.
Chapter .xxii.
On the treatment of fractured bones when they are restored crookedly and the operation of their repair is forbidden.
When it happens to the already restored member, then the healing of it from crookedness and bulging of the fractured bone should be done, and this is how the form of the member is corrected, however, the member is not prohibited from its natural operation; as long as you receive the advice of one who considers that member as newly fractured.
Indeed, there have been many foolish doctors and healers on our land who have done this, and this operation is highly disdained, losing great fear of the sign of which it is mortal.
But if the claudication and bulging are recent, then they should be immersed in a tepid water bath in which there are herbs that soften them, also covered with fennel and razing, and similar to those; and an ointment of softening plasters should be made with it, or the mud from the roots of alder, or olive oil, and applied to it; or the presidents of fat figs, intertwined with the women's hair, resembling those used in the consolidant medicines called amermans.
And sometimes it is dissolved by repeated gentle friction on the most humid parts, and also by moving the member at regular intervals throughout the day.
If the deformity has already progressed and is strong, it becomes a stone and requires surgical treatment, then one must remove the pus if present and ensure the continuity of the bone is preserved, and cut away what is superfluous from the pressure of that part on the bone using fine scissors, and provide ease to that area in need, with care and study.
**Chapter XXIII**
**On Dislocation**
Dislocation is the displacement of one of the joints from its normal position, resulting in a loss of movement, distortion of the body part's shape, and causing severe pain and significant injury to the affected area.
Therefore, when there is some dislocation, you should act promptly to reduce it, and not delay its reduction, because if it's delayed, the location becomes inflamed and strongly contracted, making it difficult to reduce the dislocation.
And so it is not advisable to move or stretch it during the inflammation, as spasms and severe pain can result from such actions.
If this occurs, you should immediately perform a fluoroscopy of the patient, and then place something cold between their thighs to help reduce the inflammation; and then immerse the affected member in lukewarm water with oil, and gently reduce it.
And all members should be treated with the water mentioned, which will return to its proper place in due time.
And you have already arranged the chapters on dislocation as mentioned above, from the upper part of the body to the lower part.
Chapter .xxiiii.
On the treatment of mandible dislocation.
When both mandibles are dislocated, if they do not return to their places; the displacement of both is caused by either a partial removal and slight softening, or a complete dislocation and swelling, so that upon the onset of the injury, the patient cannot open his mouth, nor can he close it, and his tongue is wrapped around itself.
If the dislocation is slight, it may return to its proper position on its own with little cause.
If the dislocation is complete and severe, it is necessary to promptly administer a gentle reduction, and not delay.
And it is that the surgeon holds the patient's head, and the doctor inserts his finger into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the patient's mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts both fingers together if the dislocation is on two sides, and the other fingers are outside which equalize them; and commands the patient to cease moving their jaws and release those that go from one part to another; and the doctor equally holds the jaw and repositions it until it returns to its place.
And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are simultaneously dislocated, then administration of evaporation with water and oil should be done until a slight reduction of both is achieved, without delaying the complete reduction of both.
And so when they return and are equalized, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then a compress of cloth should be placed over those parts with wax and oil applied, and also use linnen to facilitate movement easily.
And let the patient's rest on their back with their head between two pillows, so they do not wince to the right or left, and do not force any cause; having taken their food, let them use a lion's fork until the pains are relieved and their jaws are unclenched, then they may eat what they wish.
And this should be facilitated without straining the patient's mouth during eating, drinking, or coughing, until the jaw is unclenched and healed.
And if it is difficult to reduce two jaws that are dislocated at any time and not returned to their proper places, then fevers and persistent sweating occur, and the patient's belly is severely upset, and they also vomit pure cholera.
And when you see this, you will know it is a loss; and often, within a few days, that person who experiences this dies.
Chapter 25.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the furca (spine) and the extremity of the muscle.
The furca (spine) is not displaced from its place within the body due to the continuation of the muscle; however, sometimes it is displaced towards the outside, and this is described in terms of sensation.
And the restoration of it (the patient) is that they return to their previous state, with the pain remaining in their back and extending their arms. Then squeeze the area with your palm strongly, as it will return.
Then apply pressure to that compress and poultice, and strengthen it.
Place the extremity of the bone that is dried and continues to be attached to it, so that it is not dislocated on any day; then cover it and reduce it as we have said and as your equipment allows.
Then apply the plaster, poultices, and compression, and command the patient to adhere to quietness and rest until it is healed.
In this treatment, the cure is reduced to the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from its location.
**Chapter XXVI**
On the reduction of muscle dislocation.
You know that the muscle is not dislocated in any ordinary sense, but according to three manners; of which one is when it is detached at the attachment point on either side.
And the first is that it is dislocated at the attachment of its muscle, and this requires treatment; and it is not dislocated at the attachments in back by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the attachments in front by the nerves.
And primarily it is dislocated and comes out at the attachments on the sides, especially in those where there is little flesh, it is easily dislocated; but more often in those where there are many muscles, it is difficult to remove.
And many people experience this condition due to a blow or accident, and the muscle of it is surrounded by inflammation from a bruise, and it is cut off because it was already dislocated.
So, you will understand that you need to be very careful with it, and then proceed with the treatment for its cure.
And it is known that dislocation occurs when the tendon separates from its attachment; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy one, for you will find a clear difference between them; and you will find the tendon separated at the concave end of the muscle, leaving the tendon attached to the touch of the muscle head as if by a hook, and the patient cannot move their hand to its normal position nor limit its movement.
If the dislocation is in the foot or ankle and you find clear evidence of contact, it cannot be hidden.
And from this dislocation, gentle reduction is possible when it is fresh and the patient is young.
And the reduction of it is that the attending practitioner raises the patient's hand above them; then he places his fingers on the tendon of the dislocated joint, holds it firmly in place, strengthens the joint in its position, and the practitioner raises the patient's hand and extends it; then he lets go so that it returns gently.
It is not possible to accurately translate this text without further context and knowledge of the specific dialect or medical terminology used. However, based on the given structure and words, a tentative translation could be:
And then the patient is made to lie on their back and rest with their testicles hanging down, awaiting that they be lubricated between relaxation and tension, and the doctor places his foot over the expectant area, lifts the head of the muscle towards the vertical, pulls the patient's testicles away from the opening, and another assistant holds the patient's scrotum so that it is not pulled away, for in this way, it will return to its place.
And if you wish, reduce the second in this manner: so make it that another man be present who is taller than the patient, and stand on that side, and insert his muscle between the testicles and lift the testicles up towards the opening until the patient's scrotum is suspended in the air, and have another pull the patient's testicles away from the abdominal opening. If the hernia is lighter, then understand that something else may be suspended, for this one will soon return to its dislocation.
And it is reduced in another manner: a long stick is placed on the ground with a rounded head, like a mortaring pestle, not too thick or too thin; then it is positioned beneath the patient; drapes are placed over the head of the stick, and the pain remains according to the length of the stick, and then the doctor's hand extends to the parts on the other side; and the patient's body part is strengthened from the other side so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if the reduction is difficult due to all the causes we have mentioned, then use this cure: take a stick whose length is about two arms' breadth, and its diameter is four fingers, and its thickness is removed from the center according to this form:
And then cover the rounded head with lion's drapes so that the stick does not touch the pain.
And then place yourself so that the patient's thigh is between your knees, and stretch your hand or arm over the foot within the gaps, and wrap the foot around the leg and arm and the end of your hand.
Then position your arm on a scale according to its width, and stretch your other hand to the gaps, while the other side is suspended from the opposite end, so that the joint can be reached shortly after.
And once the instrument is placed as you are able, and you see that you have positioned the thread of the instrument with a hopeful tension from both sides equally, then prepare a paste by mixing fine powder and egg album on all the muscles, turning them away from each other, and tighten the thread gently; then wrap the ligament around the paste, attach your hand to the patient's leg, and leave it for seven days without moving your hand.
And ensure that the patient's food intake is limited, as long as the member is supported, since it is easier to heal them.
Then gradually increase the food intake and encourage movement; if it stops and does not become weak, then healing has occurred.
But if the joint is dislocated due to moisture or other cause, then it should be treated with a pointed cautery, as explained in the chapter on cauterization.
And if all this is done and after nine days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the bandages and tightness are removed from him several times, and he cannot raise that arm above his head, then know that the nerves in it, which are at the top of the muscle, are already damaged or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never stay in its place.
From the dislocation of that which is affected, you must reduce the foot and ankle or the fragments behind, by force and extension of the limbs, until it returns.
And both these strictures should be treated, and the other one cared for until it is healed.
If the healing becomes grave in the member and there is delay in its movement, then the disease uses many baths at times until that gravity is removed and it returns to its original nature.
Chapter XXVII.
On the healing of a dislocated hip.
You know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; it is dislocated in all parts, most notably in front of the rear part, and the dislocation of it is not concealed by any vestige or touch according to some figure being dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip, this is declared manifestly to you, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm or touch its muscle.
And take care to cover them, and reduce the dislocation as soon as it comes near the infected gangrenous point, because if it reaches the infected gangrenous point, its reduction is difficult, and it is unlikely that they will be completely cured; especially when it is in the posterior regions, because it is more dangerous than all other types of dislocation, causes greater pain, and can lead to death.
And the restoration of it, when reduction is possible, is that two hands be placed on it, extending them and opening the body's joints with the fingers of both hands together, or with the palm's root within it, until it returns to its proper place.
If the dislocation is in the anterior region, then return it by bending one hand with the other, striking the thigh at the root of the palm.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply violent extension and strong pressure.
And indeed, two ministers should stretch their arms, and hold that sight by two ministers so that it is not dislodged from the extension.
Then he should rotate his arms through all parts, as the cloth is wrapped long over his hand, or lint.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he applies some oil to it in order that this may relieve those causes which aid in lubricating the joint and facilitate its return.
And then the reduction of the hernia should be placed over that paste in which there is tightness and execution with white of egg, and it should be extracted with ease and descends strictly, and the arm should be suspended from the collarbone, and left for a few days.
And then it should be loosened; and thus if the joint is formed in its place, you loosen the ligament from him and leave that.
And if you see that the joint is not strained, repeat the application of the plaster and the lotion, and leave it for some days until it is completely removed; then take it off.
If an accident occurs during the reduction of a joint, especially if it is in motion, then apply moisturizing baths and gentle friction, and compress, until it is relieved; or place a heating pad over the affected joint, as it may be due to excessive movement; and leave it covered with a bandage for the day and night. Then secure that position, and immerse the affected part in a bath; and when dry, gently rub the joint with warm friction, repeating the process of heating and friction until it becomes numb from lack of movement. In the immersion bath, until it is calm.
And if you wish, place your hand on that moist and scalded opening of the wound and press down upon it; do this several times, as that is humid and returns to its condition.
Chapter 28.
On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, which is between the arm and hand.
In some cases, the shoulder may be dislocated, and its reduction is delicate; in contrast to other joints, it is crucial to act quickly in reducing it as soon as it is dislocated, before the area becomes numb or develops an ulcer.
And the reduction of the dislocation involves placing the patient's hand on a table and extending their hand, while the doctor places his or her hand or palm over the joint, and gently pushes it back to its position.
However, it is necessary to consider if the palm has already been placed on the patient's abdomen, then the patient should lie down with their back on a table for extension and reduction; and if dislocation has occurred before that affects the patient's back, then the doctor's hand should be positioned intrinically over the table towards that joint.
And therefore, if this happens quickly, that is good; otherwise, tighten the bandage around them, leave it, and do not worry, as they will not suffer or be able to resist the reduction of the hernia for more than a few days.
However, consider the Roman joint according to its flexibility; do not force the patient or cause them pain, but rather soften the hand and use a pointed cautery near the joint's location, which will provide relief and prevent further issues.
Therefore, when the illness returns, place your hand on the compress we have prepared and let it rest and be strengthened for several days; then release it and place it again and exercise your hand upon it.
If the movement of it is stopped and some weakness occurs in it, apply warmth with water and friction a few times, until it is relieved.
**Chapter XXIX.**
**On the Treatment of Dislocated Joints**
Sometimes, the joints are completely dislocated.
And when a joint is dislocated, either on the back of the hand or on the palm or belly, pinch the joint and push the dislocation back into place with your fingers, until it returns.
And then support the head of the finger, suspend the part that is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
And then suspend it and extend it until it is completely healed on that same day.
And at night, according to that narrative, continue to stretch it and do not cease to loosen it during the day and exercise movement, and do this for several days until it is tight.
And do the same thing if it is dislocated in the mother's womb, and suspend it to that part and perform the first operation on it until it is healed.
And do the same thing when it is dislocated in other parts.
Chapter .XXX. (This appears to be a roman numeral indicating the chapter number, without containing specific content.)
On the treatment of displaced spinal vertebrae.
When any of the spinal vertebrae in the back or neck become completely dislocated, it causes immense pain as the muscles around them spasm, and at such times, it is not easy to cure, for death often comes to the patient.
And the sign of this is that the patient cannot manage the pain on their own, and often experiences relaxation in some parts of the body, such as one leg or both legs or one arm or both arms, or even a spinal vertebra returns to its place; for often it happens that they are dislocated in four places.
Therefore, when it is dislocated at the rear parts and called "gelbозitát" (a term likely referring to a specific type of dislocation or spinal condition).
The treatment for it is that you consider whether the blueness occurs from puerperal fever, because at that time there is neither cure nor healing for all of it.
In cases where you see this due to chance or impact or similar to those, the ancients spoke of treatment methods in lengthy speeches, of which the greatest benefit returns; and you have already been inconvenienced by that of which there is little excuse due to the excessive use, through my close proximity to understanding, to which I have here exposed and shaped from various instruments of which I will now demonstrate and space out that very one.
And for those, only the one that occurs in the back itself, through what you have reconnected, is cured.
And it is that the patient should be laid on their back with their legs drawn up close to the wall, and they should be given warm compresses to prevent the pain in their legs.
Then a straight stick should be placed, with one end on the ground at the patient's foot and another stick across their other foot.
The minister should hold the stick, not fixed in a hole, and another minister should hold the other according to that form.
Then cover the patient's head and leave the tight-binding gently on their limbs; extend the end of the binding to the stick that is against their head, and tie it to them; and tighten the other strap over their hips, keeping them in place on the bed; and adjust all the bindings and tie them to the other stick which is against their feet.
And then gently extend the bandage from the foot, and ensure that neither the feet nor the ligaments in their places where they are fastened are compressed, though they should not be too tight as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength while it returns, or he places them on a table, and then adjusts the patient's feet on the table until they return to their natural position.
If it does not return in this manner, take a table whose width or length is three arm-lengths, and dig into the wall which we have said is nearest to the malady, a place where the end of the table can reach. Then place the edge of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, pressing gently until the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
And if you wish, open it up and turn the patient's head; and since you must be on the ground, place the top of the patient's thigh at the back of your two fists, their length being equal to one arm, and the top of their thigh firmly in the palm of each hand, so that no movement occurs.
And take one fist-sized round object on which to turn it, and twist it in the two grooves of each fist.
And at the end of it is a groove in which the turn is formed, its length being equal to one palm where it turns; and in the other two fists, they are similar to this one.
Then tighten the ligaments that you have straightened on the patient's foot at the turn where its head is, and the ligaments that you have tightened on their thighs in the turn that is directed towards their feet.
And then you should take each turn and have a minister twist the turn with their hand, and the doctor applies heat to the spine as we have said.
And when the spine is returned to its place and the area is heated, then apply a dry, powdery substance over the paste, and stop; then place a cloth over the paste from a table whose width is about three times or so the length of the affected area, and over the part of the spine.
And then use the mentioned treatment, utilizing subtle nutrition for healing.
And if any threat is perceived in the area at the end of healing, then medicines that soften and soothe should be administered through a prolonged course of treatment as we have recommended; and such treatment involves applying a thin layer of lead to the area.
And in some cases, there occurs an imminent danger at the end of the spine bones, which is caused by that dislocation; and it is that bone which you should already fear because no covering will protect it from this disease, as it will strongly cause you to experience death.
**Chapter XXXI.**
**On the Healing of a Dislocated Hip.**
You know that the joint of the hip and the muscle's joint should not be dislocated alone, but it happens to those who experience dislocation in the other joints with lesser removal and concavity.
And the hip joint is dislocated in four manners, for it can be dislocated inward or outward, or in front or behind.
And it is most commonly dislocated in the inner joints, slightly in the front or rear joints.
The sign of dislocation in the inner joints is as follows: when you adjust the patient's leg towards the healthy side, the affected leg becomes longer, and the pain is more acute than on the healthy side, and the patient cannot bend their foot in the normal way; this is where the pointed cautery should be applied from behind, so that the tip of the bone already reaches here.
The sign of the condition in which dislocation occurs is in the outer joints; it is that the accidents of the affected part are contrary to this accident.
The sign of the condition in which dislocation occurs at the front joints is that they expand their limb fully but still experience pain on the affected side; it cannot bend normally towards the front, and if pressed, it goes to the rear parts; its urine is retained, and its testicle becomes inflamed, and you should move the patient's leg over the thigh.
And the sign of one who experiences dislocation in the rear parts is that he does not stretch out the pain, nor can he bend what he bends the knee, and the leg is shorter on this side than the other, and the knee is softened, and the head of the matter is at that place.
The main consideration in the reduction of this dislocation is that you should, when the dislocation is old and long-standing, think that it has already been reduced by itself or slowly improved with treatment, so it is not appropriate to apply excessive reduction and risk causing more harm; therefore, in such a case, thorough observation is required.
If it is a recent dislocation and one of the four types, you should do what follows: turn the joint back to its place and extend it both inwardly and outwardly, and then to the right and left, for it returns firmly on its own without needing other treatment.
Perhaps, if it does not return in this manner, you must prepare a strong assistant to extend the patient's leg from below, or hold their feet, or wrapping cloth that is tight over their distressing area; and another minister should stretch your hand from above so that he can place his fingers between their legs; and tighten the wrapping cloth around the root of the thigh, and have another minister turn the end of the cloth to prevent its slipping.
And it is either extending the leg or the part from within to open up the angle at the fork of the bone, or behind the part towards the back of the spine.
And it is the extension of all these at once, while the patient's illness is lifted to his/her body off the ground and hangs loose.
And this type of extension is especially unique to all four.
And so if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it will be good; otherwise, it will be necessary for every kind of treatment to address its specific cure.
In the reduction of a dislocated hernia, when it is dislocated within the folds, the patient should be placed on their side; then, the ligaments should be pulled tight across the area where the hernia protrudes between the top of the hernia and the spot that remains free from pain; and the ligament should be extended over the part from the angle to the highest point of the fork.
Then another assistant should firmly grasp the patient's legs, press the swollen area of the affected hernia, and stretch it outward vigorously to ensure it returns to its proper place.
And this type is of the lightest cure to which this member is reduced compared to other species.
If it is excused on your side and you do not disobey the treatment of this type of cure for all, then you must tie both feet of the patient together with a strong ligature, lighter, on both the toes and both the soles.
And the length of each part should be four times the other, and the affected leg should be extended more than the other by a quantity of two.
Then the hernia should be suspended over the top of the leg, and it should be in the lower part; and the length of it should be from the ground a quantity of two arms' length.
Then command a strong young man to reduce the head of the hernia, and suspend it from another young man, and another young man should decrease the hernia with forceful pressure, for the joint will return to its place at great speed.
During the reduction, when there is a dislocation outside its usual place, it is necessary to hold the patient in a position of flexion as we have recommended regarding the frozen state; and tighten the ligament specifically on the affected thigh and on their chest.
Then place two sticks as supports: one on the patient's feet and another on their head; and place a moist cloth over the infected area to prevent the stick from causing further damage when extending the joints, so that the extension of the parts remaining will not be hindered.
Then each minister should extend their part, and the doctor guides the reduction according to the art (or technique).
And when the dislocation is in the front parts, you should ensure that the leg is extended slightly, and according to this method, narrate over the pain; the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the affected joint, then with his other hand, he gently pulls to correct the dislocation, leaving it in its place.
And if the dislocation is in the back parts, you should not ensure that the patient is extended at the joints, but rather elevated above the ground; once you have confirmed that he is resting on a hard surface, thus as we said about the placement of the body on two surfaces, and his face and ligaments are slightly stretched, as we also mentioned, there is no harm.
And it should be administered compression with a splint on the area where the joint is dislocated.
Therefore, when the reduction is complete according to need — and the sign of the reduction of the hernia is not hidden from you, since you extend from the hernia two thighs, and when you see those hernias and the patient extrudes their thigh and expands that as an excuse, then you know that the member according to need has returned — and now you adjust two things, place a plaster, and wrap a bandage so that the wound is not harmed in any part; and keep the hernia at rest for three days or four.
And then remove the ligature and plaster, and compare one thigh to the other.
Now, if you see those hernias in appearance, then you will know that the displacement is already closed, and therefore release the patient from rest.
And if you see any sign of softening, then return and apply a plaster to that area, remove it according to your initial stretching, and leave it in rest for three days.
And then gently pull it, causing the patient to walk slowly for some days, until they are comfortable.
**Chapter .xxxii.**
**On the treatment of dislocated joints.**
A joint is dislocated in three manners: when it shifts outward, inward, or to the sides, and not forward.
And the sign of a dislocated joint is that you apply a splint to the affected area; then you will know that the joint is dislocated.
And the restoration of all manners of dislocation is that you correctly apply the splint, so that it extends properly if possible; attach the patient's back to their face, and hold their foot between your hands; then carefully attach the joint to your palms, and place those between your fingers over the patient's dislocated joint with strength, and another assistant should extend their leg until the joint returns to its place.
And the sign of its reduction is that their leg adheres to the thigh in a non-painful manner.
Then apply a plaster to adhere the leg to the thigh, and then bind those parts with a bandage for three or four days, and afterwards remove the bandage.
And do not use the patient's mobility for some days, until they are healed and comfortable.
If the reduction of the hernia is not indicated, then administer strong extensions to the ligaments of which mention has been made in the preceding description of the treatment.
Chapter .xxxiii. (Note: The number xxxiii represents the chapter number, not a part of the text itself.)
On the treatment of the dislocation of the talus.
The foot, at times, is damaged by slight removal, and at other times it is dislocated completely; the dislocation occurs either inside or outside the joints.
And the sign of the dislocation is that the foot appears swollen, proceeding towards the joint where it is dislocated.
The treatment for the dislocation is a gentle reduction, and it should be extended to facilitate the joints and then wrapped until it returns to its place.
However, in the treatment when it is completely dislocated, you must cease the patient's movement directly, and have a strong and capable assistant apply pressure behind the back at the middle point of the dislocated joint.
Then you must place your right hand on the top of the foot from the dominant side, and your left hand below the foot at the location of the ankle.
And then gently pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and with your left hand make two movements to the left, and then extend your left arm; push the foot of the patient towards the bed on the right side of the leg, and work on it.
And do this twice as we have counted.
And then gently push the foot of the patient towards the bed on the third attempt, and you are at the ankle.
So if you return in one movement or two according to this manner, and turn the foot inside out, it is good; otherwise, continue the operation over it again.
If it is impossible for you to reduce it in this way as we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and stretch out a firm piece of wood between their thighs, and insert something between them, and cover them with a blanket so that the hernia does not protrude.
And then the minister should take hold of his limbs, and another minister extend the foot with its toes or the bandage that lies over the arch of the foot; and another minister should extend this or that minister against the extension of his part, and the padding should be retained between the thighs of the patient to prevent the movement of his body beyond its extent.
And then the doctor should re-align the dislocation with his hands, and another minister should hold the healthy thigh at its joints, so that the dislocation returns to its proper place.
And when the dislocation has returned and it is declared that the reduction is healthy, then apply a poultice and reinforce that bandage tightly, and bind the foot with bandages to the leg.
And be careful of the nerves that are behind the sole of the foot, so that the bandage over that area is not tight and causes no harm.
And then leave it for two days or three; and if the swelling softens, remove that.
And on the third or fourth day, remove that, and forbid the patient from moving for ten days. If it is necessary to move that space, be sure that the dislocation is not dissolved and corrupted, and then this will not receive treatment.
And if you suffer an apothema (fever), cover him with what we have mentioned before, in the place where our narrative precedes, rather than applying remedies and baths, until it is remedied.
Chapter XXXII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the joints of the feet.
Understand that one who is dislocated should be wrapped in a narrow extent of cloth; and for what is not difficult, it should be lifted before.
If the dislocation is in some sensitive part of the foot, then you should make the patient lie down with their foot elevated either on the ground or on a table, and keep it that way as if they were walking.
And then you stand by the foot, place your hand on it to prevent any pressure on the joints, and press gently with the foot as it returns, ensuring that the dislocation is reduced and does not reappear in the prominent area.
Then place a board beneath the patient's foot which supports the entire foot, having two ends, and tighten it gently but firmly for three days; afterward, remove it and allow the patient to walk with rest for several days until healing is assured.
Chapter .xxxv.
Regarding the types of dislocation that occur due to disease, fracture, or any other condition.
When any of these conditions occurs and you focus on the treatment and restoration of it, sudden complications may lead to death.
And for this, it is not appropriate to presume over the treatment of it, but rather he who is skilled in the art, with great experience, mercy, and compassion, gradually, without haste or arrogance; and use medicinal treatments that give gradual relief from symptoms, leaving the diagnosis to divine judgment, unless you hope for health from death, alleviation of suffering, and in which there appears some hope. And therefore, as soon as possible, strive to reduce it at the beginning of the cause, rather than applying a symptomatic cure.
And if the member returns to its proper place, then administer a gentle treatment to prevent further inflammation and cure the pain with appropriate dry compresses.
If the dislocation is accompanied by a fracture and the bones are separated, then you must open their locks, and treat it as we have said for the simple ailments of this type that precede in the places of those.
And beware, according to your virtue, of the instrument in the ways of fear, as my prediction has preceded it; for it is better for you to honor your Creator, and more permanent for your glory, and more beneficial to your true body in due time. Thus, the words of Albucasim are perfectly ended, from which God may be blessed. Amen.
