Oh, my sons, having completed this book, the last on the science of medicine, through the completion of its contents, and due to the explanations contained therein, and through the declarations it makes, I believe you have now grasped fully this treatise, which is a part of the most high art of surgery.
For surgery, considered the most high art in our region and at our time, is entirely shrouded in secrecy, as its science is greatly neglected; only a few small descriptions of it remain in the books of the Ancients, which have led to much confusion and error, as the understanding of its principles is closed off, and its power extended.
And I have found it necessary to revive the order of this treatise through a second method of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and in order that the forms of cautery instruments and other surgical tools may be included for the sake of explanation and preparation, which is essential.
But the cause why our artful healers no longer have their hands full in this our time is that the art of medicine is complex, and requires expertise in the science of anatomy, which reveals how everything within [the body] functions and relates to one another; and knowledge of bones, nerves, and ligaments, and the names and movements of these; and the veins, both pulsing and static, and their locations.
And for this reason Hippocrates says that the name is fitting, but in practice it is small, especially in the art of healing.
We have already said this at the beginning of this book; for those who do not know what we have told you about anatomy, they are not exempt from making mistakes that will lead to the death of men, as you have seen many of them who are formed in this science but lack real knowledge and rely on theory and experiment.
You see a foolish doctor who has incurred an infected abscess in the thigh of a woman and incised some arteries in her thigh so that much blood flows within, causing the woman to die between his legs.
And you see another doctor who prescribed a stone from a man who had passed it in his state; the stone was large, and he came to him and extracted that stone with part of his bladder, so that man died on the third day.
And you have already summoned help to extract it, and you see that because of the size of the stone and the disposition of the patient's condition, he will die.
And you see another doctor who was taking payment from a duke of our land for surgery, and he operated on a black crusted ulcer that was deeply infected in the patient's thigh; because of the doctor's ignorance, he extracted the fracture above the wound, using poultices and planks with strong tension, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
And then release it according to their desires, and apply rest, and take away the swelling for some days, and command that we loosen the ligament; and thus, until the matter and the pain in the foot are resolved, and brought to healing.
And you have been called to loosen the ligament, and by doing so, achieve tranquility and thus alleviate their pains.
However, if the corruption is already confirmed in the member, then it cannot be restrained, and the corruption continues to spread throughout the member until the danger of the illness increases.
And there is another doctor who perforates a cancerous abscess, and it becomes ulcerated after some days, until the evil of it increases under the control of its lord.
Which causes is because the pain in the cancer is pure melancholic humour, and it does not cover that it will reach him with a sharp weapon, but rather affects the member in which it suffers most.
And for this reason, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation be carefully devised in two stages: first, the operation associated with health, and second, the work which is perilous to the greatest dispositions.
And you have already encountered this in every place of this book where we speak of operations involving error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to pay attention and set aside that which leads people astray from speaking and shames you.
And therefore, take up your weapons with diligence and the protection of God, and your patients with ease and firmness.
And use the best means for the grace of God leading to salvation and glorious success, and set aside the terrible illnesses of difficult healing, and cease using those things that make you fear, so that your confidence in your faith and in His name does not desert you: for greater glory remains for you, and more honor both in this world and in the next, to your sanctity.
They already dissected in some of their own organs: Do not treat bad diseases improperly, so that bad doctors do not become famous.
And you have already divided this book into three chapters.
Begin the division of the book, and first, the first part. The first chapter organized within the feet, in the forms of instruments and in the tools of cautery, and of what is necessary for the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter deals with incisions and punctures, and also with venoms, and with extracts of arrows and similar objects, all chapters and ordered according to the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and repositioning, and on the cure of twists and similar conditions; a well-ordered chapter on internal foot care and the shapes of instruments.
Understand what I have said about the quality of the youth of that cautery and the documents of it, and in what conditions cautery is prohibited.
Therefore, it is said that the discourse on the quality of cautery's youth and the documents of it is long and prolix, subtle for knowledge, and secrets hidden; and much has been spoken about it by many wise men, and there are disagreements among them, so I will content myself with a small part of their discourses, fearing prolongation.
And therefore it is said that cauterization will apply to the entire universal connection, which is of material or its material, except for two connections, which are connections whose material is itself.
In the connection that is dry and lacks material, opinions differ; some say that cauterization is beneficial to it, while others claim the opposite, stating that cauterization is not appropriate for ailments characterized by quality and dryness, as the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it would be counterproductive to treat a condition that is dry and lacking in moisture with heat.
And those who claim the opposite state that cauterization is beneficial for all dry and dehydrated ailments in the bodies of men, as when you compare the body of a man and its humidity to the connection with fire, you find the body of a man to be rough.
And he says through the argument of those who claim this, that he himself has already discovered it through experience several times.
However, it is not appropriate for someone who has already been exhausted and practiced in the chapter of cautery for further training, and who knows the diversity of the composition of people and the disposition of ailments in their bodies, and the causes of those, and the accidents of them, and the space of time of those.
In other situations, there is no need for fear, especially in dry and humid ailments, as all doctors are agreed on these, and they are not discordant in the application of cautery to them.
And know, my sons, that the secret of healing by cautery with fire and the goodness of it, lie in cautery over medicine, for fire is simple, whose action only reaches the member to be cauterized, and does not affect other members with its heat except with a slight discomfort.
The action of medicine combined with fire reaches that member from which it departs, and strongly drives away the sick member of difficult healing, and strongly assists.
Light, due to its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not cause this but exceeds. It is already known to us from experience and from a long service of studying the art based on the truth of causes; for this reason, I excuse you from the length of my speech. And if it were not that it is hidden from me in this brief moment, I would reveal to you the secret fire, and the quality of the operation in the body and its expulsion through which you expel illnesses, demonstrated by philosophical discourse, which would be sharpened in your minds.
And know, children, that the times of disagreement from which these diseases arise are in the springtime, when it is most convenient to make cauterization and apply pressure.
And you say that cauterization is convenient at all times, so that the damage caused by accidental time is overshadowed by the healing of what is thrown off by cauterization, and even more so if the cauterization is for pains or necessary pains, severe and extensive, which do not suffer from delay, because it is feared those that come with evil, that it is better to have a little damage entering through time.
And so do not sit on your feet, my children, for it is only the common people and foolish doctors who value such things, for that disease which is healed by cautery does not fully recover, and leaves a scar.
And the reason is not thus as they believe, for cautery is but a place of medicine which alters the composition and dries up moisture, which is the cause why pain comes.
Yet doctors may use cautery excessively over medicine because of their desire for its power, virtue, and the greatness of their lord.
And it is possible that their illness may return at some time in the future, according to the nature of the illness and its location, and the power of it, and what is prepared within the body from the addition of excesses in it, and what has come upon it from food and similar causes; for the illness in which cautery is administered is a subtle illness in members with few excesses and moisture, just as a tooth cautery for pain and similar things, so it may not return that pain in it, but this is done in small measures.
And it is common in popular speech that a cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and although it may seem the rightest thing to do, they believe that it is not a cure that benefits from medicine or any other cause through cautery.
And the reason is to the contrary; and the understanding that a cautery is the last remedy of medicine is not so much as when one applies the methods of healing in certain ailments, and those medicines do not work, and at the end of the cause, one administers a cautery to benefit from it. And from here it follows that a cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding of the common people and too many of the foolish doctors.
And they said that a gold cautery is better than an iron cautery, and they did not say this except for the equality of the gold and the subtlety of its substance.
And they say that the place of cautery does not burn unless it is absolutely true, for you have already seen and experienced that it only burns in some bodies, and cauterization on that spot is good and better than what they said; nevertheless, when you make a cauterization with fire from gold, it is not clearly declared, because the amount of gold you want determines the severity of the burn, and since you prepare to receive friction; and if you place it over the flame, the gold melts in the fire, and sometimes some sheets fall into the fire so that the craftsman can catch them due to the occupation of that.
And for this, cauterization with iron must be made more gently and precisely to ensure the correctness of the operation.
You have already organized this chapter on cauterization according to other chapters, and you have organized those within the feet first, so that now I am asking him what he wants from it.
**First Chapter**
This cautery confers upon the servant the benefit of humidity and coldness as remedies for various accidents, which are two causes of severe and numerous rheumatic fluxes, called rigor, from the head to the parts of the senses and ears, flowing excessively, and also from sleep, toothache, and throat pain, and generally from any ill health that arises from cold, similarly in cases of paralysis, apoplexy, and similar ailments.
The method of this cautery is as follows: first, command that the illness be evacuated using a laxative on the head, for three or four nights, depending on the severity of the illness, the age of the patient, and their usual condition.
And then he commands them to shave their head, and make that cut between your thighs on a prepared bench, and place their hands on the patient's feet.
And then he places the palm of his hand, pressing it against the root of the nose between the patient's feet. However, if the swelling in the affected area has subsided, mark that place with a sign, and then apply the olive-shaped pointed cautery to it.
And then he places that over the healthy area marked with a sign, descending in such a way that the patient's hand is gradually constrained, and you remove that.
And then he gently lifts his hand and examines the area, and if you notice any bones exposed, along with the quantity of grit or stones, raise your hand again, and if it doesn't return to that position firmly, use another instrument from those nearby, or one cooled down, as long as it's visible to the bone, which I have already mentioned.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the area and leave it for three days.
Then apply pressure on the burned area at the border, and leave it on the inner part until the skin's barrier is destroyed by the heat. Then clean the area with a four-ingredient ointment until it is healed.
And it is said that when the Roman plague opens, the better the arm gets, so it is better and more youthful.
And they say that some parts of the bone should be cauterized and the cautery should be held until a part of the bone's spirit is dried up.
Then remove the part that is attached to the bone, and clean it.
And they say that the cautery should be applied to the back, first strengthening the bone with a powerful tool, and this is the form of the small knife used for lancing: And they believe that from that area, vapours from the head escape.
And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then it should be treated until it is healed and consolidated.
I do not have sight of these two types of cautery in all cases, but only in some men according to the way of fear; and let this be enough for me: health is best when it is present, as we have witnessed in the other members, and especially when the head of the patient is naturally hot.
And the specific type of cautery that comes first is the safest and best for me; and from that and in that work, health comes.
Second Chapter.
On the cautery of the head.
When chronic and persistent pain occurs throughout the head and these symptoms prolong in the patient's suffering, it is customary to use various remedies such as blades, splints, poultices, emplasters, salves, leeches, and dogs, and even more, but especially if a cautery has already been performed that does not address the root cause of the malady. Consider this: if the head of the patient's illness is of a strong and inherent nature, and there is no severe or obvious external injury, then such cauterization with another cautery should be left to one side for the time being. And then cauterize that part of the head where the bone is cracked using an internal cautery. Cut the bone and expose the amount we have found, then cauterize that with an internal cautery at the rear part of the head in the area known as the "vat" – it is the location where the wind is stopped. And apply your hand there, do not expose the bone, for the malady finds great pain through it, unlike all other burns on the head.
And you should apply this cautery in its proper place, because you know that the cautery which treats the horns of the head and the occipital region is a more subtle cautery than the one applied to the middle part of the head; this is its form.
Capital chapters.
On the treatment of old migraines.
When a severe headache occurs at the temple or inside the head, and pain is spread throughout the body, it is treated with medications that clarify the head, and other remedies as mentioned in the treatment of illnesses; if these do not prove effective, then cauterization is performed in two ways: either with sharp, burning medicines or with iron.
Make use of cauterizing medicines or burning ointments, take a hot compress and cut open the affected area on both sides of its ends. Then, with a lance, cut into the site of pain in the temple, deeply enough to reach the bone, but not to expose it.
Then tighten it with a bandage after applying a cold compress, leaving it for three hours; afterwards, remove the compress and place the affected area in hot water for two or three days, then apply a new bandage to the cooled site.
And then apply a salve to that area until it heals.
And if you choose to do this, follow the instructions I have written in the two treatises on burning medicines that I have mentioned above.
Apply the cautery according to this manner: take a hot iron whose shape is as follows:
It is called a claw clamp because its head has the shape of a claw with some curvature, and in the middle part there is a small prominence.
Then apply pressure over the painful area, hold your hand—to prevent the skin from blistering—and slowly turn the hot iron at a gentle pace.
And if the amount of blood that clings to the specific part due to the heat of the iron is such that it covers most of it, raise your hand so that the artery beneath does not adhere, preventing any flow of pus.
Then clean the area with salt water and place a dressing over it, leaving it for three days. Apply a lot of ointment around the wound until it heals.
And if you see, burn the edge of the knife with a cautery, and be careful not to incise an artery in this newly formed injury.
Capital quarter.
On the cauterization of ancient injuries.
When you treat an ancient injury as we have discussed in the previous section on the treatment of various ailments, and if the treatment is not effective, and the pain persists due to a lack of light (or proper care), then ignite the cautery knife while it is still sharp, focusing on the area of greatest pain along its length. Rest your hand for a moment and press down as you make the incision to reach the underlying artery.
However, it is necessary for you to be vigilant regarding the continuation of the mandible, which is severely damaged due to lack of chewing, and ensure that the wound is not infected, and the nerves which are affected, do not have spasms.
And if it concerns the prevention and care of the flow of blood from an artery that is compromised, as in the case of its occlusion, there is fear, especially for him who does not understand what causes it and lacks study and patience; thus, delay the operation upon it at the beginning.
And now come to the remembrance of the rules for dealing with the flow of blood from an artery, as it happens, according to their manner, in their place within this book.
And if you see that this ailment does not respond to the cautery and you judge the patient's condition tolerable, apply the cautery in the middle part of the head as we have mentioned, and cure the wound until it is healed.
And if you find it necessary, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on artery constriction using a two-pronged cautery, this is a better and more effective cauterization.
Chapter V.
On the treatment of ear pain.
When there is pain in the ear due to cold and it is treated with lacrimal and other remedies as mentioned in the previous section, and the pain persists, apply heat with a cautery. This is known as a "puncta," and its shape is as follows:
Then apply the cautery close to the heat source, and rotate it around the entire ear, or in the form of a circle over whichever part is painful. Use the cautery on the edge of the ear pain, little by little, until you have relieved the area without causing any harm.
And if the cautery with these points is done on the entire ear and some remain, then treat the areas until they are healed.
Chapter .vi.
On the cauterization of tortuous (or twisted) parts.
The tortuousness which is cured and the cauterization, in this case, refer to the species that come from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
Avoiding cauterization of the species that should be treated by drying or spasm of the nerve.
When you treat that species of tortuousness with pulling and snapping and groaning, and you do not confirm your cure, then know that you cauterize the illness in three places: first, you pierce the auricle, second, you make a small cut on their temple, and third, you treat the union of two lips.
And apply your cautery to the opposite side of the affected part, for softening occurs only in the part that appears healthy.
And the method of cauterization is as follows: cauterize that part with a cautery instrument directly on the tip of the ear, and another at the temple, whose length corresponds to the length of the finger, and place your hand over the cautery until the quantity of the substance of the skin is consumed.
This is the form of the cautery, and it is specific to the cutting tool, the shape of which is placed on the table. However, it may be even more subtle, as you will see with your own eyes; and take care to avoid excessive roughness on its surface.
And take care of the area that is exposed during the procedure until it heals.
Chapter .VII.
On the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and its treatment does not include what we have mentioned and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize it with four cauteries: first on all the corners of their head; second, on the middle part of the head, as we have said; and third, on the nape. And the manner of the cautery is done according to what has been mentioned above.
And it is cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and this is more deferred; and then its treatment is as you process.
Chapter .VIII.
About the cauterization of a hernia made with flame.
You should give the patient at the beginning small doses of grains and pills, the servants will gradually increase them.
Then completely shave the patient's head, and place on their wound the plaster described in the treatment of plasters.
And do this at certain intervals, for that is the manner of cauterization. And do this according to the order of the methods I have already mentioned.
And thus if they prove beneficial for him, otherwise make three cauterizations on the last part of his head, descending from the higher part of the head to the lower part towards the neck. And between each cautery, hold the thick part of the finger, and then carefully apply the cautery according to the procedure.
If you can add more assistance and the patient tolerates it, then make the cautery on the middle part; but if you need even more help, cauterize that over the two joints.
Carefully tend to the inside so that it heals; and the cautery should be olive-shaped according to the form given above.
Chapter IX.
On the procedure for relieving parasites and softening throughout the body.
Now that you have understood the procedure for the softening of the head in accordance with what we have said; then carefully shave the patient's head, and apply cautery to it at the middle part, and cauterize all the joints of the head, and cauterize over the rear part of it, and make three cauteries over the spinal columns of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the case of softening the body from too much cold and the pain persists, while the disease is strong, cauterize with four cauteries on the spinal columns of the back, then apply cautery until the intense pain subsides, and raise your hand. Then attend to it until it is healed, and this cauterization should be with olive oil.
Chapter X.
On the cauterization of epilepsy.
Epilepsy is not cauterized, but if it is due to phlegm, then cauterization is indicated.
And therefore, it is important to purify the brain of the patient at the beginning, when you have used fire and other remedies as described in our previous discussion, where the disease is severe and resistant to medical treatments.
And if it is a child who does not endure medicines, then administer warm and soothing drinks to the servant who purifies them, for several days, as a benefit of the foods.
Then shave the head of the patient, and apply a cautery to that area with a cautery in the middle part of the head according to the previous manner, and apply another cautery at the back of their head, and over each corner of the head where it has been cauterized. And if the patient's condition is severe and they are tolerant, then cauterize with cauteries as mentioned, having a paralytic and soothing effect on the body over the spinal columns of the neck and the back.
And apply the olive cautery as mentioned above.
If the patient is a child, then apply gentle cauteries according to this manner.
Chapter .XI.
On cauterization of melancholia.
When the causes of melancholia are corrupted corrupt humors and gross phlegm, cauterize them with the cauterizes that we have mentioned in having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholia is an excess that declines to melancholia, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him something that purifies his mind from it according to what has been preceded in the division.
Then shave the head of the patient, then apply a moderate torture to him on the circle, and then rest it in the middle part of the head.
And the patient should feel relieved, and be held from all parts.
And then apply a liniment; it is more worthy to be done before shearing sheep. And heat that above the fire for a measured warm temperature, which tells her to suffer more when it is in place. Then take that in the middle part of his head in a circular manner, and wash it until it is cooled.
And do this for the patient every day for a week, following his diet until he is cured; or if you wish, cauterize those making small points as best as possible, holding your hand over it equally: this is a type of cautery that moistens the brain to equal effect.
Then apply that moistened cloth on the border or in the folds of a grey goose.
Chapter .xii.
On the treatment of water retention in the legs.
When the onset of water retention in the legs is recognized by the signs I have mentioned in the previous section, it begins and should be treated by giving the patient a drink that purges the head, and care should be taken of all humidity.
And he should take baths with specific herbs for several days.
And he should command the patient to wash their head, and cauterize the affected area with a hot iron at the middle of the head; and if water retention begins in two legs, he should cauterize with two irons over both temples, or with one iron on one side of the head if the onset is in one leg.
Cut with a cautery all the veins and arteries that are left by the cord; and the cauterizes should be on that length in the breadth of the temples.
And be careful of blood flows when cauterizing; and if you see blood flowing from it, stop any further treatment, which is within your power.
And come to knowledge that is in extraction of arteries and amputation of those, and caution against blood flows.
And sometimes cautery is performed on the neck where two bones are joined with two cauterizes, thereby producing healing.
**Chapter XIII**
**On the cauterization of ancient tears.**
When tears of the eyes are frequent and through veins and arteries which appear in the external part of the head, and it is observed that there is an excess of fluid causing muscle weakness, then cauterize that place with a cautery as we have described in the chapter on starting hot water in the eyes, and apply a cautery in the middle part of the head and two cauteries below the temples, and two cauteries below the bones of the neck. And if there is additional indigestion, then cauterize that on all parts of the eye's coat over the edge of the upper eyelid with a small cautery.
**Chapter XIII**
**On the Cauterization of Nasal Discharge:**
When you treat someone with the condition we have described in the previous section and your treatment does not prove effective, then prepare a mixture for the patient to drink for three nights; also, shave their head, and cauterize with a middle-sized olive cautery. And then apply the cautery, using a pointed cautery on both eyelids, leaving the hairs intact.
And beware of the fire so as not to burn that.
And this is the form of the cautery with the clavel.
Chapter XV.
On the softening of the eyelids with a cautery.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by disease or moisture, apply a cautery to that eyelid with a pointed cautery, like this:
And if you, apply the cautery to both eyebrows with a small pointed cautery along their entire length, and they will become elongated from the tempora. And the length of each cautery should be according to the quantity of the protrusion.
And do not press too hard with the cautery, but according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is adhered.
Chapter XVI.
Regarding the cautery of the eyelid, when the hairs turn inside out and close up the eye, apply the cautery to the lid.
When the hairs of the eyelid turn inside out and close up the eye, applying a cautery to it is done in two ways: either as a burning cautery or as a medicinal cautery.
If you are using a fire cautery, command the patient to look away from where you will cut their hairs, so that they do not see; and if you must, place your hand over their eyes with a bandage, so that the hairs remain uncut.
Therefore, when they are clean and dried, place the patient's head in a favorable position, and then pay attention to the eyelids of the affected eye, signaling it according to the shape of a dead leaf, and this is the beginning of the sign close to the hairs.
Then apply a cold compress or a wet cloth over the eye.
Then heat the cautery, shaping it as required.
And then cauterize along the marked figure, gradually, in several passes, until the surface of the wound is completely sealed, just as if it were with a leaf of myrtle, clearly visible.
The sign of the successful treatment is that you see the eyelid of the eye contract and the hairs stand up at the site of the puncture.
And so raise your hand and place it there for three days, then remove it gradually until the swelling subsides. And then apply that ointment until it heals.
If it returns for any reason and the eyelid becomes softened, then make another cautery on that part just as you had done originally.
If the hair is in the eyelid, then cauterize it until it is raised to its natural position, sealed, and the hair does not reappear.
But the cautery with medicinal fire is that you command the patient to pull out the hair until it is prolonged and sealed, and then make a paper-like bandage in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
And then apply soap known for its healing properties mixed with warm water, forming a paste like the leaf of myrtle, and place it on the affected joint or both; leave the moistened wound covered in white honey and keep the patient's head elevated.
And now I will explain this further regarding the medicine; apply a small amount and do not be afraid if the patient feels the stinging of the medicine, for stinging is like fire in it.
And so, as you continue to observe the patient and see that the medicine's stinging subsides, stop administering it and apply a cold compress to the affected area; then consider how many times the eyelid has been lifted—just as it is washed—due to either burning or cutting, as is appropriate. And if it does not return to the application of the medicine on the spot where the medicine was initially placed, do not be concerned, for your operation will succeed and the wound will contract.
And then place your hand over it, until the pain of the adhesion is eradicated, and treat that with a definite ointment or another until it heals.
And it is necessary for you, in your operation, to pay close attention that no part of the medicine falls from the eye, and if the eyelid becomes softened after several days due to any cause from the hairs in the eye, then repeat your medicine on that area which has become softened from the eyelid, and precisely as you did at the beginning, and leave it until it heals.
And this is the method of making a cupping glass.
And you know that the eyes of men differ in size and smallness, and therefore your compression should be made according to that.
And let the way of treatment not be hidden from him who studies this art.
Chapter .xvii.
On cauterization of fistulas that are in the tear duct of the eye.
When you treat a fistula with the method we have described in the sections on illnesses and your treatment does not succeed, then know that you cauterize it as follows: command the patient to hold their head in a certain position, and place a minister's head between their thighs in such a way that it is neither hurt nor agitated by their own head.
And then apply some hot compress or a cloth dipped in honey over the patient's eye.
And then heat the cautery, which is shaped as follows:
which is curved, resembling a cane or a coil of a spring, from one end where the cautery is applied.
And if you look, it penetrates into the other extremity. And if you wish to come out this way, do so with caution.
However, he who is cautious is better at the work itself.
And if the fistula is open, press it so that it heals and dries out. And if it is not open, then open it and remove the pus from it.
And place the hot cautery over it, and with your hand protect the skin from the cautery at the root of the nose, so that neither your hand or the patient is disturbed, and then apply the cautery to the gray parts of the nose and burn that.
And therefore, if at the beginning of the cautery it penetrates into the bone, well done; otherwise, repeat the cautery once or twice, as necessary, and leave it thus for three days, then apply a compress with a dry ointment until it heals.
If after passing ten days it is still not healed, then apply the sharp, corrosive medicine again until the bone is exposed and treated as appropriate in its chapter.
There is another way to perform a fistula cautery that some first described: enter the location of the fistula and dry it, then apply pressure to the small crack from which it emerges. You make a seal over the area with as much care as possible, preventing any further harm to the patient so that the melted lead does not penetrate into the wound; cover the wound of the patient with an albumen or water, because the lead will adhere to the site of the fistula and heal it through miraculous healing.
And if the fistula heals with what we have mentioned about cautery and treatment, it is good; otherwise, it will be necessary to apply a drain from the nose and reduce the fistula to the nasal cavity according to its proper place.
**Chapter XVIII**
**On the Cauterization of the Hernia Opening**
Frequent accidents cause openings in the lips, especially in children's lips.
Therefore, if you treat those openings as we have mentioned in the divisions and do not take advantage of your treatment, then use a hot iron in the shape of a small knife as follows:
And the depth of the opening should be according to the thinness of the knife.
Place the bandage carefully over those cracks so that the cautery reaches the depth of the cracks.
And then take care of that moist wound until it heals.
**Chapter XIX**
**On the Cauterization of Fistulas in the Mouth**
When, during the extraction of the uvula, or in the palate or around the teeth, an abscess forms and it bursts, and it becomes chronic, and a fistula opens up, and you treat it but do not give proper care, then you should light a cautery according to the size of the fistula, and insert that burning cautery into the opening of the fistula, and with your hand guide the burning instrument to the depth of the fistula, doing this once or twice; and afterward, apply the treatments we have mentioned for healing until it is cured.
And so if the wound is clean and healed, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to expose the location and host the corrupt bone as will be discussed in its chapter.
**Capitol XX.**
On the treatment of teeth and the softening of arteries.
When arteries are softened by moisture and teeth are decayed, and these conditions are treated with medications rather than surgery, then the doctor should place the patient's head in a certain position, and shape the cautery so that it can be inserted between the tooth and the gum, where the fiery tip of the ignited cautery will penetrate gently without causing great pain to the patient.
Then remove your hand, and repeat the application of the cautery several times as desired.
Then have the patient rinse their mouth with salt water and do this for an hour, afterward stop it; for the decayed tooth will be held in place, the softened gums will be tightened, and the corrupted moisture will be dried out.
Chapter .xxi.
On the treatment of tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to coldness or there is a frost or vermin in it, and the cure does not come from medicine, then cautery should be performed on that part in two ways: either with cow dung cautery or fire cautery.
Cautery with cow dung is to take cow dung and boil it in a ferrule, then take hold of it and wrap it around the extremity of the tooth, and then immerse that in boiling cow dung, and place it over the painful tooth until it is numbed.
And repeat this several times until the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you see, immerse a cloth or bandage in hot water, place it on the painful tooth, and hold it there until the heat reaches the depth of the tooth's cavity.
However, the use of fire for cauterization is only indicated for burns or wounds, and it should be applied with care to avoid any harshness or the heat not reaching the wound's opening.
Then shape the cautery as required, place it on the tooth, and hold your hand over it until the cautery cools down; do this several times as the pain may return either that day or the next.
And ensure that, by pressing the cautery, the patient opens their mouth well and holds it for an hour, then gently remove it; this is the shape of the cautery.
And apply the cautery as you have prepared it according to what is possible for you.
And this is the shape of the cannula:
Chapter .XXII.
On cauterization of extrophules.
When extrophules are filled with phlegm and humors that are resistant to digestion by medications, and you need to force their discharge, then apply the cautery precisely following its shape, having two open ends so that the smoke from the cautery reaches both of them. Once one end has been treated, move the burning instrument to another area as needed until the extrophule is emptied.
And if the extrophule is small, then apply the cautery according to its size, and wrap it tightly for three days, placing a clean dressing over it until the burned area has healed.
And then apply that medicinal ointment and bandages until it heals.
**Chapter XXIII**
On the cauterization of wounds and the constriction of veins.
When humidity appears on the pleura of the lung, especially when it is chilled by a sudden cold, it is necessary to evacuate that illness at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that place with a hot iron in the affected area.
And be careful not to burn the pleura with the hot iron nor to inflame the patient's chest unless a little.
And apply a cautery to it or another cautery as needed on the joint of the neck at the last spine of the patient. The cautery of it is like a nail according to the previous method.
And then take care of what has been mentioned above until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII
On cauterization for lung maladies and cough.
When cough and lung maladies are due to moisture, and the patient has no fever or phlegm, and it is an old condition, then cauterize with two cauteries on the furcula in the places where the lungs are cracked and weak; and another cautery in the middle part of the foot between the two mamillae; and use the cautery like a nail according to the previous method.
And if you wish, your cauterization with pointed cauteries should be similar to the cautery used in the puncturing of auricles.
And make punctures within these; then take care to clean that area thoroughly before it heals.
And the cauteries should have three edges for cauterization, as follows: once you can make three cauterizations in this form:
Chapter XXV.
On the cauterization of the skin, which is the head of the assistant.
When the head of the assistant is dislocated due to slippery humidity and does not return on its own, you must reduce the dislocation while it still allows for return, and then gently shift the malposition back to its place, either on the patient's back or side. Elevate the limb that was affected, starting from the joint inside the skin towards the top with your left hand if the dislocation occurred inside.
And then apply the cautery, which has two tips; this is its form:
And then apply the cautery to the constricted area where one enters the other, and the form of cauterization will appear with the use of three cautery tips.
And in some cases, it is adjusted according to this count and for these cauterizations are eight.
Then place the whole cautery in salt water, and do what you can to make the patient tranquil, and do not move the limb for any length of time until it is healed.
And if the dislocation is in the joints above and it persists, then this should be done, cauterizing the muscle with a heated cautery clamp or with a pointed metal cautery, for the joint is confirmed and the humidity is broken and the patient is healed.
Chapter .xxvi.
On the cauterization of the stomach.
When there is inflammation in the stomach and moisture accumulates within that part of its structure, and if you continue with treatment methods without considering, soon you will see that the illness will spread to the patient's back, extending their muscles and organs, and it should be cauterized with three cauterization techniques: leave a small part of the foot with a single cautery claw-like instrument, and use two cauteries on each side of the back cost, forming a triangular cautery shape; stretch between those that are not properly adjusted to prevent gangrene.
And if the depth of the cauterization is two-thirds of the thickness of the skin.
And the shape of the cautery should be according to this form. And if you wish, cauterize with a larger cautery in the middle part of the stomach according to this form; and this should be a circular cautery according to this form:
And the stomach should be cauterized by puncturing it in such a way that this cautery does not frighten the patient: you know how much point you want to apply, and then cauterize that point; and take care of that with treatment as long as healing has not occurred.
**Capitol XXVII.**
**On the Cauterization of Veins.**
When pain in the vein occurs due to coldness, humidity, or excessive wind, and it deviates from its normal course by causing excessive discharge, the illness is treated as we have said, not by compressing it; then, you should raise the affected part of the body, and apply three cauterizations according to this form, with this amount of heat over the vein below the hip, which brings about the supine position in men.
And the space between each cautery should be according to its thickness, and the cauteries themselves should be according to the length of the body on the right side.
And do not be afraid of the cautery's heat.
And if the amount of moisture adhering to the quantity of the specific nature of the cloth is not sufficiently adjusted; and if the illness stands on the patient's feet; or if it is not standing, then let them sit, who have already extended their things and raised their arms.
And with your skill and caution in the art, you can cauterize these cauteries with a cutting cautery.
And be careful not to burn too much with the cautery, and focus the gaze of all your body so that the whole body is inflamed and penetrates within the intestines, because here the chain is subtle; and know this.
Chapter 28.
On the incision of an abscess in the leg with cautery.
When an abscess forms in the leg and you want to know if it is within the flesh or on the sheath of the tendon, if it is within the flesh of the leg, the disease takes on a severe appearance and the pain becomes acute.
And if it is on the sheath of the tendon, because the pain is severe and often exhausts the doctors in treating it.
Therefore, position the patient so that their neck is in the correct position; then identify the location of the hernia with your hand; and apply the pointed cautery, which resembles a rag, whose shape was previously described on the other page. And cauterize with that cautery until the entire wound is closed, so that it heals properly.
And likewise, take care of that one for the healing of the other hernias until they are all healed.
And do not use any other cautery than those described in the art of medicine, and especially those that cause discomfort, as you have learned; but for this operation, try it on yourself a few times first, but always keep safety in mind, which is best.
Chapter .XXIX.
On cauterization of pleurisy.
Ancient cauterization techniques for pleurisy, as described in this manner, involve taking the long, thin edge of an aristological knife, which is found to be sharp, and making a point on one end, of the appropriate thickness.
Then immerse them in oil and heat them over the fire, and cauterize the area between the continuation of the furcula and the collarbone with a cautery; place two small cauterizes below, slightly inclined towards the part where the beard begins, and two cauterizes inclining between the fifth rib and the lung, slightly inclined towards the rear parts; and another cautery in the middle part of the foot; and one over the stomach, and three cauteries in the rear parts; and a cautery in the area between the two shoulders, and two cauterizes on both sides of the foot, leaving the cautery between the two shoulders.
And do not cover your hand with the cautery, but hold it over the affected area in use.
And they also speak of other ancient practices that involve the use of hot iron cauteries, like a ray and fire, to burn those areas, placing them in the space between the ribs, as long as it helps to heal that condition and create a healthy wound, as we have said about the cautery on the foot.
One should not be afraid of using cautery in this puncture, as it often happens in the infected area where there is no healing.
Chapter XXX. (Note: This appears to be an identifier rather than text to be translated.)
On cauterization of the melanin (or possibly referring to a specific condition affecting pigment).
When treating the illness of the bowels with what we have said about treatment in division and you do not apply your cure, use cautery on it in three ways, all of which are correct, one being to make three or four punctures along the length of the bowel according to the shape of the cauterization marks on the foot.
And between each cautery, the thickness of a finger or slightly less, and the manner of cauterization is the manner we have said regarding foot cauterization in general.
And do not apply your hand with the cautery; the illness should be on its back.
And there is another way to cauterize, which is that you light the cautery having two directions, which we have mentioned in the chapter on the displacement of muscles, and raise the cord which is in the correct position of the bowel where the pain lies on the left side.
And let your elevation, by which you raise the leg according to the length of the body, be such that cauterization is done according to the extent of the wound.
Then carefully insert two hot instruments, speaking softly, into the space where they penetrate the leg from the other side.
Then remove the cauterizers; and thus four cauterizations are made.
And if you see, cauterize with a cautery having three instruments.
Then dress the cauterizations so that they do not fall off for several days, as it is more comfortable than other previous causes of treatment.
Chapter XXXI.
On cauterization of dropsy.
Cauterization should not be applied to dropsy but directly to the affected part.
When treating dropsy using the methods described in its division, and if your treatment does not confer relief, then apply four cauterizations around the affected area, as well as a cautery on the abdomen, another on the thigh, another on the shin, and two between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery directly on the right side of the foot, and another cautery on the stomach. And the depth of the cauterization should be determined according to the severity of the condition.
Then apply the cautery gently so as not to cause prolonged pain.
And do not evacuate the disease of treatment with cautery alone, but add two intentions to it, and it will be celebrated with aid for healing.
The form of the cautery that is used to cauterize the abdomen should be according to the shape of it, and it is that which is used to cauterize the back is olive-shaped, as is previously mentioned regarding its form.
**Chapter XXXII**
**On the Cauterization of Feet and Thighs**
When the feet are immersed in cold water and become filled with water, cauterize the feet on the back of the foot, between the big toe and the little finger, without pressing too hard; then lift your hand, but do not return it completely, for the cold water will seep out.
This is the cautery according to this form: Then make two cuts on both thighs, and on each cut, apply a hot cautery at the end of a cutting instrument. And the cautery should be according to the length of the thigh: one on each side, leaving one at the pain and another at the middle point of the thigh; and on each thigh, two cauteries.
And keep the plague open for a long time so that no water remains in it.
Then take care of those causes that we have mentioned.
**Chapter XXXIII** (Note: The exact content of this chapter cannot be inferred without additional context from the treatise, but the capitalization and structure suggest a continuation of medical instructions or theories.)
**On the Cauterization of Abdominal Parts.** (This heading suggests a section detailing medical procedures for conditions affecting the abdominal area, including the use of cautery.)
When abdominal pain is due to cold and humidity that dissolves the vitals, it is the digestive and retentive virtue, present in the stomach and intestines, which is cured through healing methods and does not confer relief, sometimes the patient endures severe pains from the exposure of these vital virtues, then cauterize that area with a large cautery on their stomach as previously mentioned in the cauterization of the stomach, with circular cauteries and four cauteries around the subtile circuit, with a subtle claw cautery; also cauterize over the heat on a large stone or with two cauteries.
And if the humidity overflows and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize that area on the anus and intestines, strongly applying two cauteries over the stomach and near the inguinal region, for this is a perfect cure from youth of which one does not err.
Chapter .XXXIV.
On the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
When they are in a natural state, old hemorrhoids, caused by thick humors or corrupted by moisture, are treated with the methods mentioned in the previous section and do not respond to conventional treatment, then cauterize them with three cauterizations over the abscesses located at the small of the back and a small triangular one, and cauterize them on the navel from both sides for two days.
And if you observe that the patient's stomach is cold and their food is not digested, and their face appears pale, then cauterize over the stomach with a large cautery as mentioned earlier; also cauterize on the tongue with one cautery, and another cautery on the liver with a nail-like cautery, leave the cauteries open for some time, and then care for them until they are healed.
Chapter XXXV.
Of cauterization of hernias, it is appropriate to remove them.
When you remove hernias, you apply the cautery that is shaped like a ray. Next, insert that ignited instrument into the hernia you have removed, and maintain your hand over the opening of the vein from which the pus flows.
And do this once or twice, for if the hernias are too numerous, cauterize each one of them as we have mentioned, and then apply medicine to them with hot compresses until they heal.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on anything, it is better to do so later in the process.
Chapter .XXXVI.
On the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in the natural openings of the body.
When nature does not comply with the treatment we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, then healing comes through cautery.
Therefore, when one sees a fistula in nature that is old, corrupt with bad humors and impurity, it is most appropriate to begin by attempting a gentle treatment, and then gradually increase the depth of the attempt as recommended.
Then apply the cautery that resembles a flame. And then apply that ignited cautery to this fistula, according to the depth of the attempt.
And apply the cautery repeatedly until those corrupt bodies are burned through once or twice or three times, according to the amount of your need.
And beware of burning nerves and veins; if a fistula goes to the bladder or intestinal cavity, be careful of all those areas; and do not perform this unless the fistula is in fleshy tissue and you think it is not penetrating.
And then take care of the area until it is healed.
And if the area is sealed and the matter that caused it has been removed, and it remains closed for a long time, then you know that it is completely healed.
And if the foreign bodies are not removed from the body, then know that it is penetrating or in the process of corrupting it, or falling into those causes of which there will be recollection at its location.
Chapter .xxxvii.
On the cauterization of ulcers.
When ulcers cause pain due to cold or excessive heat, and the patient's condition worsens, it is necessary to cauterize them using a cautery on each ulcer, starting with the one that causes the most pain.
And we should cauterize it a second time, slightly later, so that there will be three cauterizations in sequence, and thus the healing process will be faster.
Chapter .xxxviii.
On the cauterization of the bladder.
When the bladder is weakened and softened by friction and moisture such that the disease does not retain urine, then cauterize that part where pus has formed, starting from below the urethra, and cauterize with a cautery on the right side, and another on the left side of it.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the amount of pain; cauterize with a cautery at the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And the cautery should be struck according to how it is processed.
Chapter .xxxix. (Note: The number xxxix indicates the chapter number, not that it is part of the translation.)
On cauterization of the breast.
When fever and moisture come, it prevents conception, corrupts the patient's menstruation, delays their arousal, and causes pain upon their arrival, so the location should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said regarding the vesica; or with a cautery on the spot below the back, or with two cauteries, and it should be a clavi-cauterization.
Chapter XL.
On the cauterization of a dislocated ankle.
When moist mucus infiltrates the space around the ankle and causes its displacement, and this becomes a recurring issue, a sign of it is that the affected area appears longer than the other when compared. And the location of the dislocation should be immobilized with a suitable boot.
Then apply the cautery to the hernia at the opening of the anus, making it circular with the cautery as if you were testing the circumference of the opening, so that the hernia falls in the middle of the circle.
And the shape of the cautery described above is also used in the cauterization of the stomach.
If this cautery is not available to you, then apply three large olive-shaped cauteries.
And make the cautery according to the amount of inflammation in all the wound; and be careful that it is clean.
Chapter XLII (42)
On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain appears in the lower extremities due to friction and moisture, the malady is treated with the water we have mentioned and should not be confused, for it is an ancient remedy. You should then remove the malady from the thick humors using foul or artificial pills or something similar; and apply a cautery to that area.
And the method of the cautery on that area follows two ways: either a cautery with medicinal substances that burn, or a cautery with fire.
It follows two scientific methods, of which one is to cauterize that area across the gap in the thigh with three triangular cauteries according to this form; and make them go deeply enough. And the space between each cautery should be in accordance with the thickness of the said area, and whether the cautery is olive-sized or large.
Some times the cautery may be applied to the middle part of the anus for there are four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize the circle from which the form proceeds in the cauterization of the anus displacement, one that is circular and burns away the inflammation of all the tissue.
And this is the manner of cauterization in the rectum when pain is fixed to the anus and not spread into the thigh.
If it is spread into the thigh, then cauterize that as two cauteries on the thigh over the place where the malady, which causes pain, is located; and one cautery on the shin four times, slightly towards the inner part.
And if the cautery is made with a knife, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the amount of inflammation in the tissue.
And if the disease spreads that the pain is in the foot itself, then cauterize the area where you see it with three or four or more points if need be for that.
And if the disease perceives pain remaining in the side, then cauterize the area with a cutting cautery.
And be careful in all cauterization so that you do not end up with the cautery on nerves or great injury, and thereby do harm to the patient or contraction.
And you have already seen one of those whom we cauterize on the ankle and end with the cauterization, and the bed of fire inflated within that it achieved the foot, and fire pierced and corrupted all the foot. And then there is a strong solution of acid in the stomach, and this brings about death.
And if the pain is in two parts, simultaneously apply cautery to each according to this manner.
And certain scholars speak of the method of using a hot iron for cauterization, as follows: make it in the shape of a circle of iron whose circumference is the width of a palm; and its point should be as sharp as a date palm bone or slightly more.
And within that circle, make another third; and as for the space between them, let it be the width of a night's rest; and those circles should have two parts; and the length of those lines should be one or two nights, and properly decorate the edges of the iron on the circles; this is its form.
Then light it in the fire until it curls and sparks, and once it stops burning, place it on the affected part of the patient, the illness laid upon their side. And so he cauterizes that part with three round cauterizers at once.
And then he should rest for three days; apply a poultice to that part and keep the wound open for several days, and take care of it with ointments until it is healed.
Albucasis says: O, my sons, we have used little of this type of cautery out of fear of its appearance, and because few have found those that regard it favorably.
Apply the best cauterizers to him who suffers from them, and find a way to relieve that place of his suffering.
Instead of cauterization, use medicines that you make into two circles with a perforated armature made of iron in which the keyhole is situated; their thickness and depth should be equal to two nuts or such.
And if the space between certain parts of the body is such that it can accommodate the thickness of the finger; then place cushions on both sides and ensure they support each other in this manner.
Then apply pressure over the part where the patient feels pain on their side, and take your hand off the water; form it into two circles, and the quality of that should be like fire, gradually applying it for an hour, and let the patient endure the burning and squeezing - as if by fire - until the burning ceases.
Then raise your hand with the instrument and remove the hot water from all over the affected area using clean water.
Then bind it up for three days and apply pressure to the wound until the burning of the adhesion subsides, and leave it like that for some days, and it will heal without scar tissue; this is the best treatment for young people.
And then apply the appropriate treatment until it is healed.
If the pain is extended within the thigh or leg, place him in a position that retains water as it is done with the hydrotherapy treatment.
And this is the manner of water treatment, and you have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Prepare a solution of alkali and cause no extinction of both in turn, cut them and place them in a new mold from which the opening has been perforated, according to the quantity that goes inside.
And leave the bottom of the mold with another layer of hot alkali and live water, then take those two with your hand, compress them well, and let the hot water from the alkali-water mixture flow down into the opening left in the mold.
And then carefully adjust all that water, and pour it over another living cause and other renewable alkali, so that it becomes a strong acid, which is administered in many medical operations and in the cauterization of the other members, as the operation uses fire.
And among these medicines are some that use cauterization with a wide instrument, both quickly and gently, and cause no pain, so they are mixed.
He here recounts a story of an ancient man who performed an operation and cure for the pain of water (possibly hydrocele) and sciatica, and greatly praised that method, saying it requires no other treatment, and indeed, strengthens the patient so much that after recomposing himself in a bath, he is completely cured from that time forward.
And it is that near a certain vein, if it is not obstructed by a vein, take a fresh fig (possibly a fig leaf) and twist it; tie it tightly to the water or part where the pain is, whether in the thigh, or leg, or foot, and bind.
And it should be left for a duration of three hours or for as long as the illness requires adjustment.
Then immerse him in water, and when the body of the patient is warmed, insert that into the sun, for the pain ceases and healing occurs.
And know that one should not use cautery with these remedies unless it is for the evacuation of the body.
You may already know that when the narrow vein of a goat is cauterized, it becomes beneficial; and the cautery should be applied to them in this manner: take wool and soak it in ancient oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the bones.
And take a dry goat's vein and apply it to the fire until it is charred; then place it on top of the wool and leave it until it hardens. And then repeat this process, and do not cease to do so until the sensation of the bite disappears in the water and the pain is relieved.
And this type of cautery is called a "cow cautery.
Chapter XLII
On the cauterization of joint pain.
At times, pain in the back is caused by various factors, such as a fall or blow, or due to excessive evacuation, and for similar reasons, through the infusion of foreign, irritant material.
And cauterization does not apply to any other type but this specific one caused by the infusion of irritant material.
Therefore, to achieve evacuation of the malady, prepare pills that resemble them and apply them over the part where the pain is located in three lines according to its extent, using cautery on each line as much as needed, depending on the quantity of the malady's tolerance and the strength of the patient.
And cauterization should be done with a pointed cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or four using the median claw according to this form:
Chapter XXXIII
On cauterization begins with jaundice.
This malady often appears in small children; and the sign of its beginning in children is that their joints become stiff in the evening, causing elevation and limited movement.
And it examines the last spine of the back and the nodes of it which already begin to rise above the other spines.
And so when you see this and wish to stop it, you cauterize it with a rounded cautery in this form: that takes the cautery over all parts of the spine equally.
And if you wish, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery in two or three lines. And the points should be appropriate among themselves.
Then carefully tend to the area as it heals, as we have said.
Be careful that a cautery is not applied to a swelling caused by spasm of nerves.
Chapter XLIV.
On the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And thus, when gout caused by cold is treated by applying heat and the pain does not subside, then cautery is used.
It is because you cauterize the proper drainage in the joint of the foot using various cautery tools.
And take an olive-shaped cautery whose form is as follows:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pain intensifies within the toes or other joints and this persists, then cauterize each toe with three or four of these olive-shaped cauteries.
And if you find that these cauteries are sufficient for your needs, then cauterize the area and do not press too hard with the cautery, just enough to target the specific point.
And if the pain radiates to both the toe and the foot, then administer the cauteries as we have discussed in the previous chapter.
And if the pain is only in the joints, it is called gout, then make points around the affected joints as they are affected, on these two lines.
And if the pain persists in these joints, make points around the joint circuit on each side and also on the thumb of the hand.
And if the pain can spread to other joints or muscles, apply cautery to various parts of the limbs.
And do not evacuate the disease without proper treatment and reception of medicines; for if good regimen is followed and inflammation is removed through this cautery, God will help.
Chapter .xlv. (This appears to be a roman numeral indicating the chapter number, not a translation.)
On cauterization of breaks.
When a rupture occurs in the joints and exposes the intestines before the hernia, this is how it should begin: at once, you must order the patient to stop eating on that day and use gentle means so that the gap closes from their stomach.
Then support the patient with your hands on their back, and command them to keep their breath within themselves, so that no gap or hernia appears.
Then return the intestines to their place, and carefully try to close the rupture on the bone of the pelvis, marking the edge of which is similar to the shape of a circle in the opening parts of the body.
Then prepare the cautery whose form is as follows:
Within which there is much heat and swelling. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then apply the cautery over that sign with your hand holding the cautery properly, and aim it towards the bone of the toe within the middle of the swelling; and repeat that another time if you have not achieved it at first attempt onto the bone.
And observe wisely the condition of the hernia during the cauterization, so as not to inflame that hernia through the treatment, lest it lead to death or other great harm to the patient.
And you should know that when you use a cautery, do not touch the bone, do not perform your operation.
And take care that the cautery of children should be subtle according to their size and measure.
And then take care of the site of the cautery for three days, applying fresh bandages until the scar from the fire is healed.
And take care of those with other burns until they are healed.
And the patient should lie on their back for 10 days until the site and the plague are sealed.
And take care to fast him according to the duration of his healing, which strengthens his stomach and prevents the intestine from protruding due to efforts to heal.
And when it is appropriate to lift after approximately 10 days, then give the treatment properly made, and hold that for another 40 days.
And it should also reduce work and the intake of food and drink, and avoid loud voices, for when one follows this regimen of healing entirely, they will be healed.
And now I will describe the treatment for hernias in other parts of the abdomen, which begins with cauterizing the hernia with a red hot iron according to its size, and the fluid that is exuded from it should be like that from a third part of the body; then take care of that as we have said, and do not tighten it.
Some have also said that the hernia should be cauterized with a triangular iron according to this form, because it is perceived by trial.
And it is a pause line that they use for the width in the flesh above the rupture, and another line on top of it; then place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Chapter XLVI.
On cauterization of twists.
When pain in other parts of the body is caused by injury or impact and persists for a long time without yielding to treatment with medicines, then it is appropriate to cauterize using a pointed cautery.
And the type of cautery for each member should be according to its size and depth, its nature and condition, the location of the twist and the pain it causes.
Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, good; otherwise, repeat the cautery on it; for usually, in those pains, the members are punctured to the member closest to it, so that you get these pointed cauteries until the patient is cured.
**Chapter XLVII**
**On the Cauterization of Leprosy**
Lepers sometimes require cautery for severe swelling, especially if the type of leprosy is caused by putrefaction of the flame and melancholy.
And so if you wish to cauterize it, consider whether the leprosy is severe and if that part has been cured by what we have said in the division and not others, or if it does not improve, and be wary of the patient's condition that corruption may spread throughout the body and affect its entire structure. Then cauterize that part on the head with a cautery: first at the middle part of the head, then below it, you can treat the forehead at the end of the hairs; and also on two horns; and one behind, over the nape or serve it.
And finally, with the cautery, apply it slightly so that it creates a slight impression on the bone, and dislocates the scabs, so that the expulsion of thick vapors is alleviated; and cauterize on the surface as necessary.
If leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then you should cauterize with these cauterizations which we have mentioned at the beginning; cauterize on the tip of the nose, and make two cauterizations on each cheekbone, and two cauterizations on both spine bones of the neck, and five cauterizations on the spine bones of the back, and one large cauterization on the spine bones near the coccyx, and one over the coccyx, and two on each ankle, and one on each toe, and two on each thigh, and two on each muscle, and hold firm the skin of their foot; and cauterize on all the joints of both hands and feet, and on every heel of their feet, and on the arches of their feet.
And be mindful of the nerves that are on the leg, do not disturb those.
And in some cases, cautery is performed with a hot iron on the bone of the thigh, and also on the opening of the stomach, and yet other times on the spleen.
And you know that the more precisely you apply cautery, the greater its effectiveness, and also that illness causes no pain when cauterized, as long as they are done correctly; thus, the body of the patient is already numbed.
And take care that the size of the cautery is great or small according to the members and joints as previously mentioned regarding the kinds of tools.
Then carefully apply the cautery with fine flour mixed with honey and other remedies, as long as it heals.
Chapter .xlviii.
On the cauterization of stupor.
When a member is stunned or numbed and treated with medicines, oils, and bandages, but remains unsanitized, you cauterize the affected member with cautery according to the severity of the member or the extent of its condition.
And the hot cautery should enter into the depth of the flesh slightly. Then take care that the cautery is applied where it heals.
And sometimes a stupor is cauterized that extends to the hands and feet, and to the spine and veins of the body, which causes pain in the member, and the stupor is removed.
Do not attempt to treat this unless he who is skilled in the anatomy of the body's members and the exit of nerves throughout the whole body moves it.
**Chapter XLIX**
**On the Cauterization of Hemorrhoids**
When hemorrhoids are ancient and do not yield to any of the remedies of medicine, then cauterize them with a pointed cautery according to the quantity of the specific kind of cord within, provided that the white and red color of the hemorrhoid be preserved, and its color changed.
And then prepare a cure from flour of barley and lentils mixed with olive oil and leaves of arnugrosa, either pigeon droppings or cow manure, each in equal parts, and lay it as a poultice over the area until it is healed.
Chapter 1.
On the cauterization of cracks.
When cancer begins to develop and you want to extract it, cauterize the affected area with a circular cautery as it is revolved.
And the wise ones say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle place; however, I have not seen this, as I fear it may be ulcerated, and I have seen this happen a few times before.
It is more important that it be cauterized around the circumference of the affected area in a circular manner as we have said, or with several cauteries.
Chapter 5.
On cauterization of hernias.
When a hernia takes too long to heal, it may be due to excess fluid, the patient's poor health, old age, lack of strength, or time; and if you want to hasten the healing of the hernia, cauterize around its edge with small pointed instruments; then apply pressure to ensure it is compacted.
If you choose to perform the cauterization of the hernia, then ignite the cautery whose form is thus: and place it at the middle point of the hernia until the thread penetrates.
And if the cautery is applied at that point which is deepest, so that the body of the arm is lifted; and then take care of it until it heals.
Chapter II.
On cauterization of corrosion.
Corrodent is a mobile corruption in the member, which corrodes it as if fire were eating dry wood.
Therefore, if you encounter that corrosion in a place where cauterization with fire is necessary, you should use hot iron needles, small and large as appropriate for the location where corrosion occurs.
And then cauterize it completely until you eliminate all corrosion and do not leave any cause for it.
Then bind it for three days, and apply oil mixed with ashes repeatedly over the cauterized places until all scaling is completely eradicated and all corruption gone.
And then treat it with a poultice of hot, moist meat.
If the flesh is fresh and not corrupt after three days, it is good; otherwise, repeat the cautery over what is broken in the corrupted places.
And corrosion is treated with some medicines several times a day, for those are half in place of cautery. However, cautery with fire is more suitable for removing the leukocyte immediately.
And you have already mentioned the treatment of it with acute medicine in the incision, and therefore take that when you find him inclined to gangrene.
**Chapter III**
On Cauterization of Wounds and Similar Conditions
Flakes of hardened material should be removed from the parts surrounding the foot affected by the malady called gout, a severe, penetrating condition that attacks the foot; and treatments for these are in two manners, either with hot cautery or with cold cautery.
Cauterization with fire involves igniting the hot cautery tool resembling a whip's tail, made of iron according to the amount of gout it contains in every part, and should have subtle edges.
Then hold the ignited cautery over the gout, and carefully rotate your hand with the cautery around the gout until it reaches the depth of the gout. And leave it for three days until it starts to heal. Then apply that patch made from wild mallows mixed with salt to it, and leave the patch on for one night, so that it removes the root of the gout.
And then treat the area with a healing ointment made from natural flesh until it is cured.
If it does not heal and ulcers appear on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then you should apply these cauterizations with water, and take a thin reed or iron needle or a penknife, and place it over the joint; then dip the tip of the instrument into some water, hold your hand, and press down firmly until the entire area is compressed, and repeatedly move the edge of the instrument along the joint's edges, until you see the water flow out from under the joint. Wait for the patient to feel the burning of the hot water for about an hour, then remove it, because the heat will have dried up the moisture in the joint.
And also, apply this to all parts of the body where they might be present.
And then treat the abscesses that have been dried up from the joints with ointments made from flesh-generated medicines.
Chapter III.
On the cauterization of tremors.
When you encounter a tremor caused by friction on the nerves or due to fever from a contaminating cause, or for other similar reasons, it is necessary that you cauterize those affected areas with four cauteries or three over the spines of the back, between each spine placing one cautery; also cauterize the foot, and the stomach with olive cauteries.
And the tremor of the patient ceases, and hastens the healing of the contaminated illness.
Chapter V.
On the cauterization of sudden accidents throughout the body.
When the body expels white sores, and pustules are formed from corrupt solid matter; therefore, at the beginning of the appearance, cauterize with a subtle cautery or a heated iron, the tip of which is extended over the fistula; or cut with a long needle; or cauterize with a lenticular.
And in some cases, cautery is also applied at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; they are not swollen, and excess fluid is drained, making them healthy again.
However, it may be necessary to perform a flebotomy for this.
Chapter VI.
On the cauterization of a flux of blood from an accidental wound by an arc incision.
Excessive bleeding from an incision should be controlled using bandages or the application of pressure, especially when dealing with the start of an abscess or a cauterization on a body part, and it appears similar, but it is difficult to contain.
So if this happens to anyone, you must apply your hand over the wound of the incision, and hold it there until the flow of blood has stopped, ensuring that no further bleeding occurs.
And in addition, apply hot olive oil cauterizing irons, both small and large, by placing many of them over the fires until they are heated through.
And take from them, according to the location and the wound in which an artery is broken, either a small or large iron, and apply it swiftly over the vein that you have cleaned with the previous method, cauterizing it until the blood flow is stopped.
And if the blood is expelled from the wound when you remove your hand and pull out the cautery, take another cautery carefully from those that are prepared over the fire, and do not stop doing this until the bleeding stops.
And be careful not to damage the nerves here, which could lead to further complications for the patient.
And you should know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to constrict the flow, especially if the artery is large. There are four ways to do this: either with cautery as we have mentioned, or by extraction, where the ends of the vessel are damaged and the bleeding restricted; or by binding or ligature for a strong closure, or by applying medicines whose virtue is to constrict the flow; and these should be placed on a cushion or pad at the cost of the patient.
He who administers a proper restriction of it with bandages or by reason of burning causes and similar ones, does not relieve but aggravates.
If this must be done for anyone and not in the presence of a doctor or medicine, open at the pause indicated on the affected area of the vein as we have said, and understand the great constriction within that the blood flow is stopped from the sovereign cause of the plague, and regarding the hardness, do not hesitate; and on the hardness, apply hot water with a great chill until the veins are frozen and thickened; and then consider what cautery or medicine is necessary.
From incision and perforation, and blisters, and phlebotomy, and sores, and their likes.
In the first chapter, we have discussed all manner of illness where cauterization with fire is appropriate and medicinal combustion effective, along with their occasions and causes, and the tools necessary for such cautery in accordance with the shape of the wound; I have arranged the chapters ascending from the head to the feet.
And in this chapter, we shall proceed in this order, so that anyone desiring it may find relief, as needed.
And before you begin, take note that this chapter is devoted to the treatment of fear, which is discussed in detail in the first chapter on cauterization.
And because it is of great importance, be aware that in the operation discussed in this chapter, which involves severe bleeding due to the cautery, life-saving measures such as the application of sanative herbs, the draining of pus, the extraction of arrows, or incisions into abscesses must be performed with extreme caution. And among all these symptoms are fear and trembling, and in many of them death follows.
And I warn you that this should not fall on you, for sometimes you may be deceived by the symptoms of illnesses and act as if they are not present. And it is from them that you will learn about their illness, and you should not dismiss it as death, for the urgency of what they find in their illness, and because of the long duration of their illness, and the severity of the illness itself means death.
And it is from these that you gain knowledge and understanding, telling yourself to hope for health, and their illness is destructive.
And therefore do not agree with anyone who comes to you with such a manner; let your caution be greater than your trust and your greed; and do not presume any cause for it, but only consider certain knowledge that verifies what should happen to you, and from which admirable success follows.
Use in the treatment of all your ailments the prognosis and indication of that which is turned to health, for it assists you in acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
Oh, sons, may God inspire your understanding and not allow you to stray from His guidance and protection, for it is in His hands.
And you have organized this distinguished chapter into sections as indicated in the preceding chapter on cautery, from the treatment of the head to that of the feet, so that it may assist you in anything you inquire about and need regarding these matters.
First Chapter.
On the treatment of water contained in the head of children.
You know that this illness often manifests in children during teething, and when the blackness enters the child's head, it causes pain.
And sometimes certain conditions should be observed for an underlying cause that is not apparent.
This disease may also be seen in children; and to all those whom I have seen die from it, I have observed the same effect on them.
And you have seen that in a child whose head was filled with water, the head of him was always thus swollen so much that he could not raise himself because of the size of his head, and more than that, the moisture increased until death by fire.
And this moisture is either added between the flesh and bone or is added beneath the bones on the brain.
For the operation on that case if the moisture is between the flesh and bone and the abscess is small, then you must make an opening in the middle place of the head with a fissure at its width, and the length of the fissure should be enough to let the moisture escape, and this is the shape of the spatula:
And therefore, when the humidity is greatly increased and the abscess becomes larger, there are here two cracks according to this manner:
And if the humidity leaves the bone, it is a sign that you must open the eye sockets completely and the water is squeezed out when you press that part of the dry skin inside and it is not something you should hide. Make an opening in the middle part of the head as three cracks according to this manner:
Then extract the incision completely to remove all humidity; tighten the cracks with drapes and plasters; drill into the affected area from above using a saw and oil within five days, and then remove the lint and cure the wound with poultices and ointment, while holding the head in an equal position; and feed the patient dry bread with little humidity until the member is healed.
And there is another method of incision which considers the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of water, for sometimes it appears at the back of the head, or in front, or on the right, or on the left; therefore pay attention to the incision where the abscess appears and the filling of water, and do it as best as possible.
And observe that do not incise the artery, and strive for flows of blood and heals the patient through that flow of blood during the evacuation of humidity.
**Second Chapter.**
When there is an acute or severe pain in the ears or feet, and it is old, do not apply any treatment with medications, but rather the last cure for this is to incise those two arteries.
And thus you cover when you want to incise where the disease has formed its head, and then rub the area with coarse cloth so that the arteries appear, and tighten the collar of the disease with another cloth; and consider where the pulse of the vein is; and the locations of each over the locations which are closest to the auricles, and they remain hidden in some people.
Then you should cut across the artery with a knife, and incise each one along the direction of the fracture caused by the incision reaching into the bone, and this according to the extent of the head.
And if you want, insert the knife between the artery and cut it at the incisions made from above.
And the length of the incision should be about two fingers wide, for when a vein is incised, the blood is immediately released from the pulsating exit, which constantly jumps out.
If the arrow does not appear at the belt, then measure from the auricle the quantity of space equal to three fingers, and then carefully attempt to insert it into the bone.
And what you get from the wound is a quantity of one drop, and strong leach cannot extract more or less from it, and all this depends on the extent of the patient's malady and the depth of the arrow in their body.
And consider the plague, and if you find any cause of infection on the bone, then incise it carefully to prevent the spread of gangrene.
And then strengthen the plague with poultices and bandages of linen cloth, and treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Chapter III.
From the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When ancient or sudden migraines occur due to seasonal humidity and the quality of tears in the temples, or sudden old age that resembles these, and it is not relieved by conventional medical treatments, then we resort to extraction of arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
And the method of the operation and extraction of those is to target the ailments that reside in the temples; and understand the visible artery in the temple where it is shown by its pulsation, and it is hidden from most people due to its severity.
And if it is hidden, then tighten the collar of the illness with a cloth; and rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until you see the artery manifestly appear. And then you take the sponge that has this form: And then you cut the lock with ease as you reach the arrowhead; and you open it and extract the inner part superior to the others while you remove that of the lock and discover that of the tunic which is left behind from every attempt.
If the artery is thin, then you wrap it around the end of the finger and cut it with a single strike according to the amount by which its ends are lengthened or contracted, and thus it will not bleed excessively, for if it is not cut, no blood will flow from it entirely.
And then, empty the vein of blood within three beats.
And if the artery is large, then you tie it in two places with a strong double thread of silk or with cords, and do not allow it to putrefy before the healing of the wound and induce blood flow from it.
And then incise the superfluity which is between two ligaments, and do this at that time or another.
And if you wish, cauterize that with a hot iron within the bone, cauterizing the ends of it while they are still incised, and hold in place that precise work.
And it is better work if the patient has fever or a condition of heat; for cauterization is for those causes that help to end humidity, and therefore it is better in youth.
And then cover the extraction of the bones that have moved from their place, and they should be placed over it properly prepared, and treat with dry medicines to make the flesh and blood flow within until it is healed.
And if while working another time bleeding from the bone occurs, then you should restrict that blood flow, or cauterize, or fill the place of the joint, and strengthen your hand over it until the bleeding is restricted. And if any cause of those symptoms is not apparent, then hold the affected area until the swelling subsides, and apply cold water with vigorous friction until the pain eases, and treat it according to need.
And what is more lightly extracted from archery, it is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two edges, after you have felt both places with your hand, and applying some heat, until it reaches the bone and cuts the vein in two places, so that what is between the extremities of the vein can be elongated, as it is not strengthened by all this cauterization.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And the sharpness of both edges is an example. However, it may be better to have just one edge sharp, as if both are very sharp, they can cut the flesh too quickly when pressed against each other.
Therefore, when there is some swelling in those areas, the heat of the fire is retained there, and the flesh is separated slightly.
And this work is better than any other and should be done gently.
And the space between the two bones should be as wide as the thickness of that one.
Final stage.
On the treatment of acute and acidic chest pain in the legs.
When the pain is acute and acidic, affecting those veins just above the surface of the skin on the head, and no medical cause can be identified, the patient's face may become discolored and they may feel a throbbing in their forehead as if it were crawling with ants. Their legs are exhausted, damp, and their skin feels rough due to the intensity of the tears. The old remedies for this condition in such procedures are ineffective, and I will mention that treatment as superficial.
And it is that you command the patient to shave the hair which is on their forehead, and then incise three cuts equally distant along the length of the forehead. And if the length of the cut is two parts: one cut is equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle part of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little movement of the eyelids which are at the lacrimal, and the third from the other side.
And be mindful of the beginning of the cuts which are in two parts, and extend your hand along the continuation of both jaws. And if the space of each cut is three parts, adjust accordingly.
And if you have a piece of sponge prepared or dry cloth to absorb the blood.
And then insert the knife between the two sharp ends, which is the shape of the incision. What is removed from the temples during the second incision. Excise entirely the cord that is between the two incisions on the skull, which lies over the bone, and then make this cut from the first incision into the second. And then strike with this knife and insert another instrument called a scalpel into the first incision; one side of it is sharp and the other is not.
And hold the sharp edge against the flesh attached to the bone, and press it deeply into the gap between the bones, and use it to reach all vessels that descend from the head to the feet.
It may be continued the incision to this appear of the cord, and then make it in the middle fissure between the other fissure.
And when the flow of blood becomes equal, squeeze the areas of the frozen veins of the sanction.
And then place in each fissure a warm compress of wool, soaked in wine and oil, and let it not cause any burns with caution.
On the third day, loosen the bandages and administer a large infusion of cold water or herb tea, and then care for it with a paste of basilicon and rose oil and others until the wounds are healed.
It appears that there might be a missing or incomplete sentence here. The term "Capitol" likely refers to the Capitoline Hill, an ancient site in Rome, but without context, it's challenging to provide a precise translation. If this is part of a medical treatise, it could refer to a specific location for treatment or a general conclusion. For a more accurate translation, additional text would be beneficial.
On the treatment of bleeding through catharsis and the descent of fluids from the parts inside the head.
When acute bleeding continues and the wounds of the patient's eyes become weakened and their eyelids ulcerated along with the hairs from their sockets, and in the region of the head there is intense pain leading to subsequent detachment, then it becomes clear through these accidents that the matter and catharsis do not come from veins outside but from those within.
And the best treatment for these is as follows: command the patient to tilt their head, and then make an incision in that middle part of the forehead, a little towards the left (and begin the incision from the left temple towards the right temple; and cut through the bone; and with your hand remove the blood from the temples which are better drained after chewing). While keeping the bone exposed.
Dry all the blood with a sponge or cloth and then fill between the two edges of the incision with very clean gauze or cloth. And then apply to them a dust of herbs mixed in wine and oil, so that they do not catch a foul infection.
And when you treat it and see that the infection has decreased, then rub the bone within that starts in the fresh flesh, and apply a remedy of drying agents, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, mix them together, make a paste from them, and administer this to these wounds, both on raw flesh.
Chapter VI.
On the treatment of what attacks the ears.
Any cause that attacks the ears is one of four kinds: it may be a hard mineral or something similar to a stone, such as iron or lead, or it may be from plants like chickpeas or fava beans, or fluid-related, such as water and wine mixed together, or any animal.
And when a cat or other similar cause affects the ear, and the ear is pained, it turns towards the sun, and if the pain occurs, it distills into some cause of foul oil or mucous, then administer the extraction of it, and do make the nose blow in a condition, and oppose the nose to prevent sneezing. And then apply some pieces of cloth or wool to the course of the ear, and extend the ear away from the sides, for these causes often forget these remedies.
And if these remedies do not help, then administer the extraction of it with an instrument called a gentle epicyclic, of which this is the form:
And if it is forgotten about the epicyclic, then it is; otherwise, administer the extraction of it with a very subtle instrument with only a slight bend.
And therefore, if it is not forgotten, make a cannula of thread and insert the end of the cannula into the canal of the ear and close around the cannula with wax and soft oil so that only the cannula opens. And then extract the small wind with strong attraction, for many times we have seen this.
If it is not forgotten in this manner, take some hot light or some old apparatus with which the tools are heated, hold that at the end of the ray, and then wrap it decently around that part. And then insert that into the ear canal with ease, and then dry the ear from moisture.
And therefore, if it is not forgotten with all the causes we have seen, then you should cut off that which causes abscess or spasms.
And the method of cutting is that you begin by cauterizing the infection in the saphenous vein and extract the blood according to the virtue of it, then make that cease between your fingers and turn the edge towards the parts from which it originated, and make a small incision at the base of the edge where the disease has been most pressed. And if the fracture is of a lunar shape that it reaches the bone, and the bone is dislocated, stop it if you can with appropriate instruments; and immediately with speed apply treatment to the fracture until it heals.
And if the cause of the pain in the auricle is one of the swollen and inflated fats, then administer treatment and extract it; but if you do not obey to my advice, then take some fine sponge according to this form: and administer to that the removal of the fallen fat from the auricle.
And do not attempt this when you think that the affected area is already moistened by heat, hold it in heavy masses, or extract it with incisions or subtle movements, or through an incision as we have said, for it eases the extraction.
When the water that enters the ear is the cause of the disease, and the patient experiences sneezing as a result, he should immediately fill his ear with some soft wax or cotton up to a certain length, and then heat it slightly in the fire; the patient then inserts one of these into the opening of the ear and jumps on one foot, pressing it against the other, thus creating a strong suction. Therefore, continue with the treatment until all the water is drained out.
Therefore, continue with the treatment until all the water is drained out. And after all the water is drained out, take some paper or cloth, put one end of it into the ear and extend the other end towards the fire until the heat consumes most of it.
And then insert other needles and do this as many times until all the water is drained out, and stretch that thin tube as it is said of the stone extractor.
In the extraction of a foreign body entering that ear, if it is a small thing, it can be pulled out and treated as we have said in the previous section; however, if it is a large object causing an apparent rupture, then perform the extraction with gentle gestures and incisions, and the cause should be given more consideration than all other causes affecting the ear.
In the extraction of worms grown in the ear, when you treat that as we have said in the previous section and in the treatment of distills, and do not conform to your care, then you should watch over the ear facing the sun.
And therefore, if any cause of the worms appears here, then perform gentle gestures or incisions to extract them, but if no cause appears, take a thin tube that is wide at one end and narrow at the other, whose shape is like this. And insert the delicate end of the instrument into the ear according to the amount of pain suffered from the malady; then suck strongly at it and make rapid movements, until all the worms are expelled.
If you do not obey these instructions, then your poultice and closure around the canal should be done with wax as we have said; then administer distills that have already been prepared in the treatment of worms, and you will find this described in the treatise on distills.
And your flow should be from which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, whose form is as follows: And make it of silver or iron, left straight, with a small opening and a flat surface on top.
And thus it is used for what it is in the cavity of the containing canal here, it will be necessary. And if you wish, take the needle and neatly wrap it at its end, and then pour oil into the hollow of the ear, or juice from some herb, or whatever you choose from these medicines in the tube — that is in the ear —, and then insert the needle into the cotton and press your hand over it until the oil is expelled into the hollow of the ear and the pain feels the oil inside.
And what is inserted into the ear should be already scorched with a small flame. And be careful that the cause which you distil in the ear is not too harsh, for the ear medicines do not endure this.
Chapter VII.
On the cure for ear infections.
Sometimes children have vents in their parents' bellies that are not pierced, and this happens to some men, an inflammation of the flesh of the ear due to a plague or flesh infection in that area; and this inflammation is sometimes felt in the point of the wound of the ear piercing, which is not aware of sensation, and sometimes it is outside the folds.
And that which happens in the point of the wound, which does not understand sensation, is in the most challenging situations for healing.
And in that one where you can feel the sensation, pull the ear of the patient towards the light and observe it. And so if you see an apparent inflammation, open that with a delicate spatula, from which this is the form of it:
If the extremity of the ear where the inflammation is localized has one part that is sharp and the other not, and the spatula is two-sided, so it does not hurt the ear.
And so if the operation is for a bone grown within the ear or in the flesh, then use fine scissors and cut with violent ease until all the flesh is removed.
And if the operation is on the edge of the ear, then take a fine knife and heat it slightly with fire, and then insert that into the flesh of the ear.
And so if you have sensed an operation as something that the patient finds easy due to the urgency of the situation, by easing the pressure on them; be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear.
And then, place a bandage on the ear according to the amount of space required, which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are certain of the healing of the wound; or take some and pour it into water, sprinkle over it every third day, and use it; if the ear has already formed a crust, then be careful not to ruin the ointment and replace it with other ointment made from wax that is smooth, as long as the infection heals cautiously; and attend to it until it is healed.
If a flux of blood occurs, then immerse the exposed or drape in warm water, press upon the wound, and use another treatment that restricts the flow of blood, which is called distillation in the treatise on distillation.
It appears that you have provided a heading or a section marker, "Capitol .viii." Without any additional text or context, it's challenging to guess the meaning or provide an accurate translation. If you include the corresponding text, I'd be happy to assist with a translation or interpretation.
Regarding the treatment of atrophy that occurs on the eyelids.
Atrophy of the eyelids may sometimes be caused by moisture, at other times by dryness.
Therefore, you should have those soft tissues or fat removed, and then press upon the areas that have been treated.
If sharp pain flows from a venous wound, then cauterize those wounds with a thin lateral cautery.
And the best cautery is when incisions and deep wounds are returned when there is no cause for their reopening; and when cauterized with fire, those wounds are burned away and do not return.
**Chapter IX.**
Treatment for a severe condition that comes to the eyelids of the eyes.
Deep-seated and hard-to-remove conditions should be observed in the eyelids of the eyes, which, due to their strength and hardness, are called 'great' or 'severe'.
And it involves the addition of thick moisture to the lower and upper eyelids.
Therefore, the operation on them consists of considering, when the size is progressing in it from where the eyelid appears and is magnified throughout; and the cause of it is light.
So now let us address that fissure by widening it, and extract it entirely with ease as you evacuate it, and then suspend that one and cut and separate that.
And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with stitches; and care for that until it is healed.
And if it is small, then you will not encounter much trouble as the healing of it restores and covers that.
If the enlargement is decreasing within the folds of the eyelid, you must explore the surface inside, raise the eyelid and suspend the enlargement with a thread, except as you initially intended, and press it from all sides; if due to some cause the eyelid is elongated, this should not be noticed for any reason.
Then make the incision, rinse the wound with salt water; and treat the area with embrocation until it is healed.
**Chapter X.**
On the treatment of the inflamed eyelid.
Inflammation is caused by the swelling of the eyelid's tunics, most often in children, it aggravates their eyes and leads to their clouding; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears gather around them.
And so you keep those actions upon their faces all the time, and upon their sleep; and to their eyelids leave the eyebrows moist, which have already been covered by inflammation, and the imminence of a discharge is apparent in the eye; and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel a discharge within them.
And in some cases of operation, when the patient's head is in a tilted position on the bed, place a drape over them and make it moist, and form it into a circle according to the quantity of pus from all parts, and then place that over that one, and press with your fingers on all sides so that a discharge is added to the middle of the circle, and in the middle of that, apply humidity to the sputum incident on the fissure according to its extent, so that the fissure is not larger than the one made in flaubotomy.
Place in the poultice a hole completely through which you can reach the pus, for in the most delicate positions, pus is discharged through the fissure according to the form of the white grayness.
Therefore, remove those sheets which you have wrapped around the parts outside and turn them with your right and left hand until they are completely separated.
And be careful not to adjust the fissure, so that the spatula does not enter into the wound and damage it.
If the spatula does not appear to your satisfaction at the beginning of the fissure, you may adjust the fissure a little more easily until the process is complete; then remove the sheet as we have said; and then immerse sheets in water and wine and place them over the area and sprinkle those with powders.
And then some sprinkle salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure to prevent any further humidity from remaining there.
And then take care of it until it heals.
If an ulcer occurs at the infected site, apply a poultice until it heals.
**Chapter XI**
**On the Modes of Touching the Wound**
When, in the eyes, growths of unnatural hairs occur and they become hard and old, these lead to pain in the eye, causing persistent tears, swelling of the eyelids, and destruction of the eye, which is known as 'tactinir' (a form of irritation). It is treated in four ways: with a hot cautery; using acute medicines as mentioned in the chapter on cauterization; by cutting and stitching (incision and suture); or with tubes (cannas), as discussed earlier.
And so, you should position the top of the wound over the eye; then, with your left hand, turn the eyelid towards you, and if it does not open on its own, insert an needle into the part where there is a small opening in the eyelid and push the needle through the hair, close to the edge of the eyelid where the hairs are, and pull the thread out from under the eyelid, turning it toward the light.
And then gently open the gap between the eyelids, adjusting the hairs with a precise cut of the larger lacrimal canal; then extract the foreign body and place the eyelid back using small cotton or cloth, and press firmly on the eyelid as if it were a sealed bag.
However, it is necessary to consider the shape according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, as this varies among individuals; those who have a greater amount of fluid in their eyes will require a deeper incision into the eyelid, depending on the extent to which the eyelid becomes softened.
Then open the channel with the scalpel along both lines that you have indicated, starting from the larger lacrimal canal into the smaller one. And if your cut is near the natural hairs, it should be as thick as the diameter of the ruler.
And then apply the ongle to one of the angles of the wound, scrape it all over, adjust the stitches with two threads of silk or fine wool, wash the blood, and make the excess of the threads adhere to either side of the eyebrows for some reason, if you wish, but otherwise, do not treat it.
And then, after three or four days, untie the stitches of the threads inside, and cure it.
And if you wish, leave the scar of the suture and treat it with something that dries and tightens, because the eyelid is lifted due to the sealing of the wound and the addition of fluid; however, more sutures are better. Therefore, I have told you the old practices of the taxanir.
However, always be careful with the patient, and it is good practice, and there should not be any fear in this.
And there is another way to measure it, which is that you draw a figure on the eyelid similar to a myrtle leaf, and then lift the eyelid with three pins, separating and bringing them together according to this form.
If the pins are not available, take a needle with a thread and insert it in the center of the figure, then introduce the other needle close to the major lacrimal, and the second one close to the minor lacrimal, and adjust these threads so they are equal, then with your hand at the same elevation as before, raise the entire eyelid as we have described.
Then adjust the two edges of the wound with sutures and heal that which is clean.
If after your incision or opening, an abscess occurs, treat it with cauterization and similar techniques.
And in some cases, when the eyelids are affected and their hairs are changing, then use what we have mentioned about incision; a more artificial suture is done in some places.
To translate the text, I will follow the format provided: And it is that you bend the eyelid and divide the figure within as I have described; then, with art, make two tubes or two thin plates of which the length corresponds to the length of the eyelid and their width matches the width of the space. And you have already incised at the ends of any cuts where the threads are located.
Then add any subtle substance to the excess of the eyelid muscle, and tighten the tubes of any cuts with strong tightness, leaving it for a few days, as the cord will die due to the tightness and be denied blood, and it will fall off once it has healed on its own.
If it is delayed, then cut open the abscesses, and treat the infection until it heals.
Therefore when it is secured, the eyelid is raised and the skin does not hurt.
And this is the way to make two cans according to this form: and it should have the quantity of length and width no more nor less.
Chapter XII
On the elevation of painful, hard skin with an agule in the painful area.
When the skin is not natural, hard, rough and painful in the heels, then the operation on them involves taking a subtle needle and pricking at that precise, delicate spot with cedar oil and lion's mane, and then adjusting the extremities of it very gently. And the length of the threads should be about a palm's width.
Then take another fine thread, pass it quickly through, and twist the ends of that one if you wish.
Then hold the patient's head in the small of their back, near the sun, so that your work is clear, for this is a subtle and delicate operation.
Then insert the needle into the root of the closely-grown hair, using skill, and penetrate it swiftly within the eyelid to extract that from its natural place.
Then pull the hair within it and insert that into the oil, and let the hairs be one or two or three and no more.
Then with your hand, pull that out until the hair is completely removed from the eyelid along with its natural oil.
If it is pulled off and the skin is not torn, pull the lint off to the sides where you have placed the bandage, so that it sticks to the wound on top.
And when you have the sight of the wound, then you will remove the lint and bandage, open up some parts of the wound, and leave the stitches for two or three days, so that the skin attaches to its place and a good scar forms.
If the skin needs to be cut shorter, then take a longer natural hair and raise it up to that point, or leave it until it grows long enough to create some space, and then raise it.
**Chapter XIII**
On the treatment of a condition that appears on the upper eyelid.
When you see the eye becoming clouded, and there is contraction of the eyelid when it closes, to the right or left, due to poor healing of an ulcer, or a section, or a cautery, and this condition is called opacity, and this clouding occurs either naturally or accidentally, and is caused by the healing of an ulcer, or sections, or cauterization, or similar conditions.
The manner of the operation on it is that you break that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place in it what is between those a piece of cloth from him, and bind them so that they are healed.
And be aware that you must use cure from the causes that dry out, constrict; for if you do this, it will cause the condition to cloud again worse than ever.
Use among those causes that soften as fenugreek, and soak in water in which the seeds are boiled and ground, or in vinegar, which is liquidified with any of the oils, and immerse the cloth in that, and cure it.
And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate with every tool that is not consolidated according to the form that you see at the beginning.
And this operation that we have mentioned is nothing other than a correction of the deviation that does not return to the form of the place as you see it at first.
Chapter XIII.
On the treatment of strabism performed on the eyelid.
This strabism, which is performed on the lower eyelid, is not properly called strabism; it is of either natural or accidental origin.
It may be caused accidentally by plague, or incision, or cautery, or other similar means.
And the method of operating is that you take a needle with which to make a double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and pass it through the left tear duct into the right tear duct, so that the thread goes through both ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh apart from its sides with the needle and cut with a wide spatula. And so return the eyelid to its original shape if it is suitable; otherwise, take the thread and hold that in the split shape, and with that, turn over the eyelid, and make two slits on the edge of the eyelid.
And the ends of both slits should form two angles of the incision you have made, which converge, and when they meet, the shape of their angle should be as follows.
And this figure is Greek letter: lambda.
And then stop the bleeding of the patient, for as much as the wound is deep, this is what makes the eyelid close.
And then align the separated parts and sew them with woolen thread; and treat those with what we have said about softening medicines and applications of cold until it is healed.
And if you need to increase or close a gap with stitches or cauterization, then make sure that your incision is flat against the hairs of the eyelid as mentioned before. And then separate the application of cold between two lips as we have said.
In the entire discourse on treatment for elevation or reduction, when it is above or below, let the operation flow according to how it has been prepared in terms of elevation, and that can take various forms.
And the skilled artisan always prepares devices in various ways that are possible for him to return the form to its natural state, or close to it, and treats that illness according to what suits him from the operation and tools at his best disposition.
**Chapter XV**
On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this adhesion occurs in most people, the eyelid appears to be solidified with the white part (sclera), preventing its normal movement and functions, so you must insert your finger between the lid and the sclera, and lift it upwards or extend it using a speculum.
And then you cut through the adhesion using a thin spatula, which should not be sharp enough to irritate the cornea during the operation, and remove the spatula that does not restore the eyelid's natural openness.
And your incision should sever that adhesion easily, so that the eyelid can be returned to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
Then immerse it in salty water, with which you wash; or distill it from the sun, dissolved in water.
Then separate the eyelid from the eye with a drop of water, place over the eye a woolen cloth soaked in egg white, and apply the third day treatments that consolidate the cure until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the incision of the eye and the prominence of the flesh of the eyelids.
You know that the eye is of two manners: either it is nervous, similar to a subtle hard chip, or it is non-nervous, resembling white frozen moisture, which when pierced with a needle, is easily separated and the needle does not get stuck in it.
And both spices do not begin until the major lacrimal gland, little by little, covers the sight and prohibits light and movement of smell.
The manner of operating in the incision of the eye is that the patient fixes their gaze on a small object near, and then opens the eyelids with one hand, raises the upper eyelid with the other, and then carefully bends the corner of the eye towards the nose, extending it away from the socket. And then take a needle and insert it into the corner of the eye with a hair from a horse, or cow, or goat, or similar, gradually bending the tip of the needle and placing it in the middle of the eyelid, penetrating the eyelid with the needle, tying the lid to the thread, extending it towards the edges, and carefully removing the hair from the eyelid which blocks the pupil. And so you remove the hair from within the eye socket.
And then carefully incise the membrane at the root of the tear duct with a thin spatula or small scissors, and expose the flesh of the natural tear duct so that by making this incision, continuous flowing of tears does not occur.
And some also use an unguent applied to the sole when it is extended or hardened, as we have said, and then carefully scrape off the hard part with a sharp spatula, which is the form of this treatment.
And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal tunic and cause its rupture, and that the pupil is not perforated.
After the incision is made in the wound, apply a little coarse salt or clean lint and leave it for about a day; then take care of it until it is healed.
If the swelling is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it fixed in that place, then try this type of unguent, which is cured by medicine, and so too is healing achieved when you apply and reapply it in layers.
And if you wish to incise it, open the wound of the malady and take a thin slice of sharp iron according to this form: with precision. If the incision becomes hardened and closed up, and the blood flows into it, then draw out the blood slowly from your side in the wound with a clean instrument, or use a hot iron or salt to open it up again, and keep the wound open for another day.
And repeat the operation on it until all that is foreign is removed, otherwise a foul pus will form in the wound, for if you leave it, the abscess will begin to form again until it is healed.
And repeat your operation on that wound until it is healed.
The urgency of the lachrymal flesh, if it is noticed in a great distress, should be suspended immediately; and incise it from one side, but do not complete the incision so as to prevent the flow of tears.
And then distill the lachrymal secretions from the main tear duct until it is healed.
Chapter XVII
On incision of the herniated organs and on what arises from attached flesh in the wound.
Sometimes in the eyes of certain individuals, there is diseased flesh that protrudes, covering or pressing closely against the pupil, and forcing the eyelids apart, so they are joined together like a batten.
The surgical procedure involves positioning the patient so that their malady is resolved in the lower part of their body; then open the incisions on that area and collect all the necessary tissue with forceps or a basket, and cut the tissue from the beginning until everything is finished with the scalpel, and be careful of the wound to avoid complicating your operation.
And your incision should be the one that incises those or excises the spur we have mentioned in the incision of the toe, or small forceps that are collected with care according to the shape that comes appropriate for this chapter.
So when your incision is complete and all that tissue is removed, fill the wound with fine salt or sprinkle over it powder made from a medicinal herb similar to corrosive drugs, and place over it a clean cloth until it is certain that there will be no infection.
And if there is any reason for some inflammation and it is necessary to apply a poultice, and you are afraid of an infection, leave the wound and treat that infection with what proves effective for that infection, and then repeat the operation until it heals, and do as you have done with the affected tissue in this case.
However, you should be aware that all cure for this acute pain must be avoided by natural or accidental means, using fire, and do not place your hand on any of these operations until you see that the member has endured that operation sufficiently.
**Chapter XVIII**
**On the Collection of Knowledge in Disease.**
**Knowledge comes in various forms, some of which are stubborn on disease and resist treatment, causing the illness to persist for many days.**
**Therefore, at the beginning, you must consider whether the knowledge in which the disease resides is strong and there is no other malady involved; then you should gather that knowledge.**
**And it is that you command the disease to halt its head in the small place, and then suspend those veins with a hook or two, according to your prudence; and let this hook have a subtle and double effect in this manner:**
They should be two incisions made gradually in a body according to this form:
Then they should be collected those veins with subtle forces, in subtlety, and you should withdraw the blood at the proper time, as long as you see those veins to be filled with humor and are revolved.
And be careful not to touch the humor at the ends of the knife; and if your operation is in the morning facing the sun, and you are strong in your operation, then only cut those veins.
And when you have finished, you will distill the humor with hot water or vinegar so that its sharpness corrupts what has been extracted from the sap.
If it is not possible to collect all of that in that time, then you should apply a compress to everything that alleviates the patient's pain, and leave it for several days until the pain is relieved and the risk of abscess is avoided.
And then repeat on them according to the method of treatment until they are healed.
And this is the way of the forceps:
Chapter XIX.
On the reduction of a hernia through the nose.
When treating a hernia with a cautery or sharp medicine, as it is preceded by the account of its condition and is not healed, then do not attempt to tighten it in him, but instead make incisions over the abscess until its maturity, and extract all the humidity that is in it until the bones are exposed.
And so when the bone is exposed and there is corruption or blackness in it, then use this tool on it, whose form is as follows:
And it is called an acute headache, and it is made by cutting into the scalp with a sharp instrument, and the head is rounded in such a way that the puncture is made with a lime or alkaline substance through a subtle punctation (such as in the following form).
And press it over the corrupted part of the bone, then turn it between your fingers, and apply gentle pressure with your hand until you know that the corruption is removed.
This should be done at certain times, and then the place is restored using drying and astringent substances.
So if the place is consolidated and there is good flesh in it and the body has been separated from the sanie (perhaps referring to pus or infection) for 40 days, and it is not renewed, nor does it fester, and no accident occurs in it, then you know that it is healed.
And if it is not possible to bring the fissure back into its natural shape, you must do so by reducing it according to the following method: and this is how you expose the bone, as per your skilled or acute treatment, and once the bone is exposed, you take hold of it in this form.
The end of the instrument should be triangular, and the shaft of the instrument must first be extended towards the extremity in this way as you repeat it.
Then place your hand over the bone, and it should be the one near the lacrimal; extend your hand a little further, and then rotate your hand while pressing so that it penetrates the entire bone, and you will feel the pain as it releases air from within.
Therefore, you restore the area using astringent medicines that dry out as required.
Therefore when the flesh and the place have been hardened, the matter that was discharged from outside returns to the inside, so this is more easily treated for the malady.
**Chapter XX**
**On the Reduction of Swelling**
When the swelling is prominent and does not yield to gentle pressure or decrease, it is necessary to address the malady, and accordingly, you should continue with treatments such as scarification and suction for a good flow; then apply over the swelling a liniment made of aloe, onions, garlic, and horse collar, and strengthen the poultice over the swelling with a motley powder.
And the method of the powders is that you take sheets of lion's fur, and each sheet is cut into four pieces; and make powder from those pieces.
And then place them one on top of the other according to the amount of swelling present. Then apply strong pressure to these with a firm, tightly drawn cloth; repeat the suction with scarification; and remove the ventoses, leaving the swelling tightly compressed for the day and night.
If, meanwhile, the ligament becomes softened, be sure it is still firmly tied.
And then leave the ligature firmly in place for both the day and night as we have said.
And if the swelling has already been reduced, well, then continue with further treatment using poultices, compression, and suction until healing occurs.
Chapter XXI.
Regarding the incision of the prominence of the uvular tunic.
When you need to disrupt the uvular tunic, and it is prominent, you should process the eyelids as if with a grain of sand, and by forming a shape like a man, you want to perform an incision, during the operation on him, you insert the needle into the root of the uvula from below, and then insert another needle through which there is a double fold from the lacrimal part, and make it penetrate and leave the first needle according to its position; then incise the location of the double fold and lift that part of the uvula along the course of the needle, and tighten that tissue.
Then remove the needle and place it on the humid wool soaked in egg albumen, and wait until the thread falls off the uvula.
And then treat the wool with something that will soothe it until the plague is healed.
And in some cases, from all parts, a circular bandage is wrapped tightly around the prominent area, and then it is punctured through the thin membrane that reaches the nerve ending of the joint, and the white fluid leaks out, and the joint descends and within a short time.
And then tighten it so that it is healed.
**Chapter XXII**
**On the Cure for Alconati** (or **On Treating Alconation**)
This affliction known as alconati is nothing but a healthy condition that is confined to the joint, resembling water flowing down, and it is not [the same as] gout.
The manner of working in this case is that you sever the affliction from its attached seat and turn it to the right, and then take hold of its head with both hands from two different sides and press it inward so that you feel the health returning to the parts left behind, and make it stop descending, and retain the light, and as you see the illness thus, its causes become clear.
And if it doesn't come down below, you will know that it is water.
If, however, the descent is not prepared as we have said, then the patient should stop the malady between their thighs, take a delicate needle and make incisions at that point surrounding the pannus, just above the continuation of the conjunctiva with the tunica cornea on the crown (in the place desired), until the sanie (fluid) is drained.
Once the sanie is drained, you should distill warm water in which honey or fennel and honey mixture has been boiled, and apply it to the affected area.
And then it should be treated for other causes as well, until it is healed.
Chapter .XXII.
On the treatment of water flowing from the knee.
Having discussed the types of water in division, it is now necessary to declare which to pierce and when, according to health.
Now you must understand how to stop the patient's pain between your hands on a pillow and tie their knee so that the water stops flowing.
Then place your left hand near the patient's knee, if the water is in the left knee; or your right hand, if it is in the right knee.
Then take hold with your right hand, if the knee is on the left side; or with your left hand, if the knee is on the right side.
Then hold the tip of the hand near the corner for the thickness of the ray in the white of the eye, close to the lacrimal gland, and with your thumb, gently pull the hand towards you and turn it.
And then gently insert into the wound's albumen, and feel that the almond has already been reached by sight.
And it should be measured the distance from the almond to the pupil with the width of the space that is between the pupil and the end of the blackness, which is the iris; for you will see in that pupil the vision of the eye through the clarity of the transparent cornea.
Then gently press the almond within the area where there is water, and release it downwards a few times, then observe if the water descends; at that moment, you will know the ailment over which his sight was previously focused, and the almond will enter its iris.
Then rest for a moment; if the water has descended, you should pause again before releasing it so that the almond is not thrown out.
And when it is stuck and will not come down, you extract the magic with ease, turn your hand a little at a time, and dissolve a small amount of clear salt gem in water, then wash the swelling inside with that water; and press out the swelling or stop or cotton soaked in rose oil and egg albumen and apply it to the swelling.
May we, and those of our time, no longer rely on such things as egg albumen.
And if you do not follow your magic with the instrument of the swelling due to its hardness - for it is one of the men whose swelling is hard, then you must understand that you take the spatula named "alberid" which has this form:
And therefore, perforate that joint, do not end your hand on the trail, and make sure you only create a subtle space for the magic to enter.
And then I insert the almug as we have said.
And you must prepare the bed for the sick person, so that they sleep comfortably on their back in a dark room, and all movements are prohibited.
And consider the nature of this condition so that its natural course is not disturbed, and do not force their head to the right or left at any time.
And dress them according to their condition on the third day.
And then remove him from that dark place and banish the cold view, and examine his condition, and return to dress the wound on the seventh day.
And do not cover this during the time of treatments or, if necessary, apply infusion. Having noticed that you apply this for such a reason that water can leave slightly through great and violent observation.
If an abscess occurs cautiously, you will notice that the pain diminishes after the seventh day, and correct any deformity in the affected area with this water.
Then you clean the sight of it and place your attention on the oral side from which it is emanating, allowing its condition to improve for several days, present in the darkest season.
And gradually consider that season, its causes, and discuss them.
And you know that in illness the disciple of sight should not be excused from observing certain times, and then you will be bold about the operation.
And we have already reached those who are in the art of surgery, and one says that fire should be made in the air with a hollowed-out instrument through which water is drawn out.
However, you may not have seen this perfect method in our land, nor is it mentioned in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the ways of the spices of medicine, that they may be superior to those who ignore them.
They are made of iron or steel, and their ends have this triangular subtlety, the sharp end being so too in shape.
Chapter XXIV.
Regarding the treatment of flesh wounds in the nose.
When there are diverse layers of flesh in the nose, each with its own cause, such as a growth of many feet or a polyp in the nostril, this malady is called polypus because it resembles that foot represented. And it is flesh cancerous, leathery, of dark color; and of this flesh is the lion's flesh not of dark color.
Therefore, in that which is in these lion flesh, not fraudulent nor cancerous, you should cut the malady between your hands and place it in the sun, dry the nose of it, and pick at the tiny parts in those meats. Then extract that from the parts outside, and carefully divide what you have understood from those by the subtle cutting of one part within knowing that all the flesh is held; if there is any cause from which the separation is possible, then use this as a tool to it with subtlety among the delicate means from which nothing causes harm. If the infection is accompanied by fever or acute post-apoplexy, then you should treat it accordingly; but if it is one of the malignant apostemata, then cut and cauterize that part which has become abscessed and leave all cavities intact.
And then make incisions in the nose, carefully introducing either a knife or a syringe with water or liquid. If the nose is blocked and you find moisture inside the palate, then know that it is already healed.
If the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that inside there is flesh turned to pus over bones of the nose to which no incision has been made.
Therefore, you should carefully insert the instrument into the area where there is any hardness, and gently move it in and out, and between each bone, using as much or as little force as necessary, and thus heal the patient and insert one end of the instrument into the nose either by cutting or for other reasons that may be possible.
And after this has been done, it should be applied to the nose so that its scent reaches the nasal canals, and placed over the nostrils, for the troops who have witnessed such actions make children in schools, and it is a light cause for anyone who wishes to do so.
Then grasp both ends of the thread, one end emerging from the nose and the other passing through the nostrils, and apply pressure to the flesh with the threads, doing this until you know that the flesh is compressed around the thread.
Then remove the thread and stop the bleeding with a cold compress, and do this for three days or more until the ointment corrodes all that is broken in the flesh.
Finally, at the end of the treatment, insert a gold tube into the nose for several days until it is healed.
If there is a cure that can be ended, use it.
And this is the form of the purgative instrument that distills oils and medicines from plants:
And make it of silver or brass, which is similar to a small lamp with a small cavity, and the inside appears like a hook.
And if you wish, make a closed tube like a straw, and the tube of the purgative instrument is flat, open; it has a handle at the end, which you hold when you draw oil or water that you want from the juices and sucking causes.
Chapter .xxv.
They grow from the ends of the nose.
Small bumps appear as a thread on the ends of the nose, and it swells and becomes inflamed over some days until a crust forms on it.
And so it is important that you understand this at the beginning of its appearance, and attend to all of it. And then apply over the area either a cautery or medicine that is burning, which is in place of it.
If its inflammation is delayed and it becomes magnified, consider if it is lapified (ulcerated), hard, of dark color, and has little sensation, then do not touch it with iron or any other sharp object, for such bumps that appear at the site of this inflammation hold great malice for whoever incides upon this apostema.
And if the abscess is a serious infection and not of a dark color, sometimes it is possible to incise it entirely, drain the pus, cut out the infected tissue, and treat the area with something that promotes healing and prevents recurrence.
**Capitol XXVI.**
On the suture of the nose, lips, and earlobe when continuity is broken due to disease or something similar.
You should know that when there is an interruption of continuity in one of these cartilages, little benefit results from the operation except in certain cases.
Therefore, when you encounter any cause among these that indicates a recent infection, consider it as such and adjust the two edges of the wound with sutures, and then care for it until it heals.
And if the openings of the solution for continuity are already separated and each one is made healthy, then you must remove each part from its connection until it heals completely. Then adjust both openings with stitches and strengthen them, and sprinkle dragon's blood on them and cover them with a thin layer of plaster or some other consolidating bandage, and leave it for two or three days, then remove that and replace the plaster and leave it until the flesh is completely healed.
The technique for the suture is that you either add a solution to restore continuity as we have recommended in the suture of the abdomen, or add the solution of continuity with thread as you know how to do.
Chapter 27.
To extract those causes that come in both lips within the openings.
These swellings are often seen in many people within the openings of their lips; some are hard like grainy errant matter, and others are softer or larger.
Therefore, he opens the lips and cleaves apart each of those hard swellings from every part, and then fills the space with a clean tripe, while restricting the opening; then it is washed with wine and treated with water that has been squeezed, until it is healed.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the incision of the tissue attached to the gums.
In cases where swellings appear on the gum tissue that ancient physicians called albus, he should suspend them using tongs or hold them with forceps and carefully incise what is necessary into its base, allowing the healthy blood to flow and the opening to heal.
And then apply sage or other astringent or drying powders to the area.
And if that flesh returns, cut it secondly and cauterize it, for near the cautery returning is unlikely.
**Chapter 29.**
On the cause of teeth falling out.
When on the surface of the loose teeth and between the gums there are tight, rough, scaly, blackened, or green deposits, this leads to corruption of the gums and the loss of nearby teeth.
And so you must remove the illness between your hands, place the tip of it on the thigh, and extract the teeth in which these rough deposits and similar debris appear, without causing any further harm, and do this with regard to their blackness, greenness, and other conditions until they are purified.
Therefore, if there remains something in the beginning of reasoning, good; otherwise, you will repeat the reasoning about those points on another day and the following ones until it comes to the last statement in what you want.
And you know that teeth require various forms and shapes of cutting according to how they are prepared for your operation. And for this reason, the cutter with which the tooth is removed from its socket is different from the cutter used to shave between teeth according to other forms, and these shapes of cutters must be prepared that you will see shortly:
Chapter .XXX.
Eradication of teeth.
Understand that you cure the tooth from its pain with all diligence and take your time in the complete eradication of it, because there is no reason to delay the moment when it is eradicated, as it is a sublime substance whose excuse is not accepted during the eradication.
When the illness is forced to extract a tooth that causes pain, you must be certain which tooth is painful, as the pain may mislead you to believe it comes from an unhealthy tooth, and you extract that one, but the pain does not cease until the sickly, painful tooth is removed, for we have seen this through the operations of barbers.
Therefore, to determine which tooth is painful, and as you know, when you uncover that it is necessary to sacrifice the gums around the tooth with a scalpel in which there is some virtue, until it is completely detached from the tooth, then carefully apply your instruments, or fine pliers, starting at the smallest point, until the extraction is complete.
And next, use pliers with strong teeth for good gripping or a strong tamping tool, and place the patient's head between your hands that hold them, to avoid injury, and carefully extract the tooth according to its straightness in such a way as not to break it, or cause greater pain to the patient.
And therefore, if it is not forgotten, take one of those instruments, insert it into the affected area with ease and effort, thus as it was done at the beginning.
If the tooth is broken or corroded, you must gather a piece of cloth over that wound and twist it at the end of a fine thread so that it does not come undone during your constriction when holding it in place.
And be sure to perform the scarification carefully around the entire gum line and take care not to break or tear that part, then return to the patient for further treatment if the pain worsens than the initial pain.
And beware that you do not perform what some ignorant barbers do in their hasty and reckless attempts at removal, for they do not administer what we have prescribed; often, they cause great harm to men, whose wounds become more difficult to treat, or they completely remove certain bones from the jaw, as we have witnessed on numerous occasions.
And then proceed with the eradication of it, wash your mouth with wine or vinegar mixed with salt.
And if pus flows from it, and red spots appear, then scrape some amount of it and sprinkle on the affected area, and if that pus does not come out, cauterize.
The shape of the forceps and pliers should be thin and delicate, used to extract teeth at the beginning, with a short handle and a thick base, so that they do not bend when used in those ways.
And they should also be used with thick handles that, when first opened, are not bent, but rather have thin ends.
These are made of Indian steel with right-angled ends, and on the ends of those instruments there are teeth that interlock with each other and open by strong contraction, and sometimes the ends of these instruments have the shape of a bird's beak, which is curved, and they are very stiff.
Chapter .xxxi.
On the eradication of teeth and the extraction of broken bones from the jaw.
When it is necessary to eradicate a tooth that is lodged for some reason, you should place your hand over the area with a border for one or two days until the location is softened; then insert pliers or tongs whose ends are assembled in the shape of a bird's beak, called a ciconia or guanta.
Their ends should be filed or sharpened with a chisel or file.
And if you do not obey these instructions regarding the use of pliers or tongs, then you should dig into the root and remove all the flesh and insert the instrument named here as a small lever with this shape:
And take a thin but long needle, and do not cover it, so that it does not bend.
Therefore, if the incision is forgotten, this one [instrument] is; otherwise, help yourself to these other instruments whose forms are as follows: the form of the first instrument has an extremities triangular in shape with some thickness.
The form of the second instrument is triangular with a very thin extremity.
And now, with this instrument having two inclines, its appropriate form is as follows: and other instruments used for dental extraction; indeed, this instrument resembling a large claw is used and its form is:
with a curved or straight triangular extremity, of some thickness, not covered to prevent it from bending.
And you should know that the tools for drawing teeth are similar in appearance to other instruments.
The skilled and subtle artisans, who understand the art, discover for themselves, according to the meaning of the operation and various ailments, those to which the ancient ones did not give name or pause with their proper instruments, because of their diverse forms.
If it is about the bone of the jaw or other bones in the mouth that are broken, then apply pressure with your hands in their proper place using the instruments and forceps we have mentioned for removing teeth, and aid yourself with the manipulation which this shape requires.
And if there is any hardness, small by small, and it is squeezed or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or come out until the bone is completely healed, then restore the place with suitable medicines for this.
If there is a small hole in the bone, immediately remove the dirt and darkness from that hole and treat it until it is healed.
**Capitol .xxxii.**
On the care of teeth that stand out among others.
When teeth stand out from their natural alignment, especially in women and particularly young, delicate ones, it is necessary to consider: if it is not possible to move or extract the tooth, then extract it; but if it should not be attached to another tooth, cut it off with this instrument that resembles a pig's tusk, made of sharp steel from India.
And your incision should be made over the tooth in several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and it should not affect any other teeth.
And if the prominent tooth is exposed to the point of being damaged, then use this lime made in India in the shape of... (the text cuts off here but the context suggests it refers to the tool used for shaping or removing tooth material).
And all of the iron from India and the margin should be; and it is made of very small points with a lime, whose teeth are gradually filed over several days in ease, so that there is no other tooth like it, which causes pain. Then carefully sew that at the end, and cut it with other razors.
And if it is a tooth from which a fragment has come off and affects the tongue, then you need to file that space where the fragment's roughness is trapped, and smooth it out so that the tongue does not get hurt or the word is not corrupted.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the restoration of lost teeth with gold or silver wire.
When teeth are affected by impact and removal due to percussion or extraction, and the patient cannot bear the pain, having tried various stipulative medications without success, it is then necessary to resort to those that are strengthened with gold wire and not silver, as silver becomes brittle and soon breaks, while gold remains unaltered for an indefinite period of time.
And the wire should be of such subtlety and thickness as to fit between the teeth; the shape of the insertion is that you take the wire and hold it doubled between two healthy teeth, and then curve it in a U-shape between two damaged teeth, or if only one remains, ensure it reaches the healthy tooth on the opposite side. And then repeat the stitching within the opening from which you began, tightening your grip with ease and skill to avoid further damage.
And the tightness with which you hold the wire should be such that it does not escape from between the teeth.
And then cut off the superfluous end of the thread with forceps or scissors, and insert them at any convenient place by movement, and turn them and hide them between the sound tooth and the decayed tooth, so that they do not harm the tongue. And then bind it tightly with a linen bandage.
But if it becomes loose or broken, hold it or those parts tightly with another thread in such a way that it heals completely.
And this is the method of setting teeth and the form of correction for two sound teeth and two decayed teeth, as you tie these together:
And when it is done so that a tooth or two return to their original position in their respective places and have grown again as we have restored them, then they are improved.
And it is only done by skilled and wise artisans.
And sometimes it is appropriate to use the bones of a cow, shaping them like a tooth, and placing them in the area where the tooth is missing, securing them as we have said, and they remain and serve for a long time.
Capital .XXXIV. (Note: This appears to be a section or chapter marker, not a direct translation.)
On the incision of the ligament found in the tongue, which prevents speech.
This ligament, which prevents the tongue from moving, sometimes exists naturally in some individuals, or it can be acquired due to a condition that has already become solidified.
And the operation on it is to open the mouth of the patient, freeing its lower part from the top; raise the tongue, and then carefully incise that nerve ligament according to the extent necessary to free the tongue from its restrictions.
If there is any hardness or tightness in that place, which has been caused by the healing of an illness, then you apply oil and cut it apart along its width until you have severed the ligament and the knot is dissolved.
And be careful not to cause a fissure in the flesh, and cut here behind the tendon, and let blood flow out.
Then wash the clothes used for the incision with hot water or vinegar or friction with water; and place your hand over the tongue to prevent it from moving; it is necessary that the patient keeps the tongue still at night so that it does not solidify again.
If there is a flow of blood, apply pressure over the wound with a clean cloth; if the blood is pus, then cauterize the area with a hot iron, which is suitable for this. And then address the other causes as well so that it may be healed.
It appears that the text you've provided starts with a chapter or section mark (Capitol .xxxv.), which doesn't contain specific content but indicates a part of a larger document. Without additional context or the full text, it's challenging to offer a meaningful translation or interpretation. If you can provide more details or excerpts from the treatise, I'd be happy to assist further.
Extracting the running (or draining) of a ranula, leave the tongue intact.
Sometimes, the tongue becomes gangrened and appears like a small, black, dead piece, preventing its normal function; and if it is greatly enlarged, it is a cause for concern as it fills the mouth.
And the treatment for it is to open the patient's mouth wide, exposing the gangrened tongue and considering the condition.
And if you see that it has a pale or black, hard texture, by which the patient feels no pain, then do not touch that part, for it is brittle.
And if it turns out to be white and moist, you insert your finger into it, cut with a thin spatula, and cut from all sides; and if fresh air enters during the time of your operation, stop its flow by pressing a tight bandage, as soon as possible.
Then return to your work as soon as you have completed it in its entirety, after washing it with wine and salt; and take care of the other remedies for this until it is healed.
**Capitol .xxxvi.** (This appears to be the heading for a specific chapter or section.)
On the extraction of abscesses from two auricles (or possibly two types of abscesses in the throat) and others.
When a swelling occurs in the throat, there are glands that become inflamed and protrude outward, which are called "two auricles." If you encounter this, follow the treatment as mentioned in the previous section, and if it does not heal, consider whether the abscess is hard, dark colored, has little sensation, and do not touch it with a knife.
And if the disease is of a certain nature and the cause is thick, do not touch it with a knife due to the flow of pus; instead, let it remain until it has matured, or you will extract it, or it will break on its own.
And if it is of white color, hard, and the cause is subtle, then that must be incised.
And the operation on it is that you consider, in front of your operation, if the abscess has rested and is completely healed or if it has decreased in size; then cease the malady in front of the sunlight, place the head of the patient low, open the mouth of him, and another servant takes between his teeth the tongue of the patient with a delicate instrument that has this shape.
And it should be made of silver or iron, and it must be subtle with a sharp edge.
Therefore, when you press down on that tongue and show the ulcer to your patient, and look at that peculiar mark, then take tongs and place them in the wound, and pull out as much of the foreign body as possible. Another thing that removes some cause from the tunics, and then you cut with an instrument whose form is as follows:
Another thing that removes some cause from the tunics, and then you cut with an instrument whose form is as follows: and it is assembled like forceps, however the ends of it are curved, so that the point of each one of those is in the right angle of the other, sharp, which is made of iron coated with metal.
If this instrument is not available to you, then cut with a spatula whose form is as follows: It should be sharp on one side, blunt on the other side.
And having cut one wound, cut the other according to this same manner of incision, and then close the incision with clean water.
If blood flow is to be stopped, rinse with a decoction of poppy or myrtle leaves similar to the causes of stricture until the blood flow is restricted and then treat that until it heals.
And in some cases, there are other appendices or those two auricles, and you incise them according to what you have seen and said in the incision of two wounds equally.
And you have already treated a woman with an abscess that was born in the groin of her, an abscess that tended to a dark color, with little sensation, which had already closed the groin of her, and the woman was breathing heavily, and she had forbidden herself food and drinking water, and she was on the verge of death if more time had passed, even one or two days.
And the abscess had already infected so deeply that it had caused two openings, through which pus was flowing.
Therefore, I will listen to him fisturally and remain in one of their chambers, pull it out, and the pain is from a great portion; then I will carefully incise that part where I understand the other wound begins, and I will press the mouth of it, and grasp its tongue, and I will keep the chamber in that position.
And then I will carefully remove a large part of it, and there will be no discharge from it but a little blood. Therefore, it is absolutely necessary for that woman to drink a lot of water and eat food; thus you will not continue to incise those spots very often, but rather move on to another place in succession, which incision should be prolonged.
Therefore, you should heal and cauterize the wound of the patient, thus adding to it; and also walk around and do not clean what God has already done for me from that place.
Chapter .xxxvii.
On the incision of the hernia when it is located.
When the catarrh (accumulation of mucus) is in the hernia, and it is located and long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is at the opening, thick and round, then it is called a bulge.
It is treated as we have said in the division, and do not agree with your treatment, and indeed, there are times when the hernia has already been cauterized and is subtle, then you must incise those that are rounded; and if it is of considerable length, and it bleeds, either a dark or black color, and does not feel warm to touch, then you must be wary of making an incision, for there is fear of aggravating the illness.
And when you see it according to the manner I have said regarding its whiteness and length, you must ease the illness and press the tongue of it with an instrument that shapes its form, and then return it to its place, and make an incision on one of two instruments that are used in making a double cut.
And be careful not to puncture it except with what is suitable for the natural term of its addition, for if you puncture it more, you will damage its function.
Then make the incision, use what we have recommended for the incision of two veins, and treat it until it is healed.
If the patient was frightened by the incision, be daring in the cauterization of it, and the manner of the cautery on it is only sharp water, and this is how you place the head of the patient on the table, and press their tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, and take the water as indicated in the chapter on cauterization, and apply it to the living cause, and do not make it too thick or too thin, and fill the hollow of the instrument whose shape this is:
The end of the instrument with the hollow in which the medicine is placed should be shaped like a spoon, and place the instrument on top of the medicine on the patient's chest, and let them rest their head on their side so that saliva or mucus from their mouth does not fall due to the intrinsic action of the medicine, preventing any damage to their throat.
And then apply your hand to the medicine, and extract it from the throat by pressing for a short time until it is darkened and soothed by the bite of the medicine.
And if you wish, take hold and wrap that around the end of the finger, immerse the cloth in the medicine, insert the finger into a tube above, so that the cloth adheres to the tube, and do this several times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the ulcer, then let it dry so that it falls off after three or four days.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, do so, then with the cauterization, wash away the blood from around the ulcer using a cloth soaked in the medicine, and clean it thoroughly with water, and dress it with poultices until it is healed.
This specific type of treatment is much safer than incision and avoids much fear.
Some times the ulcer is cured by something subtler than cautery and incision, for it is treated by subfumigation in this manner: take calament, hyssop, origan, rue, scened arabic, camomile, broyth and similar herbs, and combine all those causes, or some of them, into one mix, and immerse them in wine and let them bubble; and the wave should be beaten decently with a wooden instrument shaped accordingly; it should be placed over a hole in the middle of the wave, upon which a small piece of silver or bronze is positioned.
And then insert the end into the opening of the patient's condition, so that the vapor rises to the uvula over the soft palate, until the uvula is completely obscured.
Then repeat this process on any remaining moist spots, but be careful not to perform this treatment while the patient has an active apoplexy, as you would only exacerbate the condition; rather, wait for the apoplexy to subside before proceeding, and seek the advice of a skilled surgeon if necessary.
If you do not have this instrument at hand, take a cane and create at its end a seal of wax, so that the mouth of the hernia is sealed, because the wax seal prevents the gas from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter .xxxviii. (Note: "xxxviii" is likely a roman numeral indicating chapter 38)
On the removal of thorns and substances adhering to the eye, and other causes.
You may notice substances adhering to the eye or a thorn in the flesh or any other cause.
So then, you should extract what is apparent from these [substances], focusing your sight on it, and using your tongue as an instrument before the light, so that you may clearly see what is in your mouth.
And for what is hidden from your sight in the stomach, be aware that you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because the strong cause annexed to the stomach will be forgotten through vomiting; or he should swallow a piece of nap or chopped lettuce or a piece of dry bread; or take a piece of dried seaweed lion's tooth, tie it firmly with thread, and make the patient swallow it, for when it reaches the place where there are thorns and it is extracted, it will be forgotten. And you can take an eel and tie it with thread, lay it on the table, and extract it slowly; or take a pig's intestine, open it up, and carefully extract it.
If the aforementioned causes are not forgotten, then use an instrument of lead in this way:
And it should be thin but sharp, and at the end of it, there is a concave part which you will insert into his mouth with ease.
And he raises his head up high and watches the movement of his throat bone, so that he understands what causes him pain or if it's from the bone or the spine, or what cure the doctor applies to his hand.
Yet if that disease infiltrates more deeply, it is better, thanks to the doctor's knowledge of the location of the cause and its attachment, and he drives it down below and applies his hand with the instrument to him, according to the amount prepared for him, until it is completely healed.
**Chapter XXXIX.**
On the extraction of blood from the throat.
When treating phlegm as we have discussed in the division of treatment by medicine and not surgically, consider the throat of the patient at noon under the sun, so that you may remove his tongue from the instrument which we have recommended.
Therefore, if you examine the blood, extract that tiny or subtly moving one.
If it is not possible to extract that one, then take a concave needle and insert it into the patient's wound, and in the concavity of the needle, place a heated iron (as long as the blood has stopped flowing from the wound) and repeat this process several times, and then apply a poultice of water to the wound throughout the day.
Then take a vessel filled with water, apply its mouth to the wound, and wash it; do not spill any of that water and change it every hour when you feel the pain from the cold water.
But if any of what we have recommended is forgotten, then fumigate the wound with herbs or spices using the instruments suitable for this purpose in the treatment of the uvula.
Do this, so it falls in the right place.
And another method of operation through suffocation of that, is that you take a cloth in which carbon is ignited and the cloth is covered with a cover in the middle of which there is an opening, and the end of the instrument is placed in that opening; then move it towards the suffocation; and ask the patient to open their mouth at the end of the tube, and close their mouth so that the suffocation is not escaped until you know that the suffocation has reached the blood flow, because the blood flow will fall.
And if he does not eat, then you repeat the suffocation with motive again, and ask the patient to abstain from drinking, and eat salty and cold foods, and do not drink water, and so it is necessary that at this regime be forgotten.
And this is the form of the instrument used to extract blood from the vein when seen; it resembles tweezers as well, except that it has some curvature. Which is placed in the throat, and its end resembles a swan's beak, which is smooth from lime, for this reason, when we encounter any cause, it does not cease.
Chapter XL.
In which is the sum of the discourse in regard to apostemes and their section.
The apostemes are special spots, with various shapes and sizes, according to the memory of their origin, each one described in this book.
And they are diverse in their piercing and sectioning in two ways: one is for the specific type of apostema itself; and another for understanding the humidity involved.
And the second method is for the places where bodily accidents occur, where a gouty joint may be in the head and another in the foot; or a gouty spot on fleshy tissue may differ from one in a joint; and each has its specific treatment through operation.
And some wounds are such that they do not need to be pierced, but rather the maturation of the wound in those or the completion of their healing.
Other wounds are such that they need to be treated when they intersect, and not allowed to mature according to their nature, also with wounds that are peculiar to joints, for a wound near a joint causes a prolongation of the pain as long as you can feel it in the circuit of the affected area, and often corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that member; or if the wound is near a major member, and you delay its perforation while it matures, it will affect the main member; or it is near the buttocks, so you should not perforate it when it has not matured, but rather one that is peculiar to the buttocks, so that you do not allow the pressure of the wound to extend into the parts within the buttocks, and a fistula is formed, or something similar in its term that is not healed. It is also important to know the right time for perforating the wound, and that is when it has matured.
And you will know that recovery has begun when the pain ceases and fever subsides, and there is a reduction in rigor and pulse, and the redness of the affected area becomes less pronounced, as well as other signs.
And also be aware that you should know how to make an incision in the infected area beneath the abscess, and from where pus is coming, as part of the healing process of the prominence.
The incision should always be made through the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the thighs or feet, and in places of pressure, of the nerves' cords, of the arteries; and, lastly, in any other spots that are not reflected; for in those that are reflected, one should use an incision according to the affected member.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, then it is better to delay making an incision until the digestion of it is confirmed by its completion, as we have said; for if you make an incision there before, it prolongs the course of the disease and increases the pain and hardens the edges of the wound, and deepens it.
Some openings may be made in the skin according to the thickness of the flesh or body part required by necessity, or as needed for the member.
And it is necessary to make small incisions, and in large openings make deep and wide cuts or sections according to the diversity of the size of the openings.
Other types of openings involve the skin being cut and lifted, where a pan or similar tool is used to create an opening in a way that already exists, as if it had occurred naturally, like what happens in cases of abscesses and pustules.
And of those that are cut in sections with three angles; and of those where it is incised like the shape of a myrtle leaf, as with the openings on the knees.
And of their kind where round section and moon-shaped section are administered, resembling those mentioned above.
If that which has no such signs of inflammation, only superficial pain, you should puncture with a thin and shallow needle.
And when the inflammation is thick and has collected much pus, you should puncture it, but do not be concerned about extracting all the pus at once; after withdrawing a portion, wait until the next day and then extract a larger amount, and repeat this process in stages according to its reduction.
Especially if the patient is very young, a woman in labor, a small child, or an old person with weak spirits, because the animal spirit moves quickly at the exit of pus, and often the illness kills them, so you must operate on them.
Beware in this chapter, and be careful with your punctures when you puncture these abscesses; take care to avoid infections, and consider whether the abscess is small or a flat section, then administer the appropriate medicines; and if the abscess is large and the openings from the puncture are many, then apply pressure on each track until they heal together.
And if a portion of the flesh is detached from the tendon or if it is concave in the contour, you should cover it with a thin piece of cloth or thread, just as when you use bandages or razors, to keep it moist; and reinforce it within three days, and then treat and cure it with poultices until it heals.
If a flow of blood occurs during your operation, you should administer clean water and vinegar, mix them in a cloth, and apply that to the area where the bleeding is occurring, pressing it several times.
If the bleeding persists, you should then administer specific remedies and treatments, and apply powders recommended in various parts of this book and its divisions.
If it is winter, and the area of the abscess is in a place with many nerves, you should then immerse the affected parts in hot water and oil, and apply that to the affected areas.
And if it is summer, and the parts are fleshy, then you should apply cool poultices soaked in water and oil or wine and oil, and all of this should be changed every third day, as we have said, and you must loosen the abscess and cleanse it and apply what is suitable for its cure until it heals.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but more according to the method of distinction that I have already said about each type of abscess, in what way it is a path to its cure, chapter by chapter.
Chapter .xl.
On the section of abscesses that occur on the head.
On the head, small abscesses occur, which are of various types with layers that are formed around them; and each type has its own name.
And from them flow drops, and those contain moisture resembling lemon. And those that contain moisture resembling sweat, and similar to them; and those that are stone-like, hard.
And in the extraction of all, and in the removal of those, there is no fear, as the removal of those does not cause any hostile reaction.
And the operation in extracting those is that you expect those to be in the form of an instrument called entromes, as you know it contains them.
For if what it contains is moisture, then you cut those off according to their length by sectioning the surface in this form:
And it begins in the section from B to G. After the moisture is evacuated, you remove that which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause for it to return, as all visible causes are removed.
And then immerse the affected area in hot Egyptian (or any) oil, if present, or in water and salt; fill that place with that remedy and leave it for another day, as this corrodes everything that is broken off from that skin.
And then repeat the application of that remedy with hot Egyptian oil according to need, as long as you are confident that there is no further cause for that skin condition; when the wound is healed, cure it with the ointment.
And if there is an abscess with grainy nodes, then you insert into it according to this form: Take a sharp knife shaped like a cross, and insert it between the two lips of the wound, cutting through from one side to the other, and use your strength to extract the tunic that contains it.
If your bowels cause you discomfort, do as I have told you first.
And for the abscess that is softened by section and cure, as I have told you, cut into the abscess that is softened is less severe, as it contains little pus and little humidity.
Sometimes these abscesses are so hard in some people, especially older women, that they appear as a solid, hard, white lump, which cannot be squeezed, and if anyone were to strike it, they would be hurt.
But for other abscesses that occur on the head, different from these, especially those that appear on children's heads and require the removal of hair follicles, the section should be only superficial.
And stop the perforation of those from the lowest part of their bodies to prevent the matter of the wound from spreading to the lower parts.
Then apply remedies as appropriate for that of the cure.
Chapter .xlii.
On the section of scrofula that occurs in the collar.
These abscesses often appear in the collar, armpits, and angles; sometimes they occur in other parts of the body as well.
And those that occur in the collar, these are often generated among them, and all scrofula from those comes from their own tunic, and likewise with the knots and abscesses of the head, as we have remedied.
And the treatment for these scrofulous conditions involves poultices, as some are stone-like and contain moisture, and others are malignant and resistant to cure.
Therefore, if you perceive a good disposition in the touch, of which the color is characteristic of a bruise, and it is painful at all times, not attached to any nerve, vein, or tendon, and not swollen, you must incise it along the surface from where it is located on the body, away from the joint, within the lines .G. and .B., and remove it entirely, extending the lips of the bruise as much or as little as necessary, just as we have said about the bumps on the head, and extract that small part by small part.
And it requires more caution that the vein or nerve not be incised.
And the knife should not be too sharp, nor should it fit your hand tightly for incision, or inquiet the patient, and you must not inscribe what is not necessary to inscribe; for if you were to cut a vein or tendon, you would forbid the operation, then the ulcer would fester with vitriol or other powders that prevent pus from draining, and leave that place until the acuteness of the bump subsides and the ulcer becomes mollified, and begins to heal. When the wound is incised.
Therefore, return to your operation until the aid is completed.
And then examine the aforementioned small ulcers, inquiring if there are any signs of infection from other causes; should you find any, incise and clean them.
And if it is in the region of a large vein, you must be careful not to incise that ulcer in its region. First, be sure that the twisted piece of cloth is tightly folded and then carefully remove it without disturbing its fall.
Then fill the wound with warm oil that you have already prepared using Egyptian ingredients and tend to it.
And if you completely incise that swelling, you will see that you must bring together the two edges of the wound and soon there will be no excess fluid.
If you notice that there is excessive fluid due to the size of the swelling, then understand that you must incise the base of it, drain it, and afterward, apply a bandage and what is said.
And for the scrofulas that contain humidity, pierce them with a superficial piercing at the place where you see the maturation of it, and stop the piercing of what is the base of the pus in the body, as we have said.
And then administer the piercing, you should find oil and similar things, so that it corrodes what is broken down by corruption. And when you see that the wound has already been cleansed, then you should treat it with a healing oil generated from within so that it is healed.
Capital .xxxiii.
On the section of the skin around the abscess, make an incision.
The ancients used to make this incision in the abscess, and I have not seen any person in our land who has ever done such a thing.
And this is the inscription of the speech of those people.
One must be careful in patients who have stiffness, that the extraction of the abscess be avoided, because by doing so suddenly, all the veins and major parts of the disease may be affected here.
In those who have abscesses in the mouth or throat or both ears, when the disease is not in the bones, one must be careful to avoid the incision of the abscess to prevent the loss which is caused by perforation.
Therefore, when we wish to treat this, incise the epilhot (toes) along three or four small sections of the epilhot circles, according to their arrangement, cutting through the bone, not the cartilage; this part is suitable for incision as it is devoid of flesh and its blood vessels are visible.
And if the doctor is cautious, he should extend the knife blade gently, and then cut the cord along its length until it reaches the canal, while avoiding blood vessels whenever possible for any reason.
And then, we incise the skin according to our recommendation; and it is meant with regard to cutting into the canal for the inflammation that is due to this very thing that is disrupting the flesh and by the removal of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Therefore, when the time is passed for the piercing, add two layers of cloth from the wound dressing, and with that one alone, make the incision on the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that promote the healing of the flesh until it is healed.
And we have extracted from Albucasis' work that the essence of this discourse, which we have summarized, is to observe that some of these ailments have already devoured the patient's flesh, and the illness has penetrated into the body, and others cut the epiglottis so that the sick breathes over the wound site for some respiration and is saved from death.
And for this, I will order the wound to remain open until the evil of the illness is consumed; and the evil of it is for three days; and therefore, you will command thus with the wound, and cure it until it is healed.
And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant holds a knife and slices it into the throat of the patient, opening a gap in one of the ribs, and I was called to treat him, and I approached the wound thus as if it were the cry of the dying, and uncovered the plague and traced the scar which had come from the plague.
Therefore, you confessed that she had not sliced any veins or guided the air from the plague, and the wound was healing on its own, which is how fire heals a wound.
And do not harm the servant unless it is necessary in your voice, and after some days, return to the improvement of their conditions.
And now I say that in the removal of the epiglottis, there is no fear.
Chapter XLIV.
Regarding the section about a cut made over an abscess that occurs outside the abdominal cavity, it is called a hernia of the abdomen.
This abscess, called a hernia of the abdomen, is a large abscess according to the body's color and it occurs more often in women.
And it is according to two manners, either it is natural or accidental.
And in the natural, it is not engendered to cure.
And the accidental is according to two manners: one is similar to fatty lumps, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that is caused by the compression of an artery, and in that case, there is fear. And one should not make a diagnosis with certainty except for the patient who seeks help. And you should examine it and investigate it with your hand, if it feels like thick knots, not suspended from any veins, then incise it thusly with the nodes, and extract what it contains from the flesh and bursas; otherwise, scrutinize its whole being and treat the place accordingly so that it is healed.
Chapter .xlv.
On the section regarding the types of knots.
There are various types of knots, and I have already described all their species in the previous division.
And it is important that you distinguish the difference between a knot and an excursion, with doubt.
Therefore, you say that an excursion is heat and fever and severe pain until the ebullition of excess is calmed, and it is complete putrefaction when heat, fever, and pain cease.
There is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it counts as a lion's roar that lies in the gut properly.
And according to the color of the body, its commencement is like a cease and it is done thus with vacuum, both greater or lesser, and they are according to two kinds, either fat or containing moisture, and the colors of the moisture are spots, as you have said in the division.
Therefore, when you reach the cure for neither [illness], you must expel that and inquire about the commencement of the storm which is called the intrusion, according to how it will take its form in the chapter most appropriate to this.
This is the manner of inquiry for abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this storm and insert that into the place most humid which you find in the abscess, and you will turn your threads around those spots little by little until you know that the storm has penetrated the flesh.
And then close your hand according to the size of the wound, remove the entrails and consider what has remained in the tracks of it.
If the current humidity is neglected, regardless of its color, then you insert a knife into the superficial section as I have said in the other wounds.
And if there is no humidity in the tracks of the entrails, then you know it is fat.
And dry it with a knife having the shape of a cross according to this form: Thus taught, lift it up with the knife, cut away the skin from all sides easily, and extract the stone from that place, if you can, over which and take out that health from the node.
If it is torn during the operation, it is not possible to extract that health, and you should look closely at it, and then extract it slowly until nothing tears from it.
If it does not tear from any cause, either little or too much, the hernia should return according to the best method.
And if you see that the hernia tears from any small part, then complete the problem with some sharp corrosive powders and strengthen the problem, and place a bandage over the one that will become infected, and treat the other with the same care until it is healed.
And if it is not large, then you will cut both lips of the hernia and treat that with this medicine.
If a pulsating vein is against it, or not pulsating, then you will cut and apply the place of a trig (possibly a bandage) that is wet with vitriol and let that strain for two days or three until the problem subsides and the swelling of the sanc (possibly an abscess) ceases; and then return to incise what is broken from the node.
Chapter .xlvi.
On the forms of tools necessary for incision and puncture.
Of these are the forms of the instruments, and there are three kinds, one of which is larger, and another is middle-sized, and the other is small.
The form of the large instrument is this:
The form of the small instrument is this:
They are made of iron, aluminum, and with great precision in the shape of tools, so that they fit into the incisions.
And these are the methods of experienced ones, and they are named accordingly, and one of them is called 'berid'.
And it is of three parts: one part is great, another is middle, and the third is small.
The form of the experienced one, great:
The form of the experienced one, middle:
The form of the experienced one, small:
It is expedient for those with appositions, ruptures, fistulas, and hernias, so that between them are bones and other causes.
And thus are made round, thick, leathery ones, also with great needles sewn to them, using iron or bronze or silver wire, and the best are when they are made of citrus bark.
And the experience of black plums is made, which remember that by these openings are made in the cavity of whose reflections will be reflected to their lightness on those reflections.
And they are of three kinds, some being long, and others medium-length, and others short, according to the extent of the fistula and the tightness of it.
Form of the experienced great plum:
Form of the experienced medium plum:
Form of the experienced small plum:
The shapes of the knots are like spices, some being simple, with only a curvature, and they are of three kinds: large, few, and medium-sized.
And of their bodies' humors, there are three kinds.
And of these, there are two types with two curves, each of three species.
And they have three curves each, of three species.
All of these are necessary in their place.
Shape of a simple shallow incision, shape of it:
The large half-moon has two curves: The half-moon shape has two curves: The small half-moon has two curves:
The large half-moon has three curves:
The half-moon shape has three curves:
And these are the forms of scalpels that are sharpened and cut through nodules and abscesses, and there are three kinds: one is large, another middle-sized, and a third small.
Large scalpel form:
Middle-sized scalpel form:
Small scalpel form:
The ends of these have sharp sections for making incisions, while the other ends are not sharp and are designed to be used in a way that prevents damage to veins or nerves during the excision of nodules, and for these reasons, they promote healing of the disease and restore tranquility, as well as the necessary adjustment found during the excorciation of abscesses.
And these are the forms of weapons, and there are three kinds: great, medium, and small, as you will see.
They are made of iron and look like a beam on which alcohol is also poured.
And at the end of one side is a hidden blade, which cuts inward and outward, as you wish, so too.
The forms of the instruments, which are hidden among these parts for the piercing of the openings and do not harm the patient, are of three kinds: great, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of windpipes through which the flow of air is obstructed, and they are of three kinds; great, middle, and small; the forms of it:
They are made of citrus skin, either round or elongated, and they are thin.
And it is necessary that these species of windpipes be great, middle, and small, so that they obstruct the flow of air at the required speed, and are used when primary treatment is not sufficient for the illness.
I do not recommend using those to obstruct the flow of air everywhere in the body, but only in fleshy parts, such as the scales on the legs and thighs, and the scales on the arms, and the nipples, and the stomach, and the groin, similar to the fleshy scales of a fish.
And some times these instruments are made of small, sharp-like blades according to this form; by which the ganglion is cut off when it is done by phlebotomy, or incision of a vein or artery.
And some times these incisions are made round according to this form:
Chapter XLVII.
On the care of the mammary glands of men which are assembled from women.
Some times the mammary glands of certain men are swollen due to the change in sleeping position and begin to be covered with hair; then the mammary glands become inflamed, and they are assembled (from women), and hang down, separated.
And for those who wish to do this, they should incise those parts of the moon according to this form, from the line B to the line G, and then remove all the roughness, and fill the wound with incarnate medicine, and adjust both lips of the wound with stitching, and heal whatever is inside so that it becomes healthy.
If the mammary gland recedes into the tissues and is softened by its magnitude, as it should be in women, then it should be cut in two parts, each with a pus-filled cavity resembling a moon, of which one holds the other, end to end, until the main line contains the smaller according to this form of the B. and G. lines, and then excise the cord that is between the two lips of the ulcer, stop the discharge, and administer what we have said about sutures and powders, as necessary for healing, until it is cured.
And if you do not perform the incision that needs to be made due to the restlessness of the illness and the flow of pus, then you should fill the ulcer with hot vinegar and leave it until it corrodes what is broken from the rust, and then treat it until it heals.
Chapter .xlviii.
From the piercing of abscesses that come from beneath the skin.
These abscesses that come from beneath the skin are due to the species of scrofula, hard, which contain a puss that needs to be drained.
And for those (abscesses) that contain humidity, they must be incised at the lunar section according to this figure: from the line marked G to the line marked B. And once all the contents of the abscess are evacuated, you should close it with a bandage and check it again the next day.
And keep the bandage remaining and treating it with a suitable ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess of the nodal species is, and of scrofula, you should incise it as we have said about scrofula generally.
If the plague has spread so that it causes gangrene, then apply cauterization to it as we have previously mentioned.
**Capitol .xlix.** (Capitol forty-nine)
On the sectioning of abscesses that occur due to arrows or veins.
When an arrow is broken and the wound is healed, which is above that, then pus is seen, and the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are caused by an artery or vein: for when the abscess is due to an arrow, a long accumulation occurs in the depth of the body; and when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel a hissing in it.
And that which is due to a vein returns to the surface of the body.
And cutting into this abscess is erroneous, especially in those left with open wounds, and in angles, and in the collarbone, and in most parts of the body; it is very large, so great care must be taken that its treatment avoids iron, and that which is in the extremities, or at the head, must be avoided.
Place a poultice on the affected area due to inflammation of the archer's wound, cut the long cloth into a narrow section and apply it over the wound; then cut the section with scissors and uncover the wound, removing the clothes around it.
Then take the needle and make it penetrate between the two layers, opening the wound with a double thread at two points, which causes the patient to urinate excessively due to the two hernias located in the temples.
Then apply the pressure to the area between the two ligaments with a spatula until the pain disappears completely, and dissolve the abscess.
Then administer treatment to the area where pus has formed until the ligaments fall off, and care for it with suitable poultices until it heals.
If the abscess is due to vein section, then you must place your hand over it as close as possible to the abscess at the back, and insert the needle into the area where you have placed your hand, making it penetrate; then make a double thread in it until you extract the other side, and bind the abscess with a suitable ligament according to what I have told you about the grape-like ligament from both sides of the thread.
If you fear that the thread might tear, insert the needle into the flesh at a different angle, keeping the entire aperture of the first incision, and tighten your threads in four places.
Next, dry the aperture in the middle part of it, while it is still fresh, then make an incision in the superfluous part of the cord, and leave what is attached to it.
And then place a poultice on it that you have soaked in wine and oil, and apply the treatment that is necessary until it heals.
Chapter on the healing of an aperture that occurs due to nerve twisting.
Thus, when an aperture occurs in the rear and in the veins, and it seems that an aperture occurs in the nerves when they are struck or suffer excessive work, or similarly.
And it is applied to the places of the auxiliaries or the foot, or in any place where the joints are affected.
It is a severe apoplexy, resembling the color of another body, and it appears in their most vital parts; when it is tightened by violence, the patient feels a stupor from the malady.
And it is not an apoplexy of the body's front or back, and therefore the patient is left with a lock, and it affects the whole body and does not go to the parts in front or behind.
Therefore, regarding those who have it in the joints, it does not cover that it is invaded by iron, because their bodies will strongly resist contraction.
One should apply that which is on the head or forehead with a spatula. If it is a small abscess, then cut it open with scissors and sever that part from its root.
And if it is large, then suspend it with weights, cut it out, and close it; and secure the wound with stitches, and treat it until it heals.
Chapter.
On the section of the abscess that occurs due to the inflammation in the abdomen.
Indeed, some people observe swellings in the abdomens of these individuals and in other parts of their bodies, which are called fungal because they resemble mushrooms; their root is subtle, while the head of that swelling is large. And the edges of these are convoluted, and it is from these that a great deal of excretion is produced.
And you have already seen one, and in its belly were two parts that functioned similarly, and there was no difference between those whites, of small size.
And the lips of those [parts] were everted and cracked, and moisture flowed from them constantly.
Therefore, you should cut them open and compress the one in the foot with a weight of 18 ounces, and the other with 6 ounces.
And the operation in the incision of them is that you consider when the malady is humid, and the color of the swelling is white, moist, of fine size; then cut them with a broad knife, and bring the cautery near to them over the fire, for you must drive out the humors from their section quickly; and if blood comes out, cauterize that.
And if the patient is very fearful and anxious, be cautious with incisions and needles; then take a fresh piece of lead, tighten that thread, in the manner we have said, and leave it for two days.
Then adjust the tension on the lead thread; therefore, do not cease to tighten the large lead after it has been incised and falls off by itself through its work.
If the part is of thick consistency, fear and anxiety have no cause in its incision, especially in that which is in the belly.
It is possible that you incise the hernia and then cauterize it to prevent its return.
And then take care that it is healed until the disease is cured.
And be careful not to presume to cut that which is of dark color, with little feeling, and moves slowly, for that is absolutely cancerous.
And now I come to recall certain things regarding this illness.
Chapter II.
On the treatment of hernia (or "eminence" of the umbilical).
The hernia (or eminence) of the umbilicus is caused by various reasons: either through gaps in the abdominal wall above the belly, or because of a bulge or protrusion of the intestine or hernia, as it should be in other ruptures; or due to swelling from veins or arteries, as mentioned before, or because of excessive gas confined within.
If it is indeed due to a gap in the abdominal wall and the protrusion of the intestine or hernia, then the color of the swelling is similar to that of the body; and it causes severe pain, and appears in various positions. And if it is for the evacuation of the intestine, you must observe the situation of that mass as we have described it, with greater variety, and when you press it, saying that it is hidden, then return; it is very sticky to its own place, and it requires much force for the introduction of water and vigorous work.
If it is due to humidity, you will feel a hard mass that is not hidden when you press with your hand, nor is it constrained or ruptured.
And if it is due to infection, then these symptoms will appear as an abscess turning black and declining in color.
If it is not due to flesh, then the abscess is hard, thick and durable, and it festers according to a certain amount.
If it is due to windiness, then the touch of that mass will be hard.
And the operation on it is that you consider when the prominence of the navel is due to a hernia, or a vein, or from gas; then you must be prohibited from treating it, for there is fear and dread as it is taught in the chapter where I have spoken about hernias from arteriovenous insufficiency.
If the prominence of the navel is due to an intestine or hernia, then you must order the patient to take a supine position and be stretched; then make a cut around the entire navel, and command him to lie with his back between your hands over his loins, and then stretch the edge of the incision with a broad spatula around the navel; extend the extent of the hernia above and below its origin using a forceps or ribbon, and tie it firmly in an appropriate manner.
Then you should open the middle of the hernia that is extended over the ligament and insert your finger into that indicated place to explore the intestine; and if it is constricted or held by the ligament, you must extract it gently and push the intestine back inside the abdomen.
And if you have found the fabric obstructing, then take some ointment and cut away its excess.
If it is contrary to your skill or vein, then circumscribe that area and return to your operation; take two needles and insert them into those two strong threads, and through the loop you have made around the apogee in a crosswise manner, with the needles, which you make penetrate; then tighten the apogee in four parts over the needles.
And if you prefer, leave the needles and allow the flesh to stretch and fall on its own; or cut when it has thinned and can be removed, and then treat that area with something that covers and heals the wound.
And if the bulge of the navel is soft or due to moisture, then cover as you have done with the apogee, thus removing the pain or moisture that you find there, and treat it with something that covers and strengthens the area.
Chapter .liii.
On the treatment of fractures.
We have discussed, in division, the specific types of fractures and the manner in which they should be treated with medicine, and that it is harmful in them to use a bone for treatment lest it cause an ulcer; we have also spoken of fractures arising from the greatest care in their treatment.
And the ancients said that sometimes fractures are in places where it is possible to completely eliminate them, as with the bone that is in the breasts or in the thigh and similar parts of the limbs, especially when they have just begun.
But when it is old and severe, it does not respond to its own remedies, for you will neither heal from that nor have seen anything similar, nor has anyone else achieved success in that.
And the operation on him is as we have said, you must proceed and leave the patient and purge them of black choler several times, and then drain that, if a manifest repletion is found.
Then prepare the patient for the preparation in which the operation will take place, and make incisions on the skin that cover it; and carefully remove from all parts with a good knife to avoid any cause of harm to the patient's rationality. And let the blood flow, do not abruptly stop it, press the spots, and wash the thick blood with your hand or an instrument that you have at hand from among the available instruments.
If it seems contrary to you to make a thick blood clot incision of a vein or artery, cauterize it until the flow of blood is stopped, and then care for it with the other remedies as long as it is healed.
Chapter .liv.
On the cure of hydrops.
We have already discussed, in the previous section, the types of hydrops in water and the signs of each type, as well as their cure with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is only the species of altitis alone, and it is not approached with iron to the species of tympanitres or the species of yposarcha, for that is mortal.
And when you have already treated this species of hydrops tympanitre with medicines and do not agree with your treatment, consider this, for if the illness has been weakened in the patient or it is another malady, other than that hydrops, also like those in the lungs or abdomen and similar to these, then beware that you do not treat them with iron, for there is fear over that.
If you perceive the hernia to be of a luxuriant nature, and it is nothing but an accumulation of water only, not accompanied by any inflammation or pain, then the manner of operating on it is that you should lift up the hernia between your hands, apply pressure with your hand to its abdomen, drain the water from the opening left by the foreskin, and remove the spiky gas as follows:
it should be from two sharp parts of long, with a pointed end just as with gas; however, make it of suitable length to avoid entering the cavity during operation, and hold it there.
And consider whether the generation of hydrops is from the cavities, for you will see that by sectioning near the navel, three openings are left on either side, directly over the foreskin.
If the generation of hydrops is due to a disease of the intestine, then make your section left of the navel for three openings.
And if the generation of the hernia is through the wall, then your section should be on the right side.
And be sure that your section is on the side where the disease wants to be, so that excess fluids do not flow to that place and cause inflammation.
Then pierce with the instrument through the entire ring, and insert your hand into that section, raising it with the spatula between the ring and the anus, and extract it; if it is of the size of a finger or smaller.
And then pierce the anus until the spatula reaches the desired location, which is where the water is. Then extract that, and insert an instrument of this shape: It resembles a thin silver tube; it is made of silver or brass or iron, and in its initial part there is a small opening, and on its sides are three openings: two from one side and one from the other; and its end is cut according to the shape of a pen, thus:
And at the end of it, there is an armillar, for when the instrument reaches the water, it immediately moves over the instrument, thus evacuating a considerable amount of water at once; for if you evacuate less than necessary in one go, the patient's life can be seriously compromised due to the resolution of their animal spirit or they could suffer a heart attack, which is akin to death.
You should evacuate according to the quantity that is appropriate based on the patient's condition, the strength of their spirit, and your interpretation of their symptoms from their pulse and the quality of their blood.
And after removing the instrument, retain the water that is caused, as it is often held back by the string which holds the opening over the patient's chest; and I recommend to you that you perforate that according to that manner.
And then repeat the procedure on another day if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small amount of water from them several times a day for a few days, and be careful to avoid errors so as not to drain too much water.
If you are concerned about the illness and drain a large amount of water, then treat it with burial in sand, immerse in bathwater, and expose to the sun for a long time; and apply drying medicines as needed until it is healed.
And perform cautery on the stomach, and the bowels, and closely monitor water extraction as described in the preceding sections.
**Chapter XXV.**
On the treatment of children whose birth places are not perforated for urination.
Some times, a child is born from its mother's abdomen and the top of its mixture (amniotic sac) is not pierced (or it is too tight or not in the right place).
Therefore, one should perforate the amniotic sac as soon as possible after birth with a gentle and subtle motion in this manner:
And then, in the opening of the amniotic sac, insert a subtle lead claw and tie it off, and do this for three days or four.
And as for urination, allow them to relieve themselves however they can; then return (the baby) to its mother.
If you do not remove the lead (or stop the bleeding), it is possible that the urine, which has soaked into this area, will not allow this closure.
If that whose root is narrow is to be treated with lead, as we have said, for too many days before it is relieved.
For those in whom the root is not in its place, it should be treated as follows, which is the cause of these people; when a person is born with a urinary tract obstruction, they cannot urinate inside, until the bloating in the bladder is raised up by manual pressure from above; and it is not due to generation, so that the sperm cannot reach the mother correctly, and it becomes a malefic disease.
The manner of the operation on him is that the disease is turned towards his back, and then extend the head of the bladder with your left hand by vigorous extraction, and insert the tip of the blade at the opening of the urethra, as if it were a cut with a pen, or any other instrument, so that the middle part of him comes out, resembling the head of the bladder, and the root falls into its proper place.
And be careful in your operation to free the flow of blood, for accidents may occur; stop them with something that severs the flow of blood and treat the wound until it is healed.
Chapter LVI.
Of an albaster (or white, delicate substance) that occurs in the prepuce at the head of the penis due to corruption, blackness, and adhesiveness of the prepuce at the head of the penis.
Various accidents occur to this albaster on the penis, and its prominence exposes the flesh.
And some are malicious, while others are not.
Not malicious, take care to suspend it gently and cut away the part that remains; then place a bandage with Egyptian ointment over that section, and apply the ointment thoroughly until it heals.
And if the wound is infected, of a dark color, then you must administer cauterization near the incision and its treatment.
If the wound is on the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis, and one side of the foreskin is inside and the other side is outside, then you must hold the wound that is inside at the beginning until it heals; and simultaneously treat the wound that is outside, because when you cure that one, there is no guarantee that the other side will not be affected.
And also, there are accidents in the genitals and foreskin that turn black and swollen, so you must remove everything that has already turned dark or is about to spoil or has spoiled; then apply a line of medicine on it made with flour from ground millet mixed with crushed peppers and cloves.
And also, treat that with the other remedies until it is healed.
If there should be a flow of blood, then administer monthly cautery according to this form:
The cautery that is most beneficial has two purposes, namely to stop the flow of blood and to treat the plague when it is corrupt.
And if the head of the foreskin is corrupted and completely destroyed in the process, then insert a platinum tube into the interior of the foreskin so that the malady urinates through it.
In the adherence of the foreskin to the head (and this adherence only occurs in the one where the foreskin is its own, and no circumcision is required; and when adherence occurs due to a wound or abscess), then carefully remove with an obtuse spatula until the adhesion is dissolved and the head of the foreskin is completely freed.
And if it is difficult to separate them delicately, then remove with a spatula some of the matter from the head of the foreskin and the prepuce itself, and this is because when the prepuce is thin, it is easily perforated by its own delicate nature.
And then carefully separate the prepuce from the head of the penis with a delicate knife, which has already been soaked in warm water to prevent sticking again.
Then, it is necessary to carefully cure it with a styptic agent until it is consolidated.
Chapter VII.
On the purification of infants and the cure for what happens to those of circumcision.
Circumcision is not a solution for continence compared to other ailments; however, when it concerns our actions and our will, and it is done on infants, it is necessary that we assign to this better operation and method the lightest possible losses for health.
Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not practice circumcision in any of their free regions, because they did not include it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired by experience the cause for which I have compelled the majority of artisans and barbers to use circumcision and purification with a new knife and with cautery; and they use lint with thread and incision with the fingernail.
And you have already tried all these methods and do not find better relief than with scissors, ointment, or thread that in circumcision when the foreskin is cut off, two tunics are removed, and the tonica remains below, and often it must be cut again, causing certain pain. And the circumcision that is performed by cauterization, which is digital, and is used by barbers, does not ensure the incision of the end of the male member, because it cuts deeply into the wound.
However, in the operation with cautery, sharp instruments must be used carefully to avoid damaging your operation. And the foreskin of a child is naturally short, and in many cases, it does not require circumcision, and I have seen such cases myself.
On the preparation that is done with scissors and thread, I have discovered through experience its great usefulness, for the scissors are of a proportional incision, by which the sharpness above is equal to the sharpness below; and thus when you apply your hand, the two sharp points are in proportion and cut according to a comparison at one time; and the thread is compressed in the form containing the knot of the whip from all sides, to which no error can be made.
And the first manner of operation is that you must keep the child mostly still if it is one of those who understand a little, do not do anything but tie the thread to its hernia only, and let it be until the next day.
And then do everything possible to make that child happy in the way it understands, receiving its intelligence. And then make sure to be among the most prepared witnesses, and do not let anyone know; hide the scissors in your hand or place a cloth over the child's feet so that it does not see those or any other of the tools.
And then insert your hand into the patient's anus and blow into the rectum, pulling it until the tip of the instrument reaches the end, and clean that which has been added to it by filth.
The shape of the forceps for cleaning, this is the form:
The extremities are not all of the same length, and some are shorter than others; the axis of the toe should not be left aside, and both its length and sharpness should match those of two handgrips.
But the correction of this corruption lies in escaping the strong reaction against the intrinsic code entirely, or part of it, which must be incised.
Therefore, it is necessary to extend the one from your side towards your finger, in front of the position of the place, and inscribe it according to this equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with a pincet and inscribe that one.
If it has passed three days, and they see that the inflammation remaining at the affected spot is due to the trapped heat, then leave it until the heat is discharged, gently extract it, and inscribe according to what you have prepared.
And observe the head of the hernia, as it will not be accessible to you.
And therefore treat that part which the plague solidifies with powders, which we have described in the treatise on powders.
And if it is incised from the spine in measure, and you adhere to the partitions of its parts, it will not be noticed by him.
And apply treatment to that part which we have said should be healed.
Chapter LVIII.
On the treatment of urine retention in the bladder.
Urine retention in the bladder is caused by swelling due to stone or infection, or obstruction or inflammation, and resembles those described in the methods of treatment in the division.
And if the above-mentioned methods do not dissolve it, then you should address the cause of the disease, which is done by extracting it using an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and have a thin, curved shape, like a reed with a narrow point at the end, similar to a palm and a half.
And the manner of urination through that is to take the urethra folded and tied at the end of a thread or string for proper tightening; and insert the extremities of the urethra into the opening between the prepuce, and cut with scissors if any superfluous cause from the string, but more insert it into the catheter with force. And then you enlarge the prepuce with the edge and with the albumen of urine.
And make incisions on the malignant growth over the skin, and open the bladder of the patient and the ulcer with oils mixed, olive oil and water.
Then insert the catheter with ease so it reaches the root of the ulcer; and fold the ulcer towards the opening of the meatus; and push the catheter from that side; and push it until it reaches the bladder, and that centring the malignancy being reached to its cause void, and is not done according to this order, but the meat in which it goes astray.
And then slowly extend the urethra along the thread, as the urine dries the thread.
Then extract that one for the treatment of urine, use a catheter, do not cease to do so until the bladder is emptied and the patient's condition improves.
**Chapter LIX.**
On the quality of bladder cleansing with stone and similar instruments that are suited to this purpose.
When bladder ulcers or abscesses occur in it, or there is a hardened discharge from the urethra, and you wish to drain water and medications into it, use an instrument called a clampstone, and this is how it should be done:
if at the extremity of it there is a dullness, it is closed tightly. And there are three parts to it: two from one side, thus as often.
In the beginning, there is a void, where something pushes out, and in accordance with its amount, it piles up, until when some cause throws it away from the humors, it is thrown out, and when it is expelled completely, it acts like a clamp that holds naphtha in sea battles.
Therefore, if you want to prevent humors in the bladder, insert the end of the clamp into the humor and throw it away from its opening, for the humor is thrown out into the cavity of the clamp.
And then insert the end of the clamp into the urethra as we have mentioned in the operation; and push the humor towards what you are pushing, for that humor soon reaches the bladder, and the illness arises from it.
The shape of the delicate crystal through which the bladder is cristalized, and that shape is as follows:
Whether it is made of silver or steel, it should be so fine as to resemble a small feather, and left within the wound as an implant.
Then take a bladder of motion, and place it in the humidity that you wish to crystalize within the bladder, and then tighten it between two strong ligatures with double thread, and heat that humidity over the fire.
And then insert the tip of the crystalizer into the blister.
Then place your hand over the bladder with the humidity and stretch it gently until the patient feels that the humidity has fully entered the bladder.
If you do not have a bladder at hand, take a piece of cloth and make a circle from it; then perforate that circle throughout its roundness; and insert the thread firmly into those openings, turning them around; and add the cloth thus enriched with moisture, oils, and water to whatever you wish to preserve.
And then you insert that in the instrument and make it as you have made the bladder, expressing with your hand so that the moisture goes into the bladder.
**Capitol LXX (70)**
**On the Extraction of Stones**
We have already discussed the classification of kidney stones and their treatment with medicines, as well as the distinction between stones formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, and the signs of each type.
And we have spoken of stones that require surgical intervention by the hand, or incision.
And the stone formed in the bladder specifically is the one that remains in the bladder.
And they are narrating that same clear exposition and concise summary.
Therefore, it says that the pain generated in the bladder is often felt by children; and among its signs, the urine expelled from the bladder resembles water in its clarity, appearing in that sand; and the illness rubs its thorn, causing frequent pains, and when properly treated, it heals completely.
And the healing of children from that condition is easier for those who have reached 13 years old; and it is a difficult cure for the elderly. In the young, it is milder due to what exists between them.
And of him whose pain is greater and healing is more difficult; and if it is slight, it is contrary to that one.
Therefore, to achieve the cure for this condition, we must begin by cleansing the malady with a christening that extracts the entire fissure present in their intestines; for that fissure sometimes prevents the entry of urine due to its investigation.
Then take hold of the hernia near the patient's feet and press it gently to encourage the urine to flow into the bladder or, if necessary, to aid its expulsion from its position.
Then apply that device between his legs, which is prepared, and the limbs of the patient are left free, so that the bladder is completely drained by tilting it towards the parts below.
Then extract it entirely, along with all its parts.
If you feel the urine in the space, then quickly place a section over it.
And if you do not catch hold of the whole thing, then cover it with oil from the specific finger of your left hand, whether the illness is in a child or that small seed if it's a young person, and insert it into their anus. And when the stone enters, make sure that finger remains inside. And gradually convert that pressure into small increments within the bladder's neck.
Then apply pressure with that specific finger, and expel it outside through the passage of the area you cut.
And command the assistant to press the bladder with their hand; and command another assistant to extend the legs with their right hand above the opening, and with their other hand to hold the tail of the organ left exposed at the site of the incision.
And then insert a sponge into the incident from which this is the shape of it: It then splits into what is between the buttocks and the genitals, not in the middle place, before moving to the side of the left thigh; and the incision is made above that bone, and it is said to be in the buttock, and a transverse cut is made, so that the outer cut is wide and inner narrow according to the amount that the stone can be extracted from the buttock, not excessively, for strong understanding the saying that the stone in the buttock requires the cut to be made, and it is overlooked its weakness.
And know that there is a stone with angles and edges, so the excretion of it becomes difficult because of this.
And from that, it is like a grain, round, and made of the lighter excretion.
Therefore, if it is one that has edges and corners, fit it into the gap.
And if it is not thus easily accessible, cover your hands over it, or tighten it with a gesture appropriate to the task, the extremity of which is as sharp as a stone chisel with which you tighten it on the stone, and do not slip from it; or insert between them a delicate instrument with a curved extremity.
If you cannot do that, then amplify the opening a little, and if you see blood flow, cut it with strength using vitriolic water.
But if the stone is more than one, at the beginning, push your hand into the opening of the bladder and cut it; then push a little water in; and seemingly, they will break into two.
And if the pain is very intense, ignorance is that you insert this great section, as it causes the illness one of two things: either it stops (the pain) or it leads to the distillation of continuous urine, for which the location is not entirely consolidated.
If it is necessary to expel what is inside that is foreign, or to repair a fracture using pliers to extract that which is in the wound.
After you have completed your operation, fill the wound with aloe and dragon's blood, and tighten it. And place over that cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rose oil and water, to ensure that the heat is gently released.
Then return the patient to their bed, and do not remove the bandage for three days.
And as that is loosened, moisten the area with water and oil, then apply a mixture of fine-ground ointment and powdered alum until it heals.
If, in the case of gangrene, cauterization and incision are performed, and from that similar symptoms occur as if the ice has frozen in the bladder, and due to this the urination is hindered (and this is known as the expulsion of urine), then immediately apply the common treatment for the plague and extract that pus, for if it causes corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
Then wash the plague with vinegar, water, and salt, and oppose it to all species, which is beneficial for its healing until it is cured.
And during all the hours of treatment, make sure you do both things and adjust the medications that are applied to the area.
And if the stone is small and located in the urethra, and its passage is blocked, and urination is prevented, then treat it with what you have previously described to achieve dissection, because the troops used for this treatment are often accused of causing dissection; and already having extracted it, it is that you take a metal perforator, whose form is as follows:
with a triangular end, sharp, lodged in the bladder.
Then take a thread, and tie it to the urethra after removing the stone, so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the metal into the urethra, drilling with ease until the perforator reaches that stone. And turn the perforator with your hand on that stone little by little, and you drill the penetration of it until you achieve the other side to penetrate; for urine will soon be released.
And then apply your hand to what is broken from the stone of the hernia outside the perineum, as it is squeezed and freed from urine, and the illness is cured.
If this treatment is not suitable for any reason, then tie a thread around the stone and another thread on top of it. And then close the hernia on that perineum between two folds. And then extract it. And then loosen the ligament and clean the infected wound, which is formed in the ulcer.
And it is not necessary to tie a thread around the stone, only to prevent it from returning to the bladder; and the other ligament on top, for when the thread is loosened, the hernia returns to its place and the ulcer heals.
And for this, it is necessary when you tie the bandage around them, that you raise the leg to its positions, or return it to its proper place, and secure the plague thus as we have said.
**Chapter LXI.**
**On the extraction of stones from women.**
Stones in women are rarely produced.
If you do see a stone in any of those areas, treatment is difficult, and it is hindered by numerous methods.
One of their weaknesses is that women who are strong in spirit become weak at the sight of blood.
And the second weakness is that you will not find a woman more knowledgeable than herself to discover if she should go to a doctor when she is pregnant, or whether she is married to a man who knows medicine.
The third sentence translates to: "The surgeon is he who does not hesitate to operate on a woman, especially when it comes to a difficult case.
And the fourth states that "the place of incision on the stone in women is far from the location of the stone, so a deep incision is required, and there is fear.
If it is necessary to do so, you may need to call upon a skilled female surgeon, who is hard to find.
If you are lacking in those skills, seek out a surgeon with experience and subtlety, or present a female midwife well-versed in the treatment of women, or a woman who has herself undergone this procedure.
Therefore, command this present one to do all that you instruct, from the examination of the stone to its removal; for which reason he must consider if the woman is a virgin, and then insert his finger into her anus to assess the stone.
Therefore, if you find that, cut it off, leave its tongue, and then command him to inscribe [it] upon that.
If it is not virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the vagina of the patient and feel around on the pelvis, for she places her left hand upon the bladder and feels with great care.
Therefore, if you find that, gradually massage it from the painful area of the bladder to the parts, with the help of your strength until you reach the root of the matter.
And then inscribe upon that position of the body's weight from the root of the matter, and place the foot on that part, and his finger should not be withdrawn from the pelvis.
And the section should be small at the beginning; then insert the ray upon that section, and if the bladder is felt, adjust the section according to the quantity, knowing how much urine will be discharged from that.
And you know that the spices of pepper are varied: for there are small and large, sharp and bitter, long and round, and they have scales.
Therefore, you know how many species there are of it according to what you have said about what you want.
And if you want to stop bleeding from a wound, apply vitriol trise in the area and let it act for an hour until the bleeding stops, then return to your operation until the pepper is removed.
And prepare for yourself the instruments mentioned in the extraction of pepper in men, so that you are aided by them in your operation.
And if you want to stop bleeding from a wound, and you know that the expulsion of the wound is from the deep incision, then place powder on the area and gently press with these poultices and stricture descent, and do not repeat this; leave the pepper and do not extract it, for the strong pain will die in the illness. And then treat the disease.
So when the pain of the wound diminishes after several days, and the place is healed, then you return to your operation until the stone is completely removed.
Chapter LII.
On the section about hernia treatment.
A hernia inguinal is nothing but the accumulation of moisture in the white flesh, which leaves the gate open for the intestines to escape, and it is called the inguinal canal.
And in some cases, it is within the natural fat that prepares itself as a passage for the intestine, which is already another hernia; and it is the gate of the genitals between the white flesh that we have mentioned, and it is not this but an inflammation.
And the cause of this hernia is the weakening which occurs in the muscles, for to those this material is discharged, and sometimes it occurs due to blows made on the muscles.
And this moisture has no distinct color, for its color either declines to citron or bloody, or red, or it is black and sticky, or white watery, and it is that which is most important.
And the signs by which it is known that this addition of water occurs are as follows: for if it is in the white flesh that we have mentioned, then the swelling is round and declining slightly in length, also appearing like a mushroom, since the moisture extends from every part.
And if the moisture is in the proper fatty tissue, then the swelling is round and divided from the muscle, and thus one estimates that it is another muscle.
And if moisture is between the joints of the toes and the white ciphas (toes), then scratch from below to remove the sensation.
And to determine the colour of the moisture, you should observe the colour of the moisture in the place where it emerges from a corrupted (or diseased) part; and according to what is observed in the trace of the emergence, judge what lies within.
Therefore, when we come to the treatment of it with iron, you should understand that you command the patient to urinate if possible, and wash the part affected by it.
Then make the patient lie down on their back for some time, and place clean sheets beneath them.
Then place yourself on the left side of the patient, and instruct the assistant to follow the right side, extending their finger from two fingers' width to the joints of the toes and to the belly's opening.
And then take a broad knife and cut through the cord of the testicles at the middle of its length near the penis.
And make the second cut according to the same measurement from the line you have marked for removing the skin of the testicles, until you reach the white part inside.
And extract it, observe, and be careful not to pierce through; your incision should be as wide as necessary but delicately scrutinize the second incision according to the amount you can manage.
Then, using a wide puncture, pierce the white part filled with water and extract all of it.
Then, separate the two lips of the incision with scissors and extend the white part to its sides; do not touch the cord of the testicles, and cut the white part in that manner as best as you can. And cut through the membrane completely or into the muscles, especially their thin layers, for if you do not examine the incision carefully, there is a risk that the fluid will return.
But if during the course of your procedure you find that the hernia has returned outside of its original position at the time of your operation, then once you have completed the incision of the wall, go back inside and adjust both edges of the hernia opening from the genitals with sutures, and treat it just as you would any other wound, until it is healed.
And if you find that it is corrupted by another illness, then know that you must close the vessels that are above the suspension, extract the hernia, and treat it as we have said.
But if water is added in two parts, then you know that both are hernias; so cut the first part according to what you have done with the other, and if it appears to be an operation, then do it.
And then cleanse the wound, and enter into the sections with a cloth submerged in oil or warm oil; place another cloth that you have submerged in wine and oil, and spread it over both legs and the wonder of the abdomen; then lay it upon folded sheets and poultices, and bind those with a dressing according to this form:
Then take two sheets and make them humid with worm wool; press the extremities where they join or are touched by moist wool, and add structure in the crotch of the trousers, one extremity taking up the buttocks between the two, and the second taking hold at the opening of the leg, and the other two extremities on two sides leaving two others over two angles, and all tightness is adjusted in the crotch of the trousers.
And in some cases, this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of cutting; so you take a fine cut-throat cautery and make an incision at the root of the legs, and light it according to what we have recommended while it is exposed the white skin containing the water, and then take the cautery as follows: It resembles Greek writing.
And then perforate that seal, and light it until all the humidity is expelled.
Then extend the seal with scissors, cut it with scissors, and burn it with a subtle flame; incise according to your ability until you erase all of it; and be careful so that the fire doesn't touch you.
And you know that this operation is much safer and farther from the flow of pus compared to amputation.
If it causes you difficulty to perform an apostema cautery (a type of surgical incision or burn) during amputation or in the moment of cauterization, or if there is a pus flow, then address what contradicts you with respect to this, as a cure that suits it according to what is said.
If the disease is severe and does not expect a second operation because of its horror, then perform an incision as recommended; it is at this point that you, based on what we have said about signs, must be certain that this hernia is watery.
Now you understand that you must treat the disease on a raised spot, then perform an incision in the lowest part of the abscess close to the edge, and pause the incision according to the length of the body.
And when the opening is wide enough, draw out all the water.
Then place your hand over the area tightly and hold it there to ensure the water does not reenter. And then take care of it until the plague is healed.
If there is a contradiction to the flow of water at that time, when you perforate it, it should not be done unless the white panniculi in the orifice of the ulcer causes hindrance and prevents the outflow of water; then place a plug or instrument designed to extract water from the cysts in the ulcer, whose shape is preceded; or use a small amount to adjust the pressure on the ulcer.
And you should know that water returns and the swelling subsides after about five or six months; and when it accumulates again, it is perforated in the same manner as before, for thus the illness will pass its days.
**Chapter LXIII**
**On the Section Regarding Carnous Hernia and Its Treatment.**
You should know that in the section regarding this hernia, there is great fear of its becoming mortal; for it is my opinion that its dismissal and salvation lie in those remedies.
And they are reminded of the operation on those and the specifics of the apoplexy.
Therefore, it is said that the apoplexy occurs in bodies whose vessels are composed and is done by two main causes: either by a sudden, intense inflammation that overflows into the vessels, or by percussion.
And the color of the apoplexy varies according to the color of the body, and it is not painful in itself, but a severe apoplexy.
Very rarely is the apoplexy hardened, of which the color is dark, and it is not painful to the touch.
And sometimes it is caused by the contraction of the arteries, or by inflammation of those areas where one already feels the memory of it, or by inflammation of veins.
It is known that what is called inflammation of the joints is due to the escape of pus from the abscess when you press on it; and it should not be touched.
If what is formed due to vein inflammation is not dispersed from it for any reason, you should not press on it.
And it is also possible that on this species one makes an incision and on the other meats; and you insert the knife into the openings of the genitals, then extract the white-colored mass from them, sever the suspensory muscles of the vessels, tie them, and make incisions in the suspensory muscles that you severed from all parts of the genitals.
So if the testicles have already been consolidated in those meats, then you should extract them and make incisions in that part.
And if there is an adhesion due to any cause within the wound, or between what lies between the bones, then you must dissolve all that adhesion and incise it with a round incision.
If the adhesion is a natural growth in the location of the adhesion behind, then you must dissolve everything that belongs to it, and extract the humour as we have said.
So when your operation is complete, fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine; and then take care of it with other remedies until it heals.
Chapter LXIV.
On the treatment of hernias that are of the viscera.
It is an aperture (hernia) enclosed by a sac-like structure resembling a bud with the softening of the testicles, making it difficult to move and walk on account of the patient's condition.
And in the treatment of this illness, great care should be taken regarding what precedes it.
However, I note that they mention operation in the second instance when I perform the first.
And it says that you should cease the illness over a raised cushion; then, pull the suspender of the testicles towards the sides; and take hold of the chain of the genitals with your hands, close to the roots, where they are proved on the flame; and have those other assistants, and extend them with vigor.
Then, incise with a sharp knife across the left path of the vessels while they are still uncovered.
And extract from every part as we have said in the extraction of arrows, which are in the temples.
And then insert a needle with two threads, fasten it to the first part where the pain occurs, and repeat this process at the end of their course. Then make incisions in the middle of the affected area, cutting deeply according to the length of the body, and extract what is accumulated from the foul humidity and corruption.
Then treat the plague with remedies for other plagues in which you wish to avoid generation, so that the vessels that carry the seeds of two origins do not remain, as it is not harmful by itself.
If it happens that all the veins are affected, then remove the testicles or tie them off to the veins, so that they are deprived of all nourishment through the incision of the veins and become atrophied, or tie them off so that they do not grow again with these.
Chapter .lxv.
On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a tear in the abdomen, extending from the blood vessels of the abdominal wall, allowing the intestines to protrude through the opening.
And this rupture can be either of the abdomen or of an excrescence, and these two types occur due to various causes: a blow, sudden movement, loud noise, the lifting of some heavy object, or similar.
The indication of this, when it is due to abdominal extension, is that it occurs gradually over a long period, not suddenly, and it is a swelling that pushes the intestine outward, entering the peritoneal cavity.
And the sign of it is when there is cutting in the foot, for at the beginning it causes violent pain suddenly; and it appears as an ulcer near the toe most often apparent, and this is due to the protrusion of the intestine, and the matter of it comes out from within the foot.
And sometimes the intestine's membrane is forgotten, and this is called intestinal hernial protrusion.
And sometimes it is caused by pressure, and sometimes it runs in the hernia gap, and here it is retentive, and this causes great harm to the patient, and sometimes it causes severe and intense pain especially when pressed.
In the treatment of this illness with herbs, caution is required, so that one must be careful not to miss the timing in their application.
And the manner of the operation of that is to command the patient to reduce the hernia with their hand to the inside of its cavity if they obey its return, and then place yourself between their buttocks with your hands, and raise their legs.
Then narrow the cord that is the cord of the testicles towards its roots, and cut the cord of the testicles completely through; and then fix in two layers of the incised section as you deem necessary to open the section with these.
And if the section is according to the amount that it is possible for you to achieve, then from that, a hole will have been made.
Then remove those bodies which are left by the cord of the testicles, as long as the white hard body of each partition is discovered.
Then insert your finger into the area where the testicle is located, between the white ligament, which is beneath the scrotum, and between the second ligament, and dislodge that adhesion behind the testicle.
Then, with your right hand, grasp the cord of the testicles from outside, and extend the white ligament with your left hand, lifting the testicle towards the scrotum; command the assistant to spread the testicle apart, and you will dissolve the adhesion behind with a complete solution.
And search with your fingers that there is no cause for the intestine to be wrapped in the white ligament tightly. If you find no cause (for the condition), then press down on the abdomen below.
And then cut into the opening below the cord of the testicles, sectioning it in such a way that blood and pus flow out as we have discussed above.
And then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound; place it on the abscess, and use the ligature we have recommended (and sometimes the white cautery, as we said, is applied, which can cause bleeding, for these reasons it is left until the ligature falls out).
If the case of the patient is delayed, then water should be poured over it and applied to that area as we have said.
And then treat the wound with other remedies for wounds until it is healed.
**Chapter LXVI**
**On Ventose Hernia**
In this hernia, nothing has been seen that suggests a remedy for it other than to cut off the affected part.
And the first step is to perform as we have recommended for hernia, which is to cut open the vessels near the section with ease; then dry the middle area around the abscess with something that will facilitate its healing, until the vessels fall.
And treat the illness as we have said until it is healed.
**Capitol .lxvii.**
On the dislocation that occurs in the joints.
Sometimes, dislocations break the joints as we have said, and the bones protrude from the area.
And they do not mention any cause of hernias to the learned; and if they do, it is rarely; and it should be treated immediately.
If the condition is prolonged, a fissure in the muscle should be corrected before the hernia descends into the muscle; this happens due to the expansion of the muscle as we have said, which causes the area to become weak and protruding.
And the treatment of it is with cautery as was mentioned before.
And in some cases, the cure is achieved by cutting according to this manner: the hernia moves towards the middle of the body between your legs, and then dry the site of the rupture of the prominent aponeuroses with a cut along its length according to the quantity of three digits.
And then tighten the white strap that is under the ribs until it is discovered.
And then take the stick and place it over the prominent site of the strap, and press it against the abdomen.
And then press the two prominent sites on the end of the strap's ray, and adjust the suture with one of them to the other.
And then remove the end of the strap, and do not press the hernia into the abdominal wall completely, nor extend the pain, or any other cause as you should know in the treatment of intestinal hernias.
And then apply the cure for the plague, and after incising the abscesses, cleanse it and restore the plague until it is consolidated; for the ulcer is contracted and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
And cautery is better at this location, for it is closer to health.
Chapter LXVIII.
On the softening of the cord of the testicles.
In some men, the cord of the testicles becomes softened due to the softening of the tissues between them, and it is important to pay attention to its condition.
Therefore, it is necessary for those who are engaged in the treatment of this condition to have the patient lie on their back and incise all the softened cords that exceed the natural cord, and then close two lips with stitches.
And if you wish, at the beginning, when the excessive fluid of the softened cord is three or four fold, perform a firm suture.
Then insert between the sutures; and carefully care for the healing of other ailments within, so that they are healed and the discharge falls.
Chapter LXIX.
On castration.
You know that castration is forbidden in our law, but for the sake of reminding you in this book, I will speak of it; and its remembrance is only necessary in two ways, of which the one is so that the physician may understand it when asked about its cure; and the other way is that we are sometimes compelled to castrate other animals for our children's health, as well as from dogs, horses, pigs, and similar animals.
And thus it is said that castration is performed in two ways: either by constriction or by a cut through a fracture.
In the case of castration by constriction, the surgical method involves cutting off the testicles while they are still soft and pliable, so that they hang down. And then take those with your hand, resolving them so that they do not show the mark of the touch.
For castration by cutting through a fracture, hold the animal and with your left hand press on the cord of the testicles.
Then connect the suspension, and cut through each with a section, so that two parts proceed.
And then you will cut those pus that you find somehow erupted. And do not leave any cause untouched regarding the cyphacs, but rather the subtle cyphac that is upon the vessels.
And this method of castration is better, which is done by tying, because strong binding leaves no cause for the testes, so that the beast does not desire to mate.
And then attend to the plague until it is healed.
Chapter LXX (70)
On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: one where there is an obstruction in the space of the scrotum containing testes, and another form appears as if there are two testes, resembling a female's ovaries.
And some times, this flow of urine is seen from the opening in the scrotum.
In women, there is a difference: their womb, similar to a man's penis, has two ovaries, slightly smaller than a man's testicles, as well as the vagina and clitoris.
And the treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one for women. And it is necessary that you cut those tight clothes that prevent the flow of urine, and then treat them with a remedy for other ailments.
In the second type of men, where urine is released from the scrotum, there is neither cure nor operation for it.
Chapter .xxi.
Of springtime and flesh swelling due to the causes of women.
The swelling of the liver, strongly connected to natural causes within, is observed and must be carefully considered; sometimes it is magnified in some women as much as it is in men and even pervades during coitus.
So then you must have the excess of liver fluid in your hand or between your fingers and insert it.
And finally, do not forget to insert, especially at the point of the razor, so as not to cause bleeding.
Then take care of that which is under cure from the plague until it is healed.
The flesh that is born is flesh that lacks in the horror of the mother's womb until it fills out and becomes strong; for this reason, at times we incise thus as we do with lint, and heal it until it is cured.
Chapter LXXII.
On the care of wounds.
Wounds are those where the skin of the woman is not pierced or a small laceration occurs. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental wounds are caused by gout which has preceded them, or by flesh that is not properly adjusted, or by a subtle and deep cut.
And it is done either in the region of the mother, or on the sides of her, or in the upper part above her, or in the lower part below her, and it prevents conception and childbirth, and strongly prohibits menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is gained by observing the mother, if the swelling is apparent, it is considered valid; but if it is not apparent, then you should seek it from your fingers or from the palm.
If the swelling is very subtle and located between the two lips, then you should cut and disrupt it.
And it should be placed over the two delicate lips, and then your fingers indicate both the most affected areas.
And the woman should be on her back, her legs extended, and then force open both lips to break that subtle swelling and open the swelling.
And then take wool and dip it in oil, place it over the area, and apply heat to the site daily so that the incision does not heal.
If the swelling is large and thick, then cut into it with a sharp knife or a splinter of myrtle wood.
If the swelling is due to food, then hang it from a hook and cut it.
And these are the medicines that stop the flow of pus from its bite, as well as pain and dragon's blood, and vines, adjusted to the white of an egg.
And then administer a wide metal needle to prevent the infection from healing quickly.
Hold it with cotton for several days and apply a cold compress from it.
And then it is treated as another cure of consolidation until it is healed.
And sometimes it happens in the natural origin of other meats, and then you must incise according to this manner. This is also for gangrene, for the gangrene that is in the limbs should not be treated contrary in any way.
Chapter .LXXIII.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids, and pain in the tail, and the red botch that occurs in the woman's buttock.
Hemorrhoids appear from the openings of the mucous veins, rather than from those that are deeper; and as they become old hemorrhoids, and when they have been treated with heat.
And already have I discussed in division the kinds of those and the signs of those, and to say thus those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Therefore it is said that hemorrhoids and piles are when they are in the lower part of the body and do not appear in sensation, then in those there is no cure with iron.
May those that are in the upper part of the body over which sensation is felt, for those are the ones that are cured.
And be aware that you place the woman in a reclined position, extend her legs with a spreader, and close them with a strap or rough cloth, and insert those into the cracks.
And then sprinkle over those parts the flow of sacred fire from one of the burning powders, thus as with ash and similar things.
And then gently stretch their feet for an hour, and place them in cold water.
If the flow of pus persists, then make a incision in decayed and swollen parts, and drain them of milia, ecchymoses, and similar things.
Then take ordinary flour and mix it with honey, wine, and make a paste from this over the patient's back.
If the abscess has burst, it is good; otherwise, adhere two vents to the back and perform scarification on the nipples.
Then take wool and immerse it in cold juice of colander or cold juice of artichoke or cold juice of gravel root, mix with wine and make it adhere to the place; and care for the place with ointment until it heals.
And care for that which is inside, so that it becomes healthy.
**Capitol .lxxiv.** (Capital LXXIV, meaning the 74th chapter or section) is not enough context to provide a translation without surrounding text. If this refers to a specific medical treatise or document, please provide additional details or relevant sentences for accurate translation.
On the perforation of the eye socket in the skull.
You may encounter various types of abscesses in the skull, including crusty and abscessed ulcers, eruptions, fistulas, hemorrages, ruptures, cysts, and other abscesses. And you have already described these ailments and their types, the signs of those conditions, and the treatments for them in detail.
And be aware that I shall describe in this treatise of apothema the method which you see used for those which occur in the body, and if you wish to know the manner in which the operation is performed on them with a knife.
Therefore consider whether the pain of the apothema at its beginning is acute with percussion and fever, and sometimes that feeling becomes inflamed, if you do not cut it with a knife, then cure it with what aids its maturation until the sharpness of the accidents ceases.
And then know that you must cease the woman's pain on a bed which has two supports; recline her on her back and position her feet below her abdomen, expanding her thighs and resting her arms by her sides, and tie some to the bed with suitable bindings.
Then the midwife should stand at the head of the bed and administer the instrument which opens the orifice of the mother, the form of which will be discussed regarding those causes that require it.
And when you wish to use this instrument, hold the head of the knife against the skin of the woman's breast, and let not the part that enters into the woman be greater than the head of the knife, cutting through the disease. If the instrument is larger than the head of the knife, then be careful to place poultices on the skin of the breast over the knife's edge so that no part of the instrument enters into the breast.
And be careful to place the tourniquet above the instrument's blade, and let the person holding the instrument open the wound of the breast until the tourniquet is opened.
And when the excitement appears and it is sore and hot, then be careful to dry that part with a wide spatula.
And after the discharge has been emptied, be careful to place in the wound a bandage dipped in warm oil or green oil containing some constriction; and press the pad on the incision of the breast.
And place outside the wound a clean cloth soaked in water with lavender.
And then the cure is considered complete after two days when the pain has subsided and it is healed.
And sometimes the wound and the pain are washed with a mixture of water and honey, and then treated with water in which rhubarb or long-stemmed plantain has been boiled, and then returned to the original mixture.
If the pain is deep inside a closed wound, then you must abstain from treating it with fire, and instead use the methods we have mentioned above.
Chapter .lxxv. (This appears to be a heading or chapter number, indicating the beginning of a new section in the medical treatise.)
To teach midwives in what manner embrioic vices should be treated when they occur according to an unnatural figure.
A midwife must recognize the beginning of labor through signs of nature, for when she sees a woman expelling the parts and desires to smell the air, she is urged on by what is upon her during childbirth, and hastens the emission of the embryo; then know that this birth is according to natural figure, and it is the emission of him over his head, or suspended or dangling from the navel.
Therefore, when you observe these signs, you will know that the womb is contracted so that the embryo departs slightly as it passes over its head, and it receives the second breath, and is freed from those superfluities with good purification.
He who deviates from this part is unnatural and not commendable, for when the embryo is emitted over his feet and his body is positioned with his head behind him and his feet up, or his hand on his foot or his head, or his head and hand are positioned over his belly, and he is strongly bent over his spine, resembling his unacceptable figures.
For a midwife it is necessary that she be wise and subtle in all those cases, and guard herself against errors and disappointments.
And you will show all the features of those, and what the art is in those so that it be understood for this and has been about this.
When the sensation is located on his head by natural heat, and that heat is intense in the woman and becomes difficult for her, and sometimes the virtue of it is already debilitated, then she should cease, or what women have it, and evaporate the congestion of it with fennel seed and humid oils.
Then the midwife should insert herself between their dilated lips, and apply a second time to that wound, or rather to her finger within it, pressing what is in it of humidity. And press the woman's belly as she gives birth.
If they do not wish to, then cover the woman with a poultice of chickpea flour and fennel powder mixed with oil.
Then command them, apply the compression, which should be changed and done in such a way that it causes sneezing; and close their mouth and nose for an hour, so that the effect is forgotten soonest.
And if both effects are forgotten at the beginning, then cover them with increasing ease, little by little. If you do not obey the treatment, then place the woman on a mattress and lift her legs up, and then lay the mattress on the ground; and have the woman hold herself so that she does not fall due to the jolt.
And if the effects are not reversed and the condition worsens, then cut those and extract the pain from the body or tie the body to the bed with strips and extract it with equal force, as that will be forgotten.
When the fetus is positioned on its feet, you will see that you need to push them inside, and then reduce the size of the opening, and gradually pull each one out, taking care not to break any part.
If they are squeezed inside, you must command them to come out, and help them expel the child in a controlled manner, for it is up to God to decide their fate.
And if the child is not delivered as recommended, then return the fetus slowly back inside until it finds its natural position, for attempts to force it may lead to complications.
And if all that has been recommended proves impossible, take a mixture of other herbs and a dissolving gum, grind them well in a mortar with careful and strong blows, and apply the resulting paste to the woman's womb, focusing on the lower part of her belly. And then make that incision in tepid water, until you reach the hypocondria.
And when the incisions have healed, then perform the smoldering of mint and gently press it against him. And after the smoldering for an hour, then make a new incision on top of it, and force him to sneeze and open his mouth, take away that mucus, and press gently on the lower part of his belly with a light compression, as soon as the formation is dislodged.
Extract the fetus longitudinally using one of your fingers. Be ingenious in reducing the woman's pain, but if you cannot alleviate it, then raise the woman and have her lie down.
And if it is impossible to move them, make the patient lie down, and gently beat their limbs with a hammer, then apply ointments and bandages that you have prepared from mud.
And if labor has begun, then make the woman lie down and gently pull on her legs to bring the child down, then carefully reposition the baby in the birth canal according to its natural position, and make the woman sneeze, ordering her to hold still until the passage is clear.
The child, its limbs expanded and pressing against the womb's walls, is positioned at the two o'clock position relative to the mother's belly. The midwife should hold the child's limbs and slowly turn them to ensure the baby is in the correct position, making it easier to deliver.
And as it is completely delivered and the head is what we have previously prepared with oil and mud, then apply pressure on the birth canal to complete the delivery.
And then gently command the patient to breathe in and out slowly, when you have done this, make them lie down on their side, and command them to turn onto their back, and then command them to move their legs; and make them sneeze in that position. Prepare for the exit of the fetus on the side.
When you see the signs of labor from the mother according to this manner, consider it, and then gently insert your second finger into your own palm to expel the humidity.
And if the fetus is hanging over the face and neck, insert your finger into the opening of the womb, so that it is not retained and dies.
And then push the fetus gently towards the opening until it stops according to its strength, and command the woman to compress herself occasionally, and it will be expelled easily, God willing.
The exit of twins or many fetuses. You know that conjoined twins are born, and sometimes even three or four, which is strange and rarely happens; however, these may be the result of nature, not life.
And consider those cases, whether they are multiples, one after the other, and they are separated by surgery, distinguish those who enter the ligament in each others' navel, and sometimes they are forgotten; also, some are born like this due to a natural phenomenon, and some due to an untraceable cause.
And if they are difficult cases regarding their birth and come to what we have said about unnatural figures, then care for them as we have mentioned.
And if the midwife is subtle and does it in a way that makes it easy and discreet, delays as necessary, and is ingenious according to every figure as she prepares the body with the right means for health.
Reminder that it forms in the matrix from embryos and are aborted.
Sometimes they form in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even more, and it is necessary to have already verified that a woman who has aborted cannot conceive again, and another who is completely formed causes great harm due to the measurement of the wise sages.
And all this is known to be in the science of midwifery how strong they should be to that young woman resembling this, and therefore they pay such attention to it.
Chapter .lxxvi. (76)
On the extraction of the dead fetus.
When you treat the dead fetus with what we have mentioned in the division of medicine and it is not outside, and you are forced to use manual operation, then consider whether the woman is of healthy virtue and not subject to any of the accidents by which she is feared to suffer loss.
Now cover the woman so that she lies on her side with her head tilted downward and her legs raised.
The assistant should hold both parts or be positioned on the side so that the patient's body does not extend beyond during the delivery.
Then moisten the mother's mouth with oils and a mucus of althae and fenugreek and fennel seeds.
Then the midwife places her hand with those oils and mucus, smoothly enters her hand into the mother, and seeks out the place where the cuts in the fetus are located.
And in this regard: consider then if the fetus is ready to come out on its head, and you should prepare the cuts in the soles of his feet, or in the collarbone, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or leave the beard, or in the furca of him, or in the places near the ribs, or below the hipbones.
If the pain originates in the feet of the patient, then it is located in the toes or in the middle of the spine.
And it should be held with the thumb of the right hand, bending the patient's body at that point located between the fingers of the left hand, and inserting the other hand easily, so that the thumb reaches the source of the pain.
Then it should be held and maintained in the appropriate position, or the third one if necessary, so that they are equally attracted, without excessive extension according to their natural state.
And it is beneficial at every step, so that the condition of him is alleviated as it is done in various cases for the eradication of pain.
And pay attention to what is between them, where the extension should be softened; if any part of him is retained, then the midwife should apply some of her special words and insert those carefully and turn them over to that which is retained.
Therefore, if the hernia protrusion is overlooked, the incisions should be changed to where there is more pus; and do this until the entire hernia is withdrawn.
If the hand is excessively swollen and cannot be reduced by compression, it should be wrapped with a bandage; then extract it gradually until it is completely withdrawn, and incise it either at the joint of the hand or on the finger.
And the same should be done for the other hand and both feet.
If the hernia's head is large, or compression in its emergence causes it to be tight, or it is located at the top where the edges are close together, then insert between the sharp spikes and cut off the head and extract the water, or use an instrument called "alundat", which resembles the shape of other instruments described in the appropriate chapter.
And apparently, the making of this operation is of great importance by nature: and then you will see that it cuts into that hard crust or takes up that swelling as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is hardened and compressed, then its fork must be cut; then its split should allow the fluid in the foot to escape.
If it is not complicated and does not contradict observation, then you should cut the head as soon as possible.
And if the hernia from the abdomen is inflamed or resides in a wet place, then you must perforate that space through which the fluid within it can escape.
If the operation is on their feet, then the attraction of the hernia should be relaxed and its direction to the opening of the sac should also be gentle.
If the abdomen and foot are squeezed, then you must remove that cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and cut the abdomen and foot until what is inside comes out.
If other members are trapped and the head is turned, then insert your left hand; if the mother's vagina is blocked, insert your hand into the opening of the vulva, seek for a child's head, and bring it towards the mouth of the mother, and then insert one finger, or two, and pull it out.
And if the mother's mouth is blocked by an apoplexy that occurs in the womb, then be careful not to strain it; instead, first remove the cause of the excessive humidity and fat. And apply poultices, and keep the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
And if the issue is on their side, try to use an incision if possible; and administer what we have said regarding the living flesh.
And if that is not possible, then make an incision in the flesh and extract it.
And be sure not to leave any cause inside after the second operation.
And when you have completed all your operations, administer what we have said about the cure for the wounds that may occur from the heat.
And if there is a flow of pus, then use strict waters and administer the other cure.
And you have already seen a woman whose womb was causing death, and then again over that fire another conception has taken place, and the other fetus is dead. It happened that after a long time an abscess formed in his leg; it swelled until it opened like fire, and he began to feel pain.
And you were initially called to treat them, and you treated them for a long time with medication, but the plague did not improve.
Then you should consider the patient from various causes and apply strong plasters, breaking one bone after another; he will spend several days, and then another bone will break; and you will be greatly amazed when there is no bone in the stomach.
And then you will realize that they are the bones of a dead fetus.
Thus, you will continue to investigate the plague, extracting all bones from him, taking out the remaining flesh in his best arrangements, and already experiencing such a manner for a long time, correcting him with a small piece of flesh.
And do not be strange that it should be thus, for in this there is knowledge and aid to the patient, so that the doctor with his hand administers cure amicably.
On the forms of instruments that are necessary to extract the hernia.
The form of the instrument used to open the hernia:
This is the form of the strangulation instrument in which the edges are engaged, which engagement has two cutting edges on both ends of the instrument. However, this cutting edge should be neither too sharp nor too rough, and it can be made of bone, ivory, or wooden material.
And the thickness of each stick should be such that two sticks fit together, and the margin of both sides of each stick is one finger's breadth, and the length of each is half a palm; in the middle part of the two sticks, there are two adjustments made of the same material as the other stick, whose length is equal to a palm and a little less, and the width of each is two fingers or slightly less.
And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the container so that it opens to those you turn the prescribed virtues.
Another form resembling that subtle and lighter pus:
It is made of wood or bone according to the appearance of tweezers. You may also insert two additional parts at the extreme end of it, each with a length of about a palm and a width of approximately two fingers.
And when you wish to open the container, you lay the woman on her side over the foot, opening what is between her thighs. Then open your hand over the instrument using the clamping forceps as you wish, according to the amount needed from the mouth of the container until the meter indicates what you desire.
The way of turning that the ancients described:
The method of pushing that which is pushed:
The method of healing as described, which contains the great cure:
And it is assembled like forceps which has teeth at the end, also when using, and sometimes it is made long according to this form, also when using, which has teeth like a file with which it cuts and contains. Method of healing sparingly:
Method of digging without a spike:
Method of digging without two spikes.
A spatula with two ends, one of which cuts off the head.
Form of two wide spatulas.
All those instruments are exercises, and when more varieties of them are multiplied and prepared by the artisans, they become easier to use and more useful for people in general due to their quantity.
And do not neglect those instruments that are already available to you, for the need for others is not an excuse.
From the extraction of the second (tooth, bone, etc.).
When the second stage of labor is reached, you must command the patient to hold their breath and make them sneeze in that position, then place your hand over their mouth and nose, and if they exhale, so be it.
And if that happens, then take a hot perfusion and make a hole in the covering, placing a sponge soaked in warm water over the mother's mouth, as well as hot and harsh herbs such as chamomile, aromatic ones like Arabic and cassia wood, and sweet-smelling ones like Saint John's wort. All these herbs, or some of them, should be submerged in water within the perfusion, and then placed over the fire.
Then attach a canvas tube to the mother's mouth and ensure it remains in place as the steam from the herbs enters the mother's cavity.
And then perform that sneezing as we have said, and the second should be released quickly.
If this cure does not work and it is not excessive, then you command the midwife to immerse her left hand in warm oil or an infusion of alder, and then insert that hand into the vagina and search for the second one, and once found, gently pull on it little by little as necessary so that the mother does not feel too much pain. Once it is confirmed that the pain is in the right or left side, treat it accordingly.
And if the mother's mouth is restricted, we have already recommended the cure with sneezing and the treatment of all parts with herbal medicines.
If all the causes we have mentioned are not forgotten, be careful not to perform any abstraction over that which is left from it to the mother's womb, but instead cauterize it with a discovery and tetradyman; for this will decay within a few days and will be dissolved and forgotten.
When it is observed that there is a high sound in the head and stomach, which causes pain to the patient, then be aware that fumigations and appropriate remedies should be administered.
Some of the ancients already used fumigation with nasturtium and dried figs.
The form of the instrument used to fumigate a woman for the retention of menstruation and childbirth:
It is made of iron or brass.
And let the fine point rest in the cone and the broader end over the flame, and the subtle smoke should be paused over the arms of the flame.
And hold that until the smoke is consumed, then repeat another.
On the cure of the unpierced anus of an infant.
These infants have anus that are not pierced, which are already slightly contracted and swollen. Then instruct the midwife to pierce it as she has said, and if not, pierce it with a sharp spatula, and be careful not to touch the skin.
And apply it over that wrapped cloth in wine and oil, and carefully prepare the ointment until it is cool.
If you fear it is blocked, insert a tube in the throat for several days, and stop when the child wants to spit it out.
And it also happens that the filling of the anus occurs due to the consolidation of a ulcer or abscess; then, once that consolidation is incised, it should be treated with the same remedies we have mentioned for healing and draining.
On the healing of fistulas that have formed.
Fistulas that form in the perineum contain foul-smelling, thick pus, either protruding outward from or located in the space around the anus.
And it is either a fistula or multiple ones.
And when that swelling is old and affected by moist, white discharge or subtle putrefaction, sometimes these fistulas penetrate.
And those penetrations are made through what is seated in them for exit and ventilation; and sometimes the hernia uses the exit difficulty, and very strong it is seated in those worms.
And so too are those fistulas some observed in the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the flesh of the penis; and so too are those penetrations into the joint of the thigh and into the root of the testicles.
And in the case where a fistula is penetrated into the anus and does not penetrate, you should insert the little-said endic into the anus, and then attempt with subtle effort to erode or pierce the fistula when it is not difficult.
If it is difficult in that case, then insert into that attempt subtle forceps or horsehair until you feel the attempt or hair on the little-said.
And if you do not feel anything from the whole body or have no cause for expulsion of worms or flatulence, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and now you are free for treatment.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then the meaning of it is the discharge of urine from that place and prohibition from doing so until the affected area is strengthened by medicine.
If it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the area, then its sign is that the pain persists here if there is no stiffness within the bone, and pain in the surrounding areas; and it causes pus forever; and it does not respond to any treatment, nor is it strengthened by ointments.
And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no complete cure, and the cure for those lies in the diligence and patience of skilled physicians on whom everything depends.
Perhaps the text means: "In those cases that are neither penetrating nor ancient, healing with fire is hoped for as you have been told, and what you have already experienced and proven.
And indeed, the illness moves between their legs over his sides and raises his legs within him; the parts are inclined towards his belly, then carefully insert a plug, or if it is in a twisted fistula, find the location where the attempt enters.
And if that place feels the illness around the heart, then you must insert your finger deeply into the chest.
And if you feel the attempt in the chest already penetrating on its own, or if you feel anything between the chest and that flesh or bone, then you will surely know that it is penetrating; and thus do not work there, for healing is not in that place, as we have said.
However, they may say that it heals certain people suddenly.
And for the treatment by which one hopes for recovery in him, make subtle cauterizations according to the extent of the fistula, as previously described, and insert that hot iron into the fistula until it reaches around the core; then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those fleshly parts adjacent to the fistula, which are similar to a quill of downy feathers, are properly adjusted.
Then attend to those wounds wrapped in bandages until all those parts that are properly adjusted are healed, and apply remedies to the flesh that generate and solidify healing; if it is healed, it is good; otherwise, it will not be healed in any time through other treatments.
If the attempt enters, but does not penetrate into the inner part (the colon), and between that and the attempt, there is a thin layer of flesh or tissue, and the fistula is in such a way that it reaches the surface of the colon, then dry the colon from the beginning of the fistula, and watch for the drying of the attempt; when the attempt dries up, and the sectioning (of the colon) is complete at the place where the end of the attempt reaches, the attempt is freed and removed.
And then clean those infected flesh that resemble veins, assembled together like a tube of some use, not ruptured by any cause.
If a discharge of pus appears between you and your operation when examining those meats, then take care that the best instrument to use is a cautery either by fire or by acute medicine, for a fire cautery ensures good healing: it adjusts those adherent meats and removes the pus by drying out the humidity.
And then take care of those wrapped in calluses or three-sided damage within the affected area, and pay attention to the treatment of the wound by softening hard and infected flesh, generating and solidifying new tissue.
And so, the medicines that involve stopping and cutting off; when it is restored, it is healed and you need not fear recurrence.
If the fistula has already permeated into the anus and is elongated from the surface of the body, then insert the finger into the anus and explore it carefully.
And so if you detect a growth that is hard and fleshy, between you and it there is clearly a risk of penetration, then it is not surgery for it but rather a matter of trust and hope.
The treatment for such a growth depends on three methods: either cauterizing it as we have said; or drying it out by reaching into the cavity that you create so that it is possible to apply the cure; and do not use any incisions because you would not be able to know the extent of the tear, and it could lead to further harm to the patient against their will; and take care of it as we have said for a strong healing; or elongate that tissue and clean out the pus that is in there close to the anus, as we have said, either by probing or another instrument with a very sharp point, and then clean those fistulated flesh with cauterization, if the opening of the fistula is not healed, and it ruptures again from inside the anus, it will become more painful for the patient. And in some cases, the fistula is ended in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, it is at the side of the anus around the surface of the body with the cord and on the edge of the anus, then take the probe of the perforating end, which is thus prepared with a needle in this form:
and insert into that wound wrapped in cloth or around those; then insert the probe into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
If it is deeply inserted on the edge of the anus, then you extract the wound from that place and thus insert the probe into the anus; remove the end of the wound and align both ends, open each one, and leave it for a day or two, and when you again insert the wound into the flesh, open it until those meats are opened between the two ends of the wound and they fit.
And then treat the wound until it is healed and consolidated.
If the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in some way that you are prepared, either by heat or by cold, as long as it is not harmful, and then treat it until it is healed.
The shape of the spatula with which the fistula is divided: its curvature is sharp at one end and the other part is not sharp, so as not to puncture what is unnecessary, thus avoiding it.
On the stitching of hemorrhoids where pus runs from the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids are according to two manners, for they are either between the buttocks resembling as if they were of charcoal, or those are with a grainy rash. And they are small and large, and the sanie flows from them at one time and is clear, and it is frequent, and comes out of its place, and affects the ends of it.
However, those that are exclusively from the anus can be divided into a few types based on the degree of moisture, where there is a flow of citric water or a small amount of foul-smelling sanie continuously, and they are according to the body's color.
And the treatment for those that are inside the anus is that you order the patient to lie down and press while the anus is still hot, so that the hemorrhoids appear before you. Then you carefully place yourself over them or use what you have at hand, and cut open those parts to release the contents.
If the cuts are not made in those parts for their moisture and softening, then use a coarse cloth or linen or a woolen cloth to extract them with your fingers, and afterwards incise them and sprinkle some powders over them after the incision, so that they adhere to the place instead of cauterization, or cauterize them as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization. And then apply care to one and the other cure until they are healed.
And if the hernia does not yield to expulsion, then crisp the malady with crisping in the place where there is a small bite, and wash it with water that is on the skin and which prevents the hernia from coming out more easily when the malady squeezes.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is slight, and it is because you take those with your finger, or take those with wax, and cut them, and then apply care to them as we have said until they are healed.
And for those who perform the incision, know how to administer sutures for them according to this manner: take a thread wrapped around and pass it through the hemorrhoid in the parts above, and make it penetrate with the needle into the root of the other part, and wrap both ends of the thread on the side away from the needle, and do it longitudinally; tighten the hemorrhoid with strong stretching, and tie up the thread, and extract the needle.
And do it thoroughly, leaving none untouched, so that the excess of the hot blood flows from there.
Then place the clean cloth soaked in hot oil or wax over the wound and press it down, and command the patient to rest. And leave that inside the wound; and when it becomes inflamed, treat those with ointments or other remedies until it heals.
And when these become old and no longer respond to that medicine, you will need to clean those with the points of spatum or with your own ungla (possibly a medical tool) until they are moist and free from the pus that prevents their healing; which prohibits their union. And then treat them until they are healed.
Now hold those with a strong reason, more violent than the first that enter, and be careful to tend to those that are healed.
You know that hernia is crucial, and it appears as a red swelling in the body resembling a bone head, and it is felt throughout the body but mostly in the thighs and feet, and by those pains you should treat it.
And then cut what is in the ring of the hernia, either with scissors or a hook, and eradicate it from its place; and then tend to that.
And if you wish, cauterize according to what is preceded in its chapter.
May a verruca be a small, rough, round ulcer protruding from the surface of the body, and spots are often seen in children.
And the treatment for it is to extend and incision that, or to open it with a sharp tool or within a container. And if you wish, cauterize it with fire or sharp medical tools according to what we have said.
May a tick be a small, hardened or round ulcer on the surface of the body, often accompanied by itching, and when it is disturbed, it feels like a mosquito bite around the body.
And the treatment for it is to take a thin needle of goose or duck feather, and make it strong, and press it onto the swelling until it holds the circle of the needle; then turn your hand over the needle while you insert what is in the circuit of the swelling, and press it into the flesh, and eradicate the swelling from its root.
And if you wish, make this as a needle of iron or bronze in this manner:
The part protruding from the needle should be delicate, smooth (not pierced), wrapped such that upon touching it, the patient's pain is alleviated and the rotation of that [part] is controlled.
And if you wish to cauterize the swelling, as mentioned above in the chapter on cautery.
In the form of instruments that are administered to give heat.
Some times ice is made from silver, or lead, or melted iron, and sometimes it is made from small or large instruments according to those used in administering treatment, for the instrument used to treat young children should be small; and of those that have cold or sore behinds, the ice of such should be small.
The form of large and few ice pieces:
The top of the tube of it from above, where the bag is tied, should be wide according to this manner; and its distinction is where the bag is tied as well.
And the lower end of it, which is inserted into the anus, should be blunt (not pointed), following subtlety; and on one side of its length are two channels, and on the other side a single channel, and the width of the channel should be according to the thickness of the rays, and the wider for a larger size.
And let the bag be filled with medicines from animal bladder or sheep's skin, and its size be a palm.
And it should be pierced with many things as it is twisted; and if the space between the parts is wide, use a larger one of these.
Then insert into these parts a strong, fresh tooth, or something similar; and attach the bag to them; and when the bag is secured in place, tighten it around the base of the patient's penis between two firm, thick structures, and then bind each part: The quality of binding these parts should be that you fill the bag with medicine, heated according to the patient's tolerance. And take care not to make it too tight or too loose.
Then place the patient on their back, raise their legs and place a cushion under them where it is comfortable for the man or on a lance; and apply the tip of the cautery with oil or egg white or mucilage of fenugreek or similar; and insert it into the anus with ease, and have the assistant take the bag and squeeze it two times strongly until everything in the catheter is evacuated into the intestine; then remove the catheter and have the patient raise their legs to the wall.
And if the medicine forces him to vomit, take as much as you can; and if he sleeps with that throughout the night, it is more beneficial for recovery.
If you believe that applying heat to the pains of stomach solutions and vomiting helps it leave, then you use cautery until it is healed.
And if there are hemorrhoids or fistulas in the anus that are painful, then use a gentle heat and cautery, as children use to treat them.
**Curation of Plagues**
You have already spoken about the division of plague cures according to the season, and I have also said the cure for them with herbs and other medicines as appropriate.
Therefore, it says that plagues are diversified according to where they are made by the plague and according to the place on which the plague strikes.
And the causes for which plagues occur are thus: the weight of stone, or incision of space or of metal, or percussion with a lance, or with a staff, or with an arrow, or similar to those cause of sudden movement.
Plagues that are in the parts of the body may be thus: as plague which catches on the head, or neck, or foot, or belly, or back, and similar to those of the members.
And it is recommended for the treatment of some plagues, to stop that reasoning and regulate regarding other plagues.
And one should begin with the simple plagues of the head, since the remembrance of the composite ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, it is said that when a simple plague occurs on the head and it is not a fracture, you should consider: if it is due to the impact of a stone or something similar, and the patient has already bitten their tongue and it is a severe plague, and you fear that the malady will lead to an apostema (infection), then immediately perform a cerebral flebotomy, without delay. Remove the blood from that part according to the amount of virtue in it, unless there is any other cause prohibiting flebotomy, especially if the abscess resulting from the plague is small.
And conversely, flebotomy should be performed if there is an abscess in the opposite area of the affected part; and pay attention to the patient's condition regarding food intake and avoid heavy meals.
If, however, there is no reason to avoid it due to the patient's age, then reduce their food intake and do not give them meat or wine.
And regarding the plague, if it develops into an infected abscess, apply a compress of hot oil or wine in which spices have been steeped.
If you are certain of the apoplexy's origin, rest on the affected area, if it is fresh and its wound has not been cleansed with water or air, then gently apply some dust to it again.
And if the air has already changed it, rest on some ointments until it is healed.
But if the wound is large or it is due to an incision in a tight space and its edges do not meet properly, then adjust them with stitches as I have described regarding their suture.
If the wound has already exposed the bone and tendon, and it is not a retention but a small suspension, then incise it and treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh appropriately in the place of the tendon, and order the patient to abstain from food that is hard: seeds and forms of bread and similar things, until it heals.
And if you find putrefaction in the bone that does not adhere to the bone, then cut out all the rotten parts and remove them, and then take care of it.
If these plagues involve an artery or vein from which pus flows and it is not incised by medications, then you should inquire about the artery, and if you find one that is not incised, you should cut it with a knife or tie it off; and if cauterization needs to be performed after the abscess has been drained, do so.
And if these plagues are simple and small, their cause is considered minor; so you should sprinkle on them this powder, as it hardens before the air changes those.
The method of the powder is as follows: mix equal parts of olive oil from broken seeds, dragon's blood oil from two parts, and unextinguishable smoke from three parts; grind it all finely and fill the plague with it, then tightly wrap it with good binding so that it adheres to that area and coagulates the pus.
And then tighten it with poultices and leave it, without loosening it while it is in that condition, as it will not be healed from him until the medicine is absorbed.
And at other times it requires only caution, when there is no acute pain or inflammation of the dragon.
And this surgical procedure is performed on large abscesses when it is appropriate to drain them and tighten their surroundings, and they are recent wounds with fresh inflammation, whose air has not been altered.
And if the air has been altered, especially during summer, then one cannot understand the position of this powder, but instead, apply what we have said: place over these infected spots a mixture of egg yolks or, place over the pores of the flour from the order in water and honey until they are cured; and then treat them with other remedies until they are healed.
If a fracture occurs in the bone and it is small, then you extract it with your hand.
And now, I shall tell the cure for skull fractures that are dangerous.
Of the ailments of the colon.
If the plague occurs in the colon, it does not differ much in treatment, unlike the plague of the head when it is simple.
If the nerves or arteries of the colon are cut, then if it is a nerve, treatment should not be forced but rather focus on preventing harm to it, as hot applications and similar substances that cause intense tightness, like vitriol, should be avoided as they cause damage to the nerves and constriction. And do not apply any treatment to the pain without understanding its cause, for the substance of the nerves is affected and their continuation reaches the brain, which is the source of all the body's functions.
If it is to be treated with lighter medicines, then wash it with water, sometimes with rose oil or not, and apply heat after washing with water and the other remedies in this manner, and moisten with humidity.
But if the pain is severe, then apply a stitch, or tighten the edges of it, and once it is healed, carefully remove the poultice.
But if the pain is deep or there is an abscess in it, then puncture it at the most painful spot.
But if in the pain an artery is incised and blood flow results, then separate or dry it, tie it off, or cauterize it if that is necessary to prevent it.
If the spine has already been incised from the neck all the way down, and the veins of the neck have been saved, then you should adjust the edges of the wound with sutures on the bone of the neck and do not touch it; equalize it and reduce it to its natural shape, and tighten it with appropriate tension, leaving it for a few days; and then treat it with poultices where there is stiffness and inflammation until it heals.
If the infection has already taken hold in the bone, then probe it and if there are any fragments of bone, remove as many as you can; leave what is not infected until the plague has run its course, separating and expelling it from the body.
And if the infection is recent, then sprinkle over it the powder that has been recommended to you. If the infection has caused a fistula, then treat it with the thing whose remembrance will come appropriately in its chapter.
If it is a percussion with a lance or a sword, and the pain is deep, consider more seriously if the disease has a windy quality when the patient cries out; then know that the disease is mortal.
And if there is no depth in it and the pain is recent with a fever, then you should apply to it from the first hour with poultices, and do not squeeze it so that the fever does not become deeper and return to the patient, but rather apply attractive ointments, and clean it twice a day.
And if you do not have the ointment, then apply a cold compress to the site of the pain so that it draws out what is in it from moisture; and make the patient sleep on the affected area so that the liquid flows where it should.
If the disease has passed three days or more and no spasms, tremors of the heart, nor stiffness of the joints occur, and other good dispositions follow, then you know that the illness is safe; and from there, cure it with calgesic and other remedies until it is healed.
If the healing of the hernia is prolonged and remains open for a long time, then you know that a fistula has formed; so cure it according to its nature.
And if the disease is due to an incision of the space or joint, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then cure it with this: if it is large, use stitching, and if small, powder.
If the disease has already affected the bone and you have already made an incision in the joint, then you should twist the hernia to extract the separated bones. If they are not separated, leave them as they are until the pain subsides, for their removal is alleviated.
And for other accidental pains in the other members, the treatment from the beginning is what we have mentioned.
On abdominal pains.
The condition that occurs in the belly is either great, or slight, or medium.
And small disruption is made difficult by another method, and it is clear that their reduction is more difficult if you do not insert them into their place immediately, as they open and become enlarged so that the insertion into them becomes difficult.
And therefore the best disruption is by mid-position, for in that one there is no difficulty in reducing the hernia, as it is difficult in both of the aforementioned species.
And you know that the suture of the abdomen is according to four manners, but two sutures are common that convenes in the sutures of other diseases of the body.
And the other two sutures communicate with other diseases, but nevertheless, they are more proper for the suture of the abdomen.
And I recommend to each of you an exposition and declaration.
Therefore, it says that when the disease is small and there is no cause of the hernia from within, and it becomes difficult to reduce it, then this is in one of two ways: either because of the scarcity of the disruption as we have said, or when the hernia has been caused by inflammation of the air inside.
And therefore, when this occurs, it is necessary that you wrap that which you submerge in a sponge or cloth moistened in lukewarm water, or take water with lemon, vinegar, and spice, and apply it to the hernia until the inflammation is resolved.
And in some cases, they use vinegar which has a drying effect, and it is better than water alone in resolving the inflammation.
And therefore, when you see that the inflammation is resolved, moisten the hernia with water containing aloe and marshmallow, for this alleviates the pain caused by it slightly.
But if the pain caused by it cannot be alleviated with this treatment, then cut open the obstruction with a small instrument with which hemorrhoids are incised.
And the first treatment is better when it involves neither cutting nor excessive drying and starving.
Of the instrument, consider its form:
In one part of the sharp knife, and in another part not so sharp, and at the tip it should be slightly blunt, not too sharp like a spatula.
And therefore, when the hernia is enlarged and it has protruded, one must reduce it back to its natural shape in its proper place, if possible on top of it, as this is better.
When the rupture is extensive, and it occurs in the lower part of the belly, then you must make the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; but if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you must elevate the patient's head and foot higher than the affected areas.
And similarly, if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the belly, then you must always direct your intention and consideration towards making the affected part higher than the other.
And thus it is that you must administer this in both great pains and milder pains.
And in smaller pains, apply what you have prepared, and then make the medicine be administered between your patient's thighs, holding it with both hands, adjusting its lips, and gradually uncovering from one area to another to see if any cause for the rupture lies elsewhere.
And this is the common method of suturing: take a needle, or count one needle according to the amount of the width of the wound; then lay it from the extremity of the rupture on the said finger, and tighten the needle once; be sure not to pass through both extremities of the string at once, but rather, from one opening to another, so that it penetrates from inside. And you have already added both extremities of the string and both extremities of the phalanx, making four orders.
And then tighten the thread double around the needle, and sometimes from both sides together, and add both lips and the wound by a decent addition; and then reduce the thickness of this one and fix another needle into it, and bind that as if it were the first needle; and do not stop doing this until all the contraction of the wound is completed.
And the needles should be of varying thicknesses, between coarse and fine, for the thin needles enter the flesh slightly, while the thick ones are difficult to insert into the wound; therefore, it is necessary that they be both thin and fine in thickness.
And it should be noted that the needle is inserted into both ends of the wound gently, so that the flesh is not cut deeply and the wound opens up before its healing is complete.
And the sutures should not be too long, so that the wound is not hindered from healing.
And then carefully insert the ends of the needles so as not to harm the patient during their sleep; place pillows on either side of the wound, with the ends of the needles extending from them; and leave them there until you know that the injury is healed.
And these types of sutures with needles are most convenient for small wounds, where one or two needles or even more can be used in the suture.
The second type of suture is as follows: and it is that you administer a suture to all four ends, from the coccyx and two extremities of the thigh, at once, with a needle in which silk or other thread is tightly wrapped, both in fineness and thickness.
And when the needle has penetrated these four ends, return the needle to its original path from which it began, so that the thread retracts and pulls the wound closed, making the suture like a second layer of cloth with which the wounds are tightly bound.
And between each stitch, apply the quantity of the thickest part of the bandage to it.
And this stitch heals men.
And with this stitch, I have treated the disease that had afflicted a man in his belly, where a knife had caused a wound about the size of a palm, and it was the disruption of the main plague in the middle of the body; and then I have reduced the swelling around the wound for twenty-four hours.
And the wound was healed in about fifteen days or so, and I treated it, and that man recovered and has been well for many years, and this method is practiced by most people.
And other doctors had judged that it would not heal; but by a miracle, for you did not treat it with any ointment or medicine, but only applied heat to the wound two or three times a day and washed it with honey water until it healed.
There are two kinds of suture according to the account of the word.
And so you begin to sew from the back, and insert the needle from outside to inside.
And therefore, as the needle penetrates into the flesh and at the junction, according to its rectitude and length throughout the body, and leaves the end of the thread in which you have inserted the needle; then make the other end of the thread penetrate from inside to outside through the other end of the wound.
And when you have made the first penetration, make another penetration in that same end of the wound from inside to outside; then leave the end of the thread on this side, and insert the needle into the other end of the opening from inside to outside.
And make a penetration with that penetration which causes penetration into the flesh at the end of the sight, which is in the opening of him so that all that penetrates.
Then begin at this point on the side of the body and take that with the end which is from the flesh on the other side, remove the needle from the thread, and return it to that thread and to the end of the flesh which is on the other side compared to this end of the sight; remove that from the thread which is part of him.
And do this once, and then another time, and continue doing this until you have closed everything that is outside according to this example.
The sum of this method of stitching is that you stitch with a skin suture, such as stitching the flesh, once from the side of the end of the thread, and then turn it over until it is completely closed.
But the second specific type of suture that is most effectively used by doctors, which they call 'Galia', involves stitching with certain thread-like substances that some physicians use, thereby adding to its strength relative to its natural state; and then applying one end of it to one extreme of the wound and the other end to the opposite extreme, and this is done according to your prescription.
Ensure that you hold the needle at the end of the mirror, aiming towards your own body, and make it penetrate from outside into the inside of the wound, passing through both ends of the hernia; then turn around the needle and make it penetrate from inside out, going through both ends of the hernia.
Then turn around those threads and make some of them penetrate from inside out into the wound, passing through both ends of the mirror other than the opposite side.
And this method of suture is better than the common light suture, and it is a suture of which one has previously had memory.
This is the speech of Gaul.
And they may say to you, "Suture the belly with two needles; so enter into these as you wish, and begin to insert the needle from which it is your duty, and make that penetrate between the other sides according to the suture of those whose hearts are bound together.
And know that when there is disruption in the middle part of the belly, the suture there is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
The play of medical treatment for plague is judged according to other plagues.
Which is because when you perceive the recent plague in front of its ulcer that the air alters it, and reduce the hernia and sew it and fit it properly, then pause over that powdery flesh.
And if the air has already altered the wound, then apply heat to that area with hot compresses until the pain subsides and the swelling goes down, and it becomes healed and remarkable; and then treat that wound as one would treat other wounds until they heal.
If you do not have access to medicines, then focus on these measures: apply heat and cold alternatively, several times a day, as taught to you, until it heals, for you should not need other medications or complex arrangements when the wounds are simple.
If you fear that the wound might communicate with other vital parts, then cover it with a cloth dipped in high-quality oil or melted oil, and place it around the area between the angles and leave the bandages on.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your bowels, several times a day, when this occurs, apply a compress of black stippling herb, especially if the abscess is advanced in the bowel and there is discharge penetrating into the cavity.
And you should know that hernias of greater size are more easily healed than those in the smaller cavities.
And it is of difficult healing for the hernia which is called "gunnu" because it does not receive cure from any plague; and this is due to the great number of veins in it, the magnitude of them, the subtlety of the body of that part, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
If it is that you treat the plague with cloth and succeed in making it recent, reduce it according to your established method, which reduces hernias equally.
If it has spread to the space and is already red or black, then you should tighten the thread over the area that is discolored, so that pus flows out, because in the cloth there are veins and arteries.
And then incise this other matter, and place two extremities of the thread pendant on either side of the wound, so that by removing the cloth and releasing the pressure from the plague's arm, the attraction is alleviated.
Remembrance of the plagues that occur in the intestine.
When there is a rupture in the intestine and it is small, it may be possible to restore it in some people, so you should pay attention to those who have been plagued by it in their abdomen through the piercing of lances, and they had an ancient plague with a fistula, and treatment involved management and ventilation.
Then pursue the cure for it as if it were not confirmed in its healing, but rather seek to subtilize the part that ignites health and the location is consolidated.
And having observed the place already consolidated, consider the disease that you are suffering from in your stomach; and do not give way to any further such misfortune, breaking all his healthy dispositions in eating and drinking, and then immerse yourself in water and exercise according to its dictates.
And some experienced people say that when the hernia is small, it should be treated in this manner: you take pliers with large jaws; then adjust both lips of the hernia and place a clamp over both lips from those that keep the mouth open; therefore, when you grasp those and tighten your mouth, cut off the cap, as it adheres and does not dissolve.
Then place another clamp near the first one, and do not stop making clamps as many as needed for the whole hernia.
Then reduce it and bring the hernia back to its place; cut off those attached caps within the abdomen until the hernia is healed; and cause no further harm to the patient.
And it is possible that the hernia is lined with a very thin thread made from the hernia of an animal, which is finer than a needle; so take the end of these hernia threads, make them quite bare, and attach the end of them to a thread, wrap it, and insert that thread into the hernia, and reduce it to its opening.
And this method of stitching with threads is nothing but a second way of trust and hope.
If the plague is great and widespread, especially if it is in one of the subtle hernias, then it requires subtlety, not just a remedy, for its cure.
On the cure of ulcers and fistulas.
You know that every ulcer and fistula, when they age and become old, and are not healed and get infected for a long time and do not heal, is generally called a fistula in any member, and we call it that ulcer.
And a fistula, according to truth, is a fluid-filled, hard, white structure that causes no pain and has a hollow shape just like the one caused by external injury; for this reason, it is called acute pain, i.e., suffering.
And it is in some people a moist condition, which turns red, and the moisture is evacuated in a few hours. And at times this moisture is excessive, and at other times it is scant, and sometimes it is thin, and other times it is thick.
It has already shown all those causes, the signs of those, and their cure through medicines in detail.
And also, know that is how you should treat a fistula caused by surgical operation with the hand.
And you should know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; those are fistulas that reach great veins and arteries, or nerves, or the skull, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or any of the ribs, or any of the spinal bones of the back, or any of the joints composed as is the hand and foot; and those give to it a proximity to the main member and similarly.
And therefore, among these fistulas, those that are of this nature are of the most difficult to heal diseases, and do not receive treatment, and their occupation is labor and ignorance.
And if it is a fissure that is so deep that it does not reach these places which are mentioned, wait and have faith in its healing, and want to come to know it, then try to pull or cut it, and if the fissure is according to rectitude, question that part of it.
If the fissure is twisted, then investigate that part with a delicate probe, for the weight of their body, lifted and curved due to the twist, must be straightened to cure the twisting.
And if the fissure is causing extremely horrible pain, it is not within your power to probe or question it.
Then cleanse the orifices for their horrible nature, for the moisture by which you cleanse that one must also affect the other orifices and correct them.
And you must inquire very carefully, according to what manner it is possible for you to know if here there are bones or nerves, and whether the indentation of the fistula is distant or nearby, or if it is a fistula that only causes horrible pain and is entirely within the realm of your strength, with which you question the illness, and the discovery of the pain through your compression with your hand over the area, and similar signs of accidents in the region of the wound.
And when you have carefully considered all those causes, you will see the cure according to your knowledge: for you now consider whether it is a fistula near or distant from the joint, or of a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or one of the places that you know it to be in.
Now examine the fistula according to the description given of its location, remove whatever is in that flow and corrupt flesh, and what has formed in the opening of the flesh or from parts like it, and cure that as it heals.
If the fistula is of great depth and according to the rules, then you should incise it in the place most accessible to you and clean it of all corrupt flesh; and then apply some lint wrapped in sharp medicine, and insert those into the hollow of the fistula, which you have understood with your finger.
And do this because, in some cases, acute medicine corrodes everything that is broken in the cavity of the fistula of corruption.
Then, after healing, apply ointments that promote the growth of healthy flesh.
If it is not healed with this, then cauterize it as we have recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you must prove this, then examine it and dry it as we have recommended; however, do not prohibit any cause from veins or nerves or major limbs, as we have said.
If the bone is exposed and there is no corruption or blackening, then clean it until the corruption is completely gone; and then apply care to that with something that promotes healing.
And if the pain and inflammation do not subside and dissipate as it should, then you will know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; then you must delve into it again carefully and precisely examine its cause and purification with the last remaining strength, and then restore it.
And therefore, if it is healed, it is good; but if not, you will know that the corruption is in the deep parts of the body, which has not reached, and so for you there remains only to cleanse that.
And if the corrupt bone is small, it may be removed by you using delicate forceps suitable for such work.
And if there are many bones, carefully remove all of them, leaving none due to your strength.
If something causes you difficulty due to humidity, and in their examination there is no fear or error, then cut through those bindings or flesh if they exist, and free the bones.
If you do not have the skill to remove the bones from your patient, then apply pressure over the sore area until the pain subsides, and leave it thus until it is surrounded by flesh and ligaments, and guard against a hardening of the wound that you have incised during your operation.
Habitually, if you are fearful, apply pressure to the area immersed in hot oil, or immersed in Egyptian alum, or any of the green alkalies, for when those ligaments soften, and the bones can be separated from their attachment, and that attraction is alleviated.
But if it is a large bone such as of the thigh or hip or similar, and what is corrupted of it is only the surface, then quickly apply compression only behind that until the blackness and corruption are removed, and then restore the wound.
If what is corrupted of it is a great fracture, and the corruption has already reached the medulla of the bone, then it becomes necessary to close that wound completely by incision in the area where the corruption has occurred, and then treat it until it is consolidated.
And I advise you to enter into his thigh to hold it in place and serve as an assistant for your operation.
A young man around xxx years old experiences pain in his thigh, and upon examining inside, the problem is found to be related to matter within the body reaching the thigh, which becomes abscessed or a severe abscess, and not due to an external cause.
And so the condition of the patient extends over time due to the mistakes of doctors, as the abscess becomes severe, and pus-filled matter comes out from it. His treatment is paused until the leg is fistulated, and openings are made on the infected parts which cause pain and lead to body waste and moisture.
And after this, the treatment of many doctors lasts for about two years, and they focus not on the knowledge but on the art, as I have been called.
And he saw the patient's leg and the materials that were flowing from it through these orifices by great pain; and already the condition of that man was entirely stabilized and the color of him was citron-like.
And then insert the probe into one of those orifices and succeed in penetrating the probe into the bone.
Then examine all the orifices and discover what causes these issues from every part of the leg.
And then you carefully cut and incise over one of those orifices until you discover a part of the bone, and find that it is rotten, hardened, and deteriorated; and already a part of the leg within which you had penetrated was corrupt, hard, and putrid.
And then secure what I had discovered and prepared the exposed bone.
And you should consider that it is not the bone but that corruption which needs to be removed and cauterized, and you had already dissected it.
And then, after pausing the restoration of the plague with consolidative medicine for a long time, it is not consolidated.
And then, you should iterate and expose again over the bone secondarily according to the initial discovery, and seek continued corruption from the bone.
And you should cauterize what appears to me as that corruption, and then you had made it pierced to make the cure and restoration, but it is not restored.
And then, you should discover it again and do not proceed to cut the bone into small pieces, but pierce the restoration of it, and it is not restored until you remove a part of it around a palm, and extract that from its marrow, and then restore it with medicine, which is slightly consolidated and healed.
And no further incision or section of the hernia is required unless for the purpose of arranging its folds and due to the patient's lack of endurance and fear of death, as it suffers in all hours from excessive evacuation leading to fainting.
And thus it is healed entirely by nature, and nothing takes the place of bone or hard flesh; its arrangement in the body is good, and its virtue returns; it adjusts itself to its dispositions, and causes no discomfort during walking or harm from any cause.
If a bone protrudes from the body, you must proceed as follows: take a strong bandage and wrap it around the end of that protruding bone, asking someone to extend it; then place another bandage, thicker than the first one, over the flesh left by the bone; and next, tie this over the flesh you wish to cut, extending the end so that you uncover the flesh where you want to make the incision, without damaging the flesh.
And then place a plank or table under the bone, for when you do this, the saw is not hindered from cutting through the corrupt flesh.
And take care that the sawing over the corrupt place is done little by little, because if it is in the hollow of the corrupted bone and does not appear on the surface when touching, then force the saw again.
And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, it is a continuous break from one side to another, and the corruption is in the middle or at its beginning, then you must expose the flesh from all parts; and place a plank underneath, and saw first the broken part where the corruption has entered, until the sawing of the other part is completed.
And the sawing should be according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in a joint, incise that corrupt joint, and close the bone where it continues from the other side.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in a rational way but ingeniously.
And if the corruption is in the chest of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; nevertheless, you must inquire into the corruption as it appears to you, open that up, and remove it according to any disposition possible for you, and ingeniously correct whatever remains so that no veins or nerves are affected.
And you must know what kind of knives and saws are suitable for cutting these bones, depending on the placement of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the thickness of those, and their subtlety and size and rarity, and the hardness of them; so it is necessary that you prepare all kinds of instruments suitable for that operation.
And you should know that this operation signifies to you regarding the type of instrument you need; when you have great study and long experience of the methods of this art, and testimony of the ways of ill health, then you will already have for yourself what is suitable for it among all instruments for any illness.
And in the end of this chapter, you will be taught the number of instruments which you will use with examples as you proceed with your practice, the very same ones that you will apply to your limitations, and which you will test on others. Form of saw:
Another form of saw:
Form of another large saw:
Form of treatment: The head of this treatment should be in the form of a star-shaped key, and its points are in the shape of spikes.
And it is not advisable to apply this unless the joints' heads are rubbed when they are corrupt or if the mouth is widely opened.
Form of the smaller scalpel:
Form of the broad scalpel:
Form of another saw appropriately made: it should be curved on one side and have the edge of steel sharp, and the limb of it shaped like a gentle bayonet. Form of it:
The form of the scalpel with a concave shape:
The form of another very sharp scalpel:
The form of another scalpel with an extremely curved tip:
The form of a small scalpel resembling a needle:
The form of another smaller chisel-like instrument:
The form of another chisel-like instrument; this one resembling a ray, with a sawtooth tip, and used in various locations for cutting bones.
The form of the ray that is suitable for reason of him who is pierced by bones:
And the extremity of it is triangular and of acute point.
And it is made of iron from India, and in a way that all the causes we have mentioned about razors, scissors, and saws are covered.
Of the incision of the extremity and of the locking of the bones.
The extremities may be affected either intrinsically or extrinsically, or if the treatment you have administered for that corruption does not bring relief, and the corruption continues to progress until it affects a member which is not struck by any cause, then know that you must make an incision in that member within this place where the malady has its origin, so that the disease may be relieved from death or severe damage to the member.
And the sign of that which happens is that the member becomes black within, while it is still covered by skin, or if you can see the blackness within, to that part of the member which has been affected and takes hold of the entire body; and thus make an incision on that.
And similarly, it is caused by the corruption and impact of certain venomous sources such as a scorpion's sting or that of a viper or nettle and similar things.
And if the corruption or impact is in the tip of the finger, you make an incision on the finger and do not give space to the corruption for it to spread into the hand.
And similarly, if it affects the hand, you make an incision at the root of the finger and do not give space to the corruption until it takes hold in the thumb of the hand.
And if you replace it, then incise the arm into the shoulder at the joint.
And if another corruption passes and the environment of the shoulder changes, then that is the death of the patient; and to treat another cause for this in healing is a quantity of virtue.
And similarly, for a foot corruption, if you replace the aforementioned foot, then you incise it into one of the nuts.
And if you take hold of the foot's edge, then you incise the entire foot. If it is possible to enter within the toe, then you incise the leg into the joint of the toe.
And if the corruption has already spread to the toe, then in it there is no other remedy but dismissal, and leave the patient to death.
And the method of cutting or severing a member is that you tighten the ligament in the place where you want to cut, and tighten another ligament over the area; and the instrument extends a ligament to the parts left behind, and the minister extends another ligament on top; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments without making a large gap so that all the flesh is exposed; and then it is cut or severed.
And it should be covered with clean linen from all sides so that it does not touch the wound, and the patient's injury should be adjusted and treated carefully.
If bleeding occurs during the operation, you should cauterize the area carefully or apply some powders to constrict the blood flow; and then return to your treatment until it is complete.
And then attach the affected member to a suitable ligament, and treat it until it heals.
And now I present the translation of the provided sentence: "And I advise you to attend to a man on his foot, this unexpected accident that you and I have recommended, which occurred due to the darkening of his foot by an adjustment that resembled the burn of fire.
And that corruption occurred first in the inner part of his foot, which tends to affect the entire foot.
And then that man prepared himself for this treatment, as he saw the cure advancing to the member with the violence of his pain and the heat of the fire, and he incised that foot at the joint, and the fire healed it.
For a long time, that treatment caused this corruption on the inside of the foot, as indicated.
And then it occurred to me, and I realized that this excess should be countered with a method that stops the body's corruption, so I applied purification to his body; and the excess did not recur, and we began to move to the other inner part of the foot where we had started in the hand.
And the doctor asks me to cut the patient's hand, and he does not want to do this hoping for the repulsion of that superfluity, rather you must hold firm the incision of the patient's dead hand, for the virtue of the disease was in its sudden onset.
And since he has left me, he has returned to his land and forced me to prepare and cut the hand of that man entirely, and he is healed.
And I have not related this narrative merely to provide aid regarding this illness, but also to explain its cause and meaning, and according to which it is understood and treated.
On the treatment of wounds and the quality of enema therapies with medications.
When an abscess occurs in certain fleshy parts of the body and the space of the abscess extends to form a collection of pus, then it is cut open and drained, and the pus is let out from it, leaving the area hollowed out as if it were a pipe. The skin over it remains intact, and there is no subsequent corruption, and it does not affect the bone or nerves or ligaments; this is called a sinus, and it is not called a fistula.
Nevertheless, if the space is prolonged such that the corruption completely involves a member, it is called a fistula and does not heal.
And the treatment for it is that you cut open that entire duct as it is twisted, especially when it has become subtle and is made with a knife, and ensure that it does not adhere to the place due to its corruption.
If you hope that the duct will adhere and that that corruption will not succeed through further consequence, and if the duct has opened from front, then treat it with a cleanse.
And it is that you consider the sinuses, and if they are large, and the arm that they affect has a foul odor, then cleanse it with an Egyptian medicine made of oil, vinegar, and spices, mixed in a vessel, heated over fire until the medicine becomes steamy and reaches a specific temperature.
And then take from him what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; wash the affected sinus with a clister, tighten the orifices of the intestine, and leave the medicine within for two hours.
And then extract that foul matter; do this for several days until the sinus is purified and the pain relieved.
In some cases, enema with ashes of vite (a plant) can be used as an alternative when this medicine is not available; you take the ashes of vite and mix it with water; then apply that and wash the affected area with a clister until you confirm that the sinus has been relieved.
If the patient is intolerant to Egyptian medicine or ash water, then wash the affected area with a clister of honey and water mixed with third of triquet (a traditional measurement), or with wine and honey mixed, for honey has purifying properties and washes, while wine helps adhere the mixture to the sinus, especially when there is an excess of stiffness and dryness from previous treatments.
And after you have done this several times and feel that the swelling has subsided, cleanse that part with water which causes the flesh to be born in it.
And indeed, you take a mixture of vinegar and dissolve that oily substance and apply it with astringent; or you clean that part with some medicines mixed with oil, as I have already written in the treatise on ointments.
And if the orifices of the swelling are tight and do not allow the enema tube to pass, gradually widen them with a small iron, and place warm water wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basil ointment until they are widened.
And if the orifices seem wide enough, then you should remove the stitches around them and leave them open for the amount that is necessary for the enema to be added.
And if the orifice through which the arm passes is elevated above its attachment, dry that part in the deepest location within it so that the arm flows freely inside, for when the arm is compressed in the depth of its socket, flesh grows within it.
And if it is not possible to dry the socket within the deepest location around the bone as you wish, then perforate and prepare the member so that the arm can flow out of it lightly according to what you have prepared and without any cause for retention by the arm.
He who is above the wound of the sinew, which pulls at all times so that it draws what is attached to it from the arm. And so that you know if what flows from the arm is hot or cold, or digested or undigested.
And thus, consider the location of that sinew, whether the patient feels pain in it or not, and if there is any abscess.
And when your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that has been thrown onto the wound of the sinew has adhered, or a strong adhesion formed, on certain days you loosen it, and when you remove the plague, change the bandage for another one and renew the ointment.
If it is a sinew that has created a long, thin space, do not be discouraged by the adhesion of it, for healing to itself takes place, for there are certain people in whom the growth of flesh occurs in their wounds after a long time, and others in whom the opposite happens.
And if an indigest brash of the sinew has been present for several days, you will know that the sinew does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinew is prolonged and it is the cause of continued discomfort, then adjust in the scarcity of medications, and if the medications are humid in their substance and virtue, they should be dried as with a drying agent, when there is an abundance of superfluity added for protection.
And the last remedy, which is used for its curative properties, is to take a drying agent and dissolve it in warm oil, and apply it over the affected area, just as if it were another substance, and then wrap it up and use it.
And it seems to act in the same way when there is no brash, take a drying agent, honey that is thick, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe vera, boil them, grind them into a powder over fire, wrap it in cloth, and press it onto the sinew; and use the honey that you have observed to be thick, grind it into cloth, and press it.
And some times they administer to him long and thin pieces of celestial lilies (and these are celestial lilies), and henna flour and centaury, and use those simples either fresh or dried, crush them and sieve them and sprinkle the powder over honey which has been collected; and apply it.
And if the pain persists and does not improve with this treatment, you will know that the corruption is in the joints of the patient, and it has affected the bones or other hard members or their ligaments; then you treat it with a fistular remedy, as is said above.
On the treatment of bruises and sore nails, adding cuts to the finger and making an incision.
Panarici (bruises) is an apostema (inflammation) that results from the nail of the finger or toe becoming detached, and it can also affect other digits. When prolonged, its treatment becomes more complex, either with a cauterization (apostemat caut) or corrosion (corrumput), causing a bitter smell to emanate. The extreme end of the affected digit darkens in color.
And therefore when you have dealt with what we have mentioned in the previous section and do not apply your treatment, then cut off with iron all the excess that is adhering to the nail and cauterize the wound nearby, for cautery brings relief to it.
If the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, but the excess of the nail already penetrates into the flesh and begins to puncture and harm it, then stop the pain by making a subtle cut at the angle of the nail that is piercing the flesh, push it away and cut that flesh easily, and apply over it medications with corrosive-burning herbs until all the flesh is completely healed; then care for it with poultices until it is cured.
If the corruption has already penetrated into the bone, then cut out the bone and extract it, for no time is there healing where the bone is corrupt.
And if you observe corrosion and destruction in the area, you will incise it into one of the joints according to the memory of its pain, and then treat it so that it heals.
If there is necessary percussion or incision on the finger due to severe pain, then at the beginning of the treatment, you should cut off the diseased part with a sharp and clean knife in a transverse manner from above, and be careful that the section does not penetrate into the flesh that remains on the finger, because otherwise, you will cause the patient severe pain, and it can lead to the growth of excess scar tissue at the site; then treat the area so that the pain subsides.
However, this condition, which is born in the flesh of many people, is either entirely cartilaginous, or it contains a lot of bone, or it is very hard in the fingers.
And some of them originate in the stiffness of the joint, or it is the nature of them in certain joints of the fingers. He who is born in ignorance of this knowledge will not suffer, but he who is born with strong joints will be afflicted.
And of those who are born fleshy, the incision is shallow, for you must insert the blade slightly into their flesh.
For he who is born with the condition in the joint, treatment is difficult; therefore, beware of the excision of it.
In the case of those born with such a condition in these areas, you must begin by inserting the knife at the start, cutting into their flesh with a circular motion within the bone, and then close it with one of those suitable saws, and take care that it heals properly.
Similarly, consolidation that occurs between the joints due to frequent use or by nature in a person who lacks such knowledge, or due to hernia or fire burn, or similar, you must remove that consolidation so the joints return to their natural form.
And then place between their sheets some linen soaked in warm oil so that they are not quickly consolidated, and separate them with a thin lead sheet until it is solidified according to need.
And if similar consolidation occurs in certain parts of the hand, then dry that consolidation according to what is prepared and suitable for the shape of the member.
From the incision of veins, there arise varicose veins.
Veins, when they are damaged, become varicose veins, which are thick, rolled-up veins filled with melancholic superfluity, which occur in most parts of the body, especially in the legs, particularly in those who walk a lot, work hard, and carry heavy loads.
Therefore, it is necessary that you induce purging of the body from black choler at times with strong expulsion, and draw blood from the patient's basil vein.
The treatment for their pain is by two methods: one is to incise and drain that black pus, and the other method is to elevate the vein and extract all of it.
The incision is made according to this method: first, the leg is soaked in hot water until the thick pus is resolved, which is foul from the leg, then the leg of the patient is tightly bound at the infected area above the purulent pus with a bandage, and the vein is cut in one, two, or three places with wide incisions, and the black pus is raised with the dominant hand from the infected area below the leg until all the desired amount is drained, as much as needed to alleviate the patient's condition.
And then bind it tightly, and order the patient to abstain from spicy foods that generate black bile.
And repeat the treatment through phlebotomy when the veins are filled and this causes pain to the patient.
However, the elevation of their limbs should be done in this manner: if you are cleaning the patient's leg, and it is covered in hair, then immerse it in water and soak the leg with lukewarm water until it becomes numb and the veins stand out; or if it has been exercised vigorously, then wash it with cold water until the limb is cooled.
And then tie the string around the vein at the right of its course, cutting it either near the surface or deep within, depending on where it is most painful, or at the very bottom if it is least painful.
And then loosen the string with scissors and cut the vein from all sides until it stops pulsing, and observe the color of the vein; if it turns darker, it indicates that the disease is declining.
And once you have removed the string and the vein, examine the white part of it to see if any cord remains.
And then you insert the instrument into the space that it is elevated and freed from the cord, and suspend it with a weight of some kind.
Then make another cut at a distance of three fingers from the first, and carefully separate the cord from the vein until it appears.
Then elevate that one and incise it in the posterior section, close to the talus, and extract it, raising it until it passes through the second section, and then extract it from the section above that one.
And do this until you extract the one from the highest or most superior section among all of them, ensuring that they are all removed; and then incise it.
And if you do not adhere to extracting and raising it, then insert a strong double-ended needle and tie it, and extract it, or insert the instrument into the space and turn your hand over until it is completely freed. And be careful not to cut yourself; for if it is broken, it will be difficult to raise that part and it will come back against the wound causing further harm.
And when all that is removed, you will place over the affected area a mixture of water and oils, both fragrant and unfragrant, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted without twisting or entanglement, and it is not in its normal position as we have said, you will make a cut over all of its twists and at the sites where it is entangled, and then suspend it until it lifts entirely.
And be careful not to cut the vein and avoid damaging it, for it will be difficult to raise it; and use your discretion in that regard.
The form of the injury which should be treated:
It is not cut too sharply as with wounds, nor does it have an acute edge so that it does not harm the vein; instead, it has great flexibility, for if it were too thin, it would pierce the vein due to its thinness; thus, it has a sufficient thickness as we have said.
Of the removal of the vein of the thigh.
This vein is generated in the legs in hot regions, as well as in the hernia on Arabic land and in the rear and arid lands of India with little greenery or openness.
And moreover, the vein is also generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And the process of decomposition is such that it causes pus to come out from within the body, snakes and worms, and parasites that are born between the fester and the flesh.
And the sign of the onset of gout is that a violent inflammation occurs in the leg; then the area becomes swollen; and shortly after, the vein begins to leave the affected area, which seems to be torn from within, like a plant's root.
And when the onset of gout becomes apparent, you will notice that you must wrap around it a piece of lead whose weight is equal to that of a dragon. Within this dragon, put the affected area and leave the lead suspended from the leg.
And whenever you see any cause for gout to occur outside of the body, wrap it in lead and note this. And if the pain persists, you make an incision into it and wrap the wound; do not dig deeply with a knife unless it has come to the surface, for if you dig too deep, it contracts and goes into the flesh, causing abscesses and gangrene in the area, and bad ulcers.
For it is important that the growth be treated gradually and extracted little by little, until it has completely come out from the body, without leaving any cause for its return within the body.
And from this vein, some men have reported that it extends to the length of their palm and fingers, and I myself have witnessed one case where it extended for 10 palms.
And if an incision is made during treatment, you insert the ray into the channel of it and perforate that deep channel in the flesh, so that all that is within the matter may be evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the place for some days using medicines; then take care of it for the healing of abscesses.
And this vein is sometimes seen with great swelling, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot, and it causes great pain, and it emanates from each painful point.
And therefore treat that as we have said in the division and pay attention to what is mentioned above.
Regarding the section about worms generated under the skin, and it is called bovine inflammation.
This illness is called bovine fever in some countries because it causes great pain in the cows and a few worms are found between the intestines and flesh, which enter the whole body, causing swelling and destruction, and their symptoms are most evident when they break the intestines and push them out.
And the generation of this disease is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, which causes worms and serpents and roundworms and ascariasis in the belly.
And it is feared by its malice, for when it enters the body and rises to the head, it reaches the blood, then severely breaks and destroys the blood vessels, and this should be treated with care.
And so when you wish to cure and extract it, you must not do so unless you understand its movement and appearance in the body, and then grasp what is above it and what remains below it with strong compression, and dry it and extract that.
And if it is deeply embedded in the flesh and does not cause pain, then apply a hot cautery at the place where it resides, and the main cause that is feared is its corruption, which also corrupts the place as we have said.
If it has reached the head near the blood vessels, then grasp the upper eyelid with strong compression, and dry it, and extract that. And take care that this malady uses purification of the body by medicines that expel putrid bad humors, and be cautious of foods that cause putrefaction.
On the incision above the disease.
This disease is called "nafir" in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in some members, and then it changes from one member to another.
And you have already seen that second one that I will recommend to you. You were called to a female patient in a village, and upon discovering her arm, you saw a small inflammation in the vein at the wrist, which had been broken for an hour. As it was being examined, this inflammation seemed to spread, almost like living silver as it moved from place to place.
Then they removed the pain from that place and applied pressure to the muscle, and held it for an hour.
And then correct the other body until you reach the other arm.
And then I noticed that I had to revolve myself in every part of the body as I had seen; and it was too amazing from the permutation of it and the speed of its members. And I had already seen this in my feet according to that manner, however I have seen many which shock with pain being permuted from member to member. I have never seen this in the feet like on a woman.
And I did not think that this was anything but that it was because the woman was crippled, with dry skin and exposed veins, and in this condition, the sensation of that permuted air appeared.
And it is necessary that this retro-cures not be apparent in those who are delicate and have moist bodies with narrowed veins.
And if you wish to cure him and the patient feels that pain, then it is not apparent as we have said, tighten over that and let him lie lightly and dry on that until the air circulation is restored, and cauterize the place.
If you cannot find them in your feet, then cure that by relieving the body and removing the air circulation, and bind those with foul-smelling pills and serpentine pills.
From the extraction of arrows.
Arrows vary according to species and according to the parts of the body they hit, for their diversity lies in that some have sharp points, others small, concave, or dull, being solid; and some have three angles, or tongues, or are saw-toothed.
And among the signs of severe illness is when an arrow strikes in it and penetrates the bone, especially the one above the brain, due to violent heat, and causes scotomies, vertigo, pain in the legs, inflammation and pain in the tongue, spasms, and mixing up of speech, vomiting of bile, and a strong loss of words, and destruction of the voice, and leaves at the site of the illness a white humidity resembling powder, and it has characteristics similar to those of flesh.
And if these symptoms appear to you, then abstain from treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is protruding.
If the arrow enters the heart, so that it is near the left breast, and you feel a sudden, severe pain, not visible from the outside, and strongly perceive the movement of the arrow as similar to the pulse and the flow of black blood, and there is a coldness in the extremities, shortness of breath, and fainting; then know that death is at hand.
And the symptoms when the arrow has pierced the lung, showing pus from the plague, and the vessels near the collarbone are affected, and the patient's condition changes, breathing heavily and requesting fresh air.
And if the arrow strikes the membrane in the foot, and the pain is localized to the small ribs, it causes intense pain and heavy breathing, and all the muscles of the body are greatly affected.
And if an arrow strikes the stomach, it will immediately alleviate the pain of any undigested food.
And if an arrow strikes the abdomen and becomes stuck in it, causing a tear or rupture of the organ, whether it be the gut or hernia, there is little hope for its healing through removal of the arrow.
And if the arrow strikes the bladder and causes it to release urine outside, resulting in any discharge due to its impact, and intense pain grips the patient, then you should know that it is a fatal wound.
The other members, such as the face, neck, head, shoulders, elbow, hip, thigh, leg, and similar parts of the limbs, can be saved with careful handling when the arrow does not strike a vein or artery and is not a venomous dart.
And I will tell you about what I have seen regarding the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand their application in treatment.
The cause of which is that when an arrow strikes the lacrimal bone of a man's eye in the root of his nose and it is extracted from him on another day, leaving the grays of his eyebrow intact, then he recovers, and there is no injury to his eye.
And another arrow was extracted from a Jew, which had struck him in the grays of his eye, leaving the eyelid intact, and the arrow was hidden and could not be removed from there except for a small tip to which it clung, and it was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, capable of striking a lion without leaving an auricle.
And the Jew was healed, and there was no further damage to his eye.
And extract another arrow from a Christian man who had fallen into his throat, which was an Arabic arrow, and it is the one with feathers; and then I incised between two guides, and it was already submerged in the man's throat; and then I carefully removed it, and thus healed the Christian.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who had fallen into his belly, and I realized that he was dying from it; so, after we had passed thirty days and nothing had changed regarding the state of his organs, I incised onto the arrow and manipulated it, and thus he was healed, without any further complications.
And I saw a man in whom an arrow had stuck in his back, and the pain was concentrated on him, and after applying heat for some time, I pulled out the arrow at the base of the wound.
And I saw a woman who had an arrow stuck in her belly, and the pain was deep inside her, and it did not change with any of her organs' functions, and the woman suffered no severe disruption of her natural operations.
And he sees another man to whom an arrow has struck his face, the wound is deep and the arrow breaks, causing little pain but many similar symptoms.
And he extracted the arrow from the face of the prince of the king who had been struck in the middle part of his nose and had already bent to the right a little; the whole arrow was hidden.
And you were called for the treatment of him, soon after the arrow's wounding, within three days.
Then he carefully examined the wound of the arrow, and found it deep; then he sought that subtle attempt, and did not feel it; but he felt a sharp pain leaving the right ear, and then he hoped that that pain was from the end of the arrow.
He then applied a plaster to the place with a drawing and digestive effect, hoping that by doing so he would draw out the arrow from that place.
And do not open in the place of the injury where the arrow has struck; continue to apply poultice over it for several days, and no further injury occurs; and as the plague solidifies between them, break up the obstruction from the opening by intervals of several days until on one day you feel the arrow within its neck and reconnect it to me.
And then stop over the injury with a sharp corrosive medicine for several days until a wound opens, and try to soothe it, and cut off the tip of the arrow, which adheres to the wood.
Then adjust the opening of the wound with that acute medicine until I see visibly the tip of the arrow, and spend time on it for intervals of time up to four months.
Then I made the wound more enlarged, and I managed to insert forks into it, and maintained them, and did not give up trying, when suddenly one day through ingenious ways I managed to take hold of it with forceps, as will be the form of those in the end of the chapter, until I removed that; and then I restored that wound.
And some physicians judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored, and they restored it so that the disease was consolidated and the illness was healed entirely, without any recurrence.
And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some arrows in order to give this rule and meaning regarding what has not been said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of that are not understood from the narration, nor can one comprehend those in the book.
And the wise artisans speak little about what is present, and much more about what is absent; and they seek new operations and new instruments for the descent of foreign causes from the art when accidents occur.
Therefore, you say that arrows are not extruded from the members in which they are embedded, but according to two manners: either by attraction of the place in which they intertwine; or conversely, from the other side.
And that which is discharged from the place where it enters, or is an arrow proceeding through fleshy parts, and is thrown out and removed.
And if you do not adhere to the timing of when to eat, soon you will leave it for a few days until the flesh around it rots and the attraction of it and its exit are relieved.
And similarly, if it becomes lodged in the bones and you do not adhere to eating times, leave it for a few days until it relieves itself of attraction and motion on certain days, and then it will be discharged.
And if you do not adhere to your diet for a few days, soon you will puncture the path of the arrow in that bone at a subtle journey until the location is enlarged by the arrow, and then extract it.
If the arrow is already embedded in the body but stuck in place, and it is causing pain, then investigate its attachment, and if you feel any resistance, apply some sharp objects to its attraction.
And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow, here there are neither nerves nor veins, then cut into the wound until it is enlarged and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
And if there are auricles attached to it, which should be removed entirely, then cut through the flesh in which it is embedded from all sides using every means at your disposal; and devise a way, if you cannot remove the flesh from around the torn auricles and their twisting, until they heal.
And when you perform the extraction of the arrow in any location, then use your hand's torsion with forceps from all sides until it tightens; and with subtlety and the utmost care to prevent the arrow from breaking, and successfully extract it along with the wound.
And if you cannot reach it with your tools, then wait for a few days until the swelling in the wound's area decreases, and then try again when the pain has subsided. If you experience difficulty due to bleeding, then administer what we have mentioned for treatment in its chapter.
And take care to cut the vein or nerve, or string, and administer remedies in every possible way to facilitate the escape of the arrow; do this with ease, tranquility, delay, and firmness as much as you can and as recommended by your physician.
And therefore, contract the arrowhead in such a way that the injury is according to the figure by which you aim to hit the target of the arrow, for it is more beneficial. If this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Also, the arrows that are shot against the opposite side or have already struck any part on the outside of the body, or whose tip shows signs of bending due to the pressure from below and above the skin, you should remove it; and hold it with pincers, if necessary, according to the amount they take up; then shoot it away, for it is made lighter by impact.
If it is held in the bone, then you use a sharp knife according to the direction that the arrow penetrates into the bone, amplifying the cut and then extract it.
And if that does not help after several days, then repeat the process as often as necessary.
If the shaft of the arrow is within the bone, then you push it towards the opening.
If the shaft has fallen and you want to give a thrust, then insert a pointed instrument, if it is hard, strike it sharply into the concave part of the bone where the arrowhead is located, and push it towards the opening.
If the arrowhead is concave, then push it strongly towards the instrument, as the arrowhead will be guided away by that.
If the arrow is embedded, you must press all your weight into the flesh where it is truly stuck, if possible, and take care of that area as best you can.
If the arrow strikes the foot, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side, and it is near enough that you can feel it, and if it is possible to extract it without causing injury to veins or nerves, then extract it and treat the wound as necessary until it heals.
Design of forceps for extracting arrows:
Their ends should be shaped like a bird's beak, made with a serrated edge to grasp the arrow firmly so that it does not slip.
And these are made in various sizes, large, small, and medium, according to the amount of the arrow's thickness, its fragility, the width of the wound, and the tightness of the area.
so that it is driven out from the concave arrow and pushed towards that side.
On venipuncture.
The veins for flebotomy, of which there are several, include: two pulsatile veins near the auricles, called the temporal arteries; two veins in each eyebrow, known as the lacrimal ducts; a vein located in the middle part of the forehead and one at the tip of the nose; two jugular veins at the nape of the neck; two veins on the upper lip; two on the lower lip; these are called the alare veins; and finally, two veins on the tongue. When the veins that are flebotomized in the arms; for from them comes a cephalic vein, and it is necessary to use wild lettuce; and the people call it "the vein of the head," and also "the deaf one," and it is the median vein, composed of a branch of the basilic and another branch of the cephalic; and the people call it "the vein of the whole body," the basilic vein which is paused in the domestic armpit is called "citular," and the common people call it "vein of the belly"; and the funis of the arm, paused on the fossa, is the one where flebotomy is performed, and is the one that appears on the skin through manifest appearance; and the saveola, which is the vein between the said auricular and the smaller said vein, is only two branches deep.
And on the foot and leg there are three veins; one of them is left at the curvature of the end of the wild lettuce; the second is superficial, and its location is left at the cuff of the domestic lettuce; and the sciatic vein, whose place is left at the cuff of the wild lettuce; and in the cuff there are other veins similar to those.
The treatment of veins that are close to the auricles is for old catarrh, emaciation, scurf and ulcers on the head, ancient evil conditions.
And the quality of bleeding from those veins depends on what you have learned: it should be done at the base of the patient's head, and rub the patient's head on the occiput at the place where both veins are located close to their auricles with a good friction; tighten the bandage around the patient's head so that both appear and the locations where their auricles are firmly pressed in two parts from the head; and if you want to follow this method, and if you feel the pulse of those veins as described above, do it.
Now take the scalpel, one that is sharp, and insert it into the vein in the neck until the fluotomy reaches the bone. And raise your hand over the vein and bone, and cut into the vein with a sharp incision. And the length of the incision should be about two fingers wide, or as needed; and cut through the flesh as deeply as you wish.
Then apply strong compresses and leave it until it is healed.
And as mentioned at the beginning of this text, the incision and cauterization of these are to be done.
However, of the two veins and arteries that are located on the temples, the jugular vein is an ancient and serious evil, leading to frequent headaches and acute overflowing of fluids in the joints.
And the quality of performing a phlebotomy on these is as follows: compress the patient's neck until two veins appear by visible evidence and confirm the pulse below them, and then you should proceed cautiously.
And then, raise the cord over the vein as indicated by your finger, insert the sharp phlebotomy instrument beneath it, and elevate the vein; cut through it in the same way you have done with the other two veins; and allow the blood to flow according to the amount of your need.
And then, close the incision of the patient's hernia, place your finger over the vein for an hour, apply pressure to that side and moisten it with a poultice, and tighten it firmly until it heals.
And now, having preceded the recollection of them, and those of their incisions, attract them to the beginning of the opening.
Thus, the application of phlebotomy to the vein of the forehead is appropriate for ancient face diseases, migraines, and putrid wounds.
And the quality of the flebotomy is according to what you have learned; so that the disease tightens its collar with a bandage in which the vein appears; and then take the instrument called a phleatome, which has this form.
Stop the point at the prominent end of the phleatome on that vein and strike it with a gentle or other appropriate motion in the manner of the instrument, and let the blood flow according to the amount you wish; then remove the perforation from the patient's disease and tighten it until it is healed.
And in some cases, the phlebotomy is opened widely, but it is not appropriate to perform a phlebotomy of extreme acuteness as with other phlebotomies, but rather of a lateral extremity, and phlebotomize that according to the transverse, because the bone is close and strong, it would easily break during the delicate phlebotomy.
However, the juices of the two veins that are the tears of both eyes due to itching and irritation in the eyes, and to the diseases of the face.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the illness tightens the vein in one place, and then you make a phlebotomy there, while standing over the patient's head.
And the phlebotomy should be made according to the transverse direction along a little bit of phlebotomy, for in the place there is no flesh; and if the phlebotomy is subtle, then only the tip of it should be cut.
Then allow the bleeding to continue as much as is necessary, and press on those parts, tighten them for a night, and then loosen them.
The phlebotomy of the nasal vein is useful for acute fever and violent chills, and for facial illnesses and migraines and redness that occurs on the face, especially when it is long-standing.
And the quality of the phlebotomy for him is that the illness tightens its grip and you take his nose with your left hand, and make a subtle long phlebotomy at the middle part of the nose according to its straightness, because the vein does not hurt in this place, and because the blood begins to flow soon.
Be sure to carefully clean your hand with water and soap before touching the patient, since unclean hands can cause further infections. Endure slowly your fingers in the flebotomy, allowing the blood to flow according to your need; then tie it off tightly for a night, as the wound will heal more easily.
After the flebotomy, both openings should be tightly bound to prevent blood loss and facilitate the beginning of healing, as well as combat infections, inflammation, and aggressive or corrosive ulcers.
The effectiveness of the flebotomy lies in that it draws out the illness from each part of the body; the healer should be positioned at the head of the patient, and the patient should lie on their side.
Then, make a small but deep flebotomy in the vein of the limb, removing blood according to its volume or as much as necessary; then close it with a bandage similar to that of the other vein.
And then carefully loosen the ligament and tighten both veins with moderate pressure to prevent further inflammation, and leave it within the bandage until the pain is healed.
And regarding the surgical incision of the veins, it deals with small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, and the corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, as well as bad ulcers on the nose and around the anus.
And the quality of this surgical procedure is that it stops the disease in its track and tightens its hold with a bandage, then turns the lip edges inside out and examines both veins, of which one is on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; each one is identified by the darkness of both, especially so around those areas where smaller veins are present. Then incise each one with a precise cut.
If doubt still persists, and you do not know which one it is, then understand that you should proceed to incision of the larger one among them, and remove any visible pus from those areas.
And make it look like the two veins that are on their lips.
When both veins that are on the tongue are involved, it is appropriate to perform phlebotomy of the cephalic vein at its proximal parts, which are in the throat, as well as for conditions of the uvula and oral cavity.
The quality of phlebotomy is such that it follows the disease among your fingers in front of the sun, lifts the tongue, and observes beneath the tongue, from one side where the vein is and from the other side, and the color of each changes to blackness.
And then perform phlebotomy on each one; and be careful not to end up with your hand in phlebotomy of those, for those are arteries.
And your veins that are phlebotomized in the thigh are those through which blood usually flows in all men, and the phlebotomy of them is performed in two ways, either by applying a phlebotomizing needle with a drop of myrtle or olive oil, or by making a cut with a phlebotomizing knife, and it is called arteriotomie, and this is its form.
Both the thickness of it [the myrtle] and its length, and it is used to open the concave veins full of thick, clotted blood.
And this fluctometry is of smaller extent and has more subtle endings, suitable for fluctometries of delicate veins that contain subtle citrus blood.
However, the juvenation of the fluctometry of the basil vein, which is one of three veins: it extracts the blood from the maladies that are left in the gullet and intestines, and from this, the feet and belly are healed.
And it is necessary for the fluctometrist, when performing that fluctometry, to preserve that and be wary of it, because it has an artery, and if he err and misplace the puncture of the fluctometry, he will incise that artery and cause a flow of blood, so it is necessary not to fluctometize that part with a sharp fluctometry, but rather cut it with alnessil.
And if the basil vein does not appear by manifest appearance, then you must know that you should leave that one and change to another, or seek some of its branches; or fluctometize in the place where it ends in the arm, because that is manifest; and you must incise that one with alnessil as we have said.
If you wish to perform a flebotomy on the patient, first cover the stricture of the arm you will be using, and locate the spot within it where the pulse is felt; then press down upon it tightly; bring the arm close, and with a sharp cut make a flebotomy on the concave vein; and be careful to avoid striking the artery in any space of the location.
And when you press, and strengthen the ligament, there appears an inflation in the spot that you have pressed tightly; that inflation is an inflammation of the artery, and therefore you should avoid it.
And if you feel the flow of blood in the flebotomy as with a horn (ampullary) vein, and the flow is subtle and quick, be aware that it is from an arterial flow; then cut and press on it for a long time; and if the flow stops, as you can see, it is stopped, tighten the arm and leave it.
And observe the patient from the moisture of their body, and be extremely careful of them and do not harm that for a few days until they are healed.
If the stone cannot be removed and you are not skilled in medicine for this, then incise the artery if it appears to you; because the end of the stone is contracted and the stone is dislodged; or take a piece of fig and make a hole in it, and insert that, and take one third of its size and tighten it over the site of the vein with tape and poultices for another day.
And if the stone is dislodged, then it is good; but if not, treat that with the water as mentioned before in the recollection of the place of the dislodged stones' flow.
And the removal of the stone from him is difficult due to the location of the pain and the possibility of ligature of the arm.
From the dark vein, phlebotomy is useful to extract blood from the upper part of the head and leave it from the lower parts of the body; for this reason, it is composed of branches of the basilic vein and branches of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
And be wary of the phlebotomist if he is afraid of phlebotomy, for that indicates a nerve; then, after finding the nerve during the phlebotomy procedure, stupor will occur, and healing will be difficult, and in many cases, it will not heal completely. This nerve causes sensitivity; if it is hidden in some people and is subtle and not visible, you must pause the phlebotomy with which you are cutting off the vein and avoid the nerve with all your might.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein along its length.
The advantage of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it removes blood from the head and provides relief to illnesses of the feet.
And in this case, if you want the phlebotomist to puncture for bloodletting either an olive phlebotomy or a myrtle phlebotomy; for it is the safest of all veins, as it does not leave behind any arteries or nerves.
Although some people may have a strong sensation of heat in certain areas when not phlebotomized on the first attempt, you should still pay attention to that sign.
The first sentence translated into English is: "The first of these is what you should know that phlebotomy is not administered except for the preservation of health and in hope of the patient and with caution from the occurrence of illnesses; and phlebotomy is performed on one of the veins in the arm, namely: cephalic, deep, and basilic; and phlebotomy is done at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter near meals, when signs of replenishment appear.
And phlebotomy should be performed on the third day or on the first pulse that passes three hours after midnight.
Phlebotomy may be administered at any time of day or night, as it is convenient and necessary, whether in the morning or evening.
And note that children should not be phlebotomized before the age of 13, women who are pregnant should not be phlebotomized except in the fourth month, and the elderly, those who have already passed 60 years, should not be phlebotomized.
And if someone wishes to be freed from fluid retention by any means, he should cleanse his cavities in front of the flebotomy with a lion's dung, if there is a significant gap retained, so that the veins do not expel the surplus during the flebotomy of the cavities, which are pure, and they do not affect the main members.
And patients should not be subjected to flebotomy if they are nauseous from sacred knowledge or gluttony, nor should they avoid illness or madness until this is remedied by them, nor should they suffer from hydropic disease, and it is more prudent to postpone the flebotomy until after passing colic, vomit, abdominal pain, and multiplication of urination, defecation, work, exercise during breakfast or vigils, or any cause that weakens vitality, whether in humans or animals.
And it is appropriate to consider the subtlety of humors in this regard if the swelling is caused by excessive food and drink, and medicines if it is possible for them to help with this.
And then immerse yourself in a bath, unless some cause or exercise prevents it, so that the pain is alleviated.
And stop the phlebotomy on the patient's leg at around noon, as we have said.
And perforate that foot, which should be guarded on that day from all animal misfortunes, as when there is pain, anger, fear, and from all bodily accidents, as when there is excessive work and labor, heat and swelling similar to them.
And at his bedside, have the causes of which gout is often experienced by men be present, aromatized and perfumed and with balms and similar things according to the amount possible.
And follow the phlebotomist over another cushion that is softer than the one from which the phlebotomy was to be done.
And then extract the arm, and with the fluebotomy instrument make two or three incisions; and then tighten the ligament with a strap and fold it over twice.
And whether the stricture is tempered, so that the constriction is not equal, or the stricture is excessive, then the flow of the blood is prohibited; or if it is for softening, then the movement of the blood should be prohibited entirely.
And then apply the stricture, so that whoever has been subjected to fluebotomy rubs their hands together between their thighs until the veins are inflamed and visible to the touch.
And then the fluebotomist applies a small amount of ancient oil to their fluebotomy instrument; they place their left hand's digit on the vein, slightly moving it away from the area where the fluebotomy is to be performed, so that the vein protrudes slightly and the pressure is relieved. This is because when the fluebotomy is applied to a vein filled with air, it should be contracted during the fluebotomy, and if it is not, the fluebotomist has succeeded; and the fluebotomy does not damage the vein, and if it does, that part of the vein becomes narrowed.
And therefore, it is important that the fleabotomist be skilled and competent in all these cases.
And after completing the flebotomy, if the vein is swollen at once, then that is not good; otherwise, you repeat this another time, leaving that place a little, or applying pressure with your fingers, if the location is not inflamed.
If the location is inflamed or the illness worsens, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not strain the limb, as suddenly the inflammation can turn into an abscess, nor should you immerse it in water.
And then repeat the flebotomy if necessary.
And if the opening is small and the blood flows subtly, and you fear that it will not allow you to extract the desired amount, then repeat the flebotomy on that spot according to its rectitude, and adjust the opening a little, and apply pressure in front of the location becoming inflamed, because in many cases, a small opening becomes an abscess.
It may sometimes be that the affected area is already inflamed, but do not apply any treatment to it, as it provides no relief; instead, apply some oil to any part of the wound, as it soothes the body's pain. And this one is better at this location than other oils.
And it seems that the application of oil in all forms of phlebotomy, where phlebotomists cut veins to prevent blood clotting in the body, is a tried and true method. It acts as an antithrombotic and wise choice when one of those is placed over the affected area, because the clot is dissolved and turned when it becomes thick.
If a great abscess is formed at the site of phlebotomy, as it often happens due to various causes, especially when the blood does not flow out but only that which surrounds the vein, or in the appearance of a thin vein, then you should compress and apply a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly warmed, and hold it there for an hour, as it dissolves.
And then he should make sure to tie off the vein of that blood, either by completion of itself or by another vein.
And if after some days a blackness or greenish color appears, do not pay it any attention; and if you wish, apply to that place a mixture of aloe and myrrh dissolved, or a solution of mint juice or warmth or something similar.
And often, after accidents or abscesses and bumps appear, you must perform a flebotomy on the basilic vein.
And therefore place your hand over it, and if you feel softness, you must apply pressure to that area; for the swelling is a sign of evil and bad; and thus be careful to place your hand over any cause of this that we have said, as strong blood flows from the sanitarian artery.
And make an embrocation on the area where there is stiffness, so that the place is hardened, and then take care of the other treatment until it is healed.
And take care to extract the pus from everyone according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the dominant color above the pus as it appears.
If the pus is black, leave it to drain until it becomes thin; and if you turn it out, let it be done gradually; and similarly if it is hard, let it be drained while preserving its sharpness.
And be mindful of him who is full and strong and requires the extraction of pus all at once; in this case, widen the incision into the vein and make the vein incisions broader.
And for him who is anxious, do the opposite; and be sure to extract it in several stages, making the incisions narrow.
And the best method for performing a vein laceration is to make a transverse section, not a puncture.
And this method of phlebotomy is free from blood flow and nerve incision, and it is more laudable and safer than phlebotomy according to latitude and longitude.
And to which it is customary for syncope to occur after phlebotomy, and know that you should cure that in front of phlebotomy with a little wine infused with millepellets or simple oxymel; and extract the blood from the wound in three or four draws.
And if it is a cold condition, then take wine infused before phlebotomy with myrrh or honey-based elixir aromatic with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar, or an elixir aromatic and strongly perfumed.
And if syncope occurs after phlebotomy and it is due to the sudden release of a lot of blood, then know that you should take a drink of warm water with fragrant elixir; and use aromatics such as fennel, and chill your feet at the affected area.
And employ other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter of fainting for evacuation.
And here he will extend his arm and dissolve the swelling a second time, focusing on the part from which phlebotomy is most effective for evacuation, and the virtue of it is cold, which evacuates the small swelling little by little, according to the quantity of virtue in the continuous days.
If one wishes to extend their arm and dissolve the swelling a second time, and their body is strong, then do this after seven or eight hours from the first phlebotomy.
One may throw the swelling of the body in the opposite direction of its decline, provided that it has been extended on the second or third day.
One should not treat a body in which there is much swelling that has already been punctured and is acute and causes fever, as it is necessary to evacuate the swelling once and drain a large quantity of it, and thereby increase the perception until fainting occurs, since you will have preserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and if you place your hand on the pulse of the swelling, you must hold the body from dying in fainting, because repeated attempts are necessary here when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And when you want to loosen the arm and empty the vein a second time, after the orifice of the vein has already been closed and it becomes difficult to draw out the blood, press on it with great force and gently bend it slightly, for this is too painful.
Habantz (after) the layssa (bleeding) has ceased to be fleubotomat (vein-squeezing) secondly; or otherwise, this is done with the acuity of the fleubotomi (vein-clamping) that coagulates the blood in the orrifici (opening) of the vena (vein); or pause (hold) over those of tyriaca alfarach (turpeth root) or sagzenea (cress), and compress slightly until the blood is completely out.
And if the vein is inflamed, stop the bleeding on it and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
And if it becomes necessary to empty the blood a second time, and there is no excuse, you may bleed it from that place or on the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called the "funnel of the arm" is phlebotomized in place of the ceph or basilic, when they are not visible or are obscured, for it is composed of those.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is such that the patient inserts their hand into the water-filled vessel until the needle turns red, and the vein becomes clearly visible.
Then apply pressure to that stricture with a tight bandage; and phlebotomize according to the transverse small, not longitudinally or according to width.
And the incision should be wide, and your phlebotomy should be such that you phlebotomize that over the joint of the hand a little.
And if the flow of blood is blocked, insert your hand into the water-filled vessel again and let the blood flow in the water until you achieve your need.
If you were in the summer days, then you are excused from the hand's journey in cold water, and in winter, the body of the sun is paused in cold water at the same time.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is considered safer than all other veins, because it has neither pulsating nor nerve.
And phlebotomy of the saphenous vein in the right hand is effective for liver ailments.
And the quality of phlebotomy here is that you should tighten your hand with a ligature or around your hand, since it has been immersed in cold water, as long as the vein remains swollen and clearly visible; then phlebotomize transversely; and if you make an incision from top to bottom, this will not harm the patient.
And be careful not to cut off your hand with phlebotomy, because it contains the nerves of the fingers naked from flesh.
And then repeat the hand in the warm water and let the blood flow through that, for if you do not repeat that in the warm water, the blood will clot in the orifice of the vein, and it is forbidden to flow.
And once the blood is extracted according to the amount needed, you should apply oil and salt to the vein to prevent it from hardening; and be careful that you do all this in a narrow space.
But the healing of the flebotomy of that with the left hand, it is related to the illnesses of the chest.
And do the same with the flebotomy of him/her as you have done with the other.
And the healing of the cephalic vein from the flebotomy is for illnesses that are in the distant parts of the body, just as there are illnesses of the chest, and retention of menstruation, and for illnesses of the veins and ulcers of the thighs and legs old, and similar to the illnesses.
And the quality of the flebotomy in this case is that the illness pushes its foot into the water and causes friction until the veins appear; it is then wrapped around the joint of the foot with a strap; and the location of the vein, having appeared, should be marked with a sign, and from there it branches out in various directions on the surface of the foot.
And therefore, cut the vein widely and leave the leg on the bed next to the marked area, as it is better and more salutary.
And if you perform a flebotomy on the surface of the foot, be careful to avoid the nerves that lie there, and place your hand over it when making the flebotomy, moving along its course as if you were cutting it.
And be brave with the flebotomies.
If it is forbidden to drink wine, then you should immerse the foot in cold water and let the urine flow out until it is evacuated.
And if the flebotomist fails on the first attempt, then he should repeat the phlebotomy in another place, as the area is clean; and do not fear any harm from it, but be careful of the nerves as we have said.
And do the same for the other foot equally.
And for the sciatic vein, the area as we have said is below the talus, near the origin of the wild branch.
And the incision of phlebotomy on him is at the hip joint when it is for the sake of caution against urine retention.
And the quality of the flebotomy is that the disease is bathed, relaxed and tightened the flesh of the thigh from the side of the wide into its sole on four sides with a long thin bandage, only appearing through this.
And so when it appears, you perform the flebotomy on that part according to each method that is within your ability and according to the cross section, which is best; either puncture it with an incision or cut it off with a secion, since the location of the disease is dry.
And it is in most people not quickly noticed; and if you find it, and it does not appear to be painful for the entire limb, perform a flebotomy on one of its branches, and that is the one that appears at the back of the foot opposite the big toe and the little finger.
And be mindful of the nerves, and let the blood flow out as much as you wish.
And then carefully dislodge the stricture and place your hand over the site of the femoral surgery, tightening the area as it heals.
On ventilation and the qualities of using those.
Ventilators can be of wood, or iron, or glass.
Ventilation is achieved through two methods: the first involves the incision and drainage of pus, and the second is ventilation through incision without drainage.
This ventilation, which involves incision, is also through two methods: either with heat or without heat.
And the ventilators that are administered through incision and drainage of pus have twelve locations in the body, one where ventilation is paused, which is the last opening at the top of the head; another in the middle part of two columns; and ventilation from below the jaw, leaving it outside the mouth; two-spaced ventilators; and those of the ribcage, above the end of the ribs; and two-inlet ventilators, each a span wide; and ventilators with two pegs; and ventilators with two pieces.
And the extraction of blood should not be done from small veins scattered in the flesh, and for this reason, it does not remove toxicity through those, but rather it is done by phlebotomy; nor should one cover that bloodletting with fire or apply heat to any illness caused by accumulation within the body until it is completely evacuated.
If bloodletting is necessary for an illness or a continuous condition, it should be done at the beginning and end of each month, and at its midpoint and at any other time that seems appropriate.
And therefore when, for any cause of those (conditions), and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, you find that a venting must be done rather than waiting two or three hours past the day.
And an immediate venting of the neck is when it imparts gravity to the head and what sinks into the shoulders; more importantly, this is a proper evacuation for the whole body.
And this venting is at the site of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein.
And it is not advisable to use that which is of foul composition or in which catarrh is present, as it causes great harm to that part.
And for this reason, one should not use those vessels, especially in the heads where the maladies are confined.
May he who is continuously pressing on it be relieved; and for this reason, make sure that you order the windbag holder to place his hand lightly on the parts where the pressure has subsided, lest relaxation lead to a recurrence.
The use of the windbag (ventozacio) on the chest is an alternative to phlebotomy of the small vein (vena fusca) and the basilic: it aids in asthma, relaxes constricted airways and cuts through air movement obstructions, as well as helping cough and congestion.
And be aware that the windbag should not be pressed too hard on the chest, for if it remains in place for too long, it causes weakness in the body and stomach.
And the windbag applied to the head helps with accidental pains in the head and eye, migraines, and toothache; it is an alternative to phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
And beware that you command the fan (or bellows) handler not to press his hand into the scarification so as not to pierce the artery and cause flow of blood.
The fan (or bellows) can also be used to provide comfort to the mouth, and to clean corruption of the gums, and to resemble the conditions of illness in the mouth, taking the place of phlebotomy of the alien substances that are in both lips.
But the fan used over both palms provides warmth, which is achieved by reflection of heat.
And the fan used inside the two hollows provides immediate relief from phlebotomy of three veins, namely the basilic, femoral, and cephalica, as it draws blood from all those manual veins in the flesh, as well as from the smaller veins of the other, larger veins, to achieve the attraction to the three veins.
And instruct the bellows handler not to blow too strongly during scarification, as the area is already devoid of flesh, leaving only nerves and arteries.
And it is a bellows used to blow over wounds and apply treatment to hemorrhoids in the anus and to pus-filled ulcers.
And you should instruct the bellows handler to use a strong bellows, made of iron, as the area requires firm pressure; and its powerful but gentle blows should be used for scarification.
But the bellows from the legs should be reduced in size for delicate treatments, as they draw blood from throughout the body, providing relief from old pain in the joints and kidneys, and from the bladder; they induce menstruation and provide relief from breathlessness and coughing; and they serve in place of phlebotomy for two veins, and for binding and incising, and for two pins.
Despite weakening the whole body, it causes fainting in many people.
And the stretching of the ropes from above causes the healing of the wounds on both legs' vents.
And the proper positioning of the ropes is that it stops the wound at the beginning by applying a temporary suction, and does not prolong the position of the ropes, rather it releases them lightly, and tightens those as needed, allowing the humors to come to the area naturally. And do not cease to repeat this process until the location becomes red and swollen, and the sign of the wound appears.
Then cut and repeat the suction gradually, and pay close attention to the body's condition.
For that man who has tender skin, be careful to make an incision once and not more, so the place is not ulcered.
And command the bellows to increase the incision depth slightly, and facilitate the suction with ease.
And if the swelling in the vein is great, you must make two incisions, because the first incision opens the way for drainage of the vein and its contents. Make the second incision at the site of the acquired inspection during the extraction of the large vein.
And if the vein is very foul-smelling, make a third incision for the final extraction.
Finally, when we want to extract the vein little by little or a small one, it is enough for us to make an incision.
And if we wish to extract a hard stone, make a deep incision; and if we know that the stone is large, then we must make a deeper incision.
And the term "scarification" refers only to the depth of the cut.
And if the stone is large, hard, dense, and its pores are very tight, then the places where the suckers are to be applied must be softened, opened, and resolved; if it is in summer, then use oil of aloe or oil of violet, or crushed almond oil, or oil from a cockle; and if it is in winter, then use goosefat, or lilac oil, or chamomile oil, or walnut oil, and similar ones.
And if the surplus is thick, stubborn, then use oil of ambergris, or balsam oil, or aloe oil, or anise oil, and similar ones.
If the blister-maker is made of large pieces of tender skin, then it must be prohibited from oil, and at these places where blisters are made on their bodies, the blistering should be with warm water or cold water from a bath, or vinegar water, or wine water, and similar.
And that one whose skin is very moist, washes their blisters with wine or vinegar water, or myrtle and sumac water, and similar to those.
And for those whose excesses are thick, wash their blisters with old wine or water of fennel, which is marjoram, or from anise decoction, or chamomile, and similar to them.
And it must be guarded away from baths; as it is administered immediately before or after a bath for an hour or two, and it must sleep near the blister.
What is it that must be done to regulate the flow of blood after phlebotomy before ventilation?
When beginning the treatment: if the phlebotomist or the one who has had blood drawn is irritable and has sharp pain and inflammation, then you must take causes that bring coldness, such as with milky cucumbers, endive in wine, laytuguas (a type of herb), secanabin (possibly a type of plant), julep (a medicinal drink), and similar things.
And they should abstain from food such as poultry, young meat, and foods seasoned with spices.
And for those whose condition is severe, they should take in drinking alcohol made from almonds, or alcaparras (capers) seed oil, and sumac, and often smell a mixture of wine and nutmeg between vegetables and meat; and it is recommended that they limit their intake of alcohol and food, abstain from poultry, rabbit, peas, small birds, and pigeons.
And it is necessary that on the day of ventilation and phlebotomy, the liquid intake should be greater than the food intake.
It is necessary to provide some men with a drink of tyria, or other muscle relaxants such as musk, especially before ventilation or phlebotomy, so that the principal members are comforted and the pain is alleviated; and one should not take that scorching heat.
However, not all vents are scars; they should be stopped on the liver, and over the navel, and in places of the joints, and the opening of the anus, since these members do not suffer scarification.
And it is not desired for those who only have pain in a member due to the attraction of humors; thus, they use a paused vent on the breast in the case of flux of humor from the nose; and employ that method to dissolve the stuck ventilation within the member, just as they pause over the stomach and navel; for it rarifies the member, scorches it, and removes pain as it resolves the ventilation.
And it is now placed over the lumps when they occur in their compression or pressure, for by virtue of strong attraction, it improves their compression and eradicates the pain from its place.
And it seems to occur when it is placed over the liver and gallbladder, requiring ventilation in those enclosed spaces.
And these ventilations are administered using suction as needed; and sometimes they are administered with fire.
And sometimes they are administered by filling them with hot water in the ailments of the gallbladder.
And this is so that the ventilation be filled and a great abscess forms, it is only hot water or water in which suitable herbs have been steeped.
Form of a wound administration over fire: the size of the opening should be two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and the quantity of the ointment should be the thickness of a palm; and in the width of it, at the place that is in the circumference, half of it, the passage should be small according to the quantity that fits into it with an needle.
Use ery or citrus, with thick margins, lion, alligator, and terry fabrics to prevent the member from moving out of its position.
And at the middle of it, there should be a transverse mark of ery or iron, where the candle is held over fire.
And this wound is much greater than the one we have previously treated; and its size is smaller according to the illness and the condition of him who uses it.
And the force of suction from the cups on children and weak bodies is different from that on young people and those with strong bodies.
And the technique for applying this suction is to hold the fire over a piece of wood with decent heat in front of a small candle of wax, and place it over the middle of the transverse branch at the exact spot of the cup, so that the fire is lit around the edge, preventing any harm to the patient's body.
Once the cup is applied to the patient's member, as we have described, and while we have the fire, before the cups are removed, we should ensure that the said fire touches the wood and ignites the vapor on that surface; then the suction will be quickly released.
And hold the fire according to your preference, repeating it if necessary.
Place a suction cup that is applied in the case of pleurisy, filled with water without crossing or breaking, and it should only be placed on the affected member.
And this is the form of it: And the larger the suction cup, the better, as it can receive a greater amount of water.
Chapter LXXVII
Bloodletting instruments are not administered in all members, but only in those where the placement of suction cups is impossible due to their small size, such as the nose and similar parts; or in members devoid of flesh, like the nose and its surroundings.
And the quality of using those that you have found bloodletting instruments in the infected waters of putrid boils.
And in the morning and night, it is placed in lukewarm water until they are relieved, and no cause of discomfort arises in their abdomen; then the body is evacuated through flebotomy and venesection; and the affected members are rubbed until they turn red; and they should be held still.
When they are full and the case is closed.
And if it is possible to drain the area with venesection, it is more beneficial in youth.
And if not, wash the area with hot water and then apply cold; it should be rubbed and pressed.
And if the fever persists and the abscess of the bloodsuckers does not heal, then you should immerse a cloth in hot water and place it over it until the discharge stops.
And if the abscess multiplies, sprinkle upon it dried vitriol or gall and substances similar to those used for stoppage causes, until the abscess is drained; or apply heat over the area with crushed fava beans, and leave them there until the beans adhere to the site, and the abscess is drained.
And if it becomes necessary, apply bloodletting, when it is possible to change those (blood vessels).
And if bloodletting is forbidden for suspension, then the place with the recent abscess should be rubbed or a needle left in the places until an abscess forms; and afterwards, they should be restrained, because those who feel any pain soon give in.
And when you want them to open, sprinkle upon them some dried aloe, or salt, or ash, and do this several times.
Thus begins the treatment for the third stage: restoration. This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine; it deals with the restoration of broken and dislocated bones.
Oh, son, know that those who boast of this chapter are foolish doctors and common folk, and those who at any time have not studied the books of the Ancients or read a letter from them.
And for this reason, this way of thinking among scientists in our land is lacking; and you should not forget it at any time; nor have I devoted myself to that later, except through the long study of the books of the Ancients and the understanding of their writings, from which I extracted science.
And I have also added experience and study throughout the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter everything that my knowledge encompasses and over which I have gained experience; for I wish to make it accessible to others and free from the occupation of enlargement; and I have condensed it at the end of explanation; and I have demonstrated it at the end of declaration; and I have formed in it various forms of the instruments that are administered there, by addition of explanation, as I have done in two preceding chapters.
**First Chapter**
**Summary and collections from the existence of bone fractures, of those which must be mentioned before we begin the remembrance of amputated members and the various ones of each.** **Therefore, let us state in the preamble of this chapter the sums of the discourse; and the chapters to the understanding of which the artisans are forced at the beginning, and at rest concerning the truth of those; it is for you and those who are eager to know or learn this noble art from you.**
And therefore it is said that when you encounter any fracture or dislocation or twist or injury, you must pay attention to the beginning with phlebotomy or remove that part, or in some cases, if no specific cause prohibits, with the debility of virtue, or it is the one that happens suddenly, or weak from decrepitude, or there is time for severe heat, or severe friction.
And it is also beneficial in its diet with herbs, and meat of fowl, and crabs; it prohibits fatty meats and stuffing, and all food that fills the veins with rust, as long as you are careful to avoid abscess, and if you do not fear the effusion of material into the member.
And then return the patient to their original condition, to which they are accustomed, and by which the pain usually subsides.
And so when the broken bone begins to be healed, you must ensure that the patient is fed nutritious foods with plenty of motion and not too heavy or dense, such as food made from flour soaked in water, and rice, and beans, and meat, and veal, and fresh fish, and large vegetables and similar foods, and following this regimen brings about the coagulization of the fracture more gently and better.
And you should know that bones become brittle in old age and in the frail, it is not possible for them to continue and consolidate according to their nature because of the drying out of their members.
Nature nevertheless adjusts and amends the broken bone from any cause similar to gout in which a swelling occurs that adheres and strengthens the joint that is always glued together, until the end of strength and firmness, just like fire at the beginning, so long as any cause does not prohibit it from its work.
And for this reason, it is necessary to refrain from the patient's food, food in which gravity, viscosity, and thickness are predominant, as we have said.
And you should know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the arm bone is different from a fracture of the skull bone; a fracture of the foot bone is distinct from a fracture of the leg bone; and similarly, all other members differ among themselves.
And having refreshed your memory of every species of fracture, expounded in its separate chapter from the others.
There is great diversity of fractures within itself. The species of bone fractures are diversified within themselves; for there is one type of curved fracture that occurs in them, while another kind happens due to stars falling; and sometimes they are fractured according to the length of the bone: such as sagittal, stellate, and transverse fractures, both proceeding and not proceeding from a cause, just as it is done in writing, and there is a fracture by plague and disruption in the head, and a small fissure fracture.
And for all species, there is a specific pain or torment inherent in their restoration according to the distinct memory of its location.
Sign of fracture of the bone. And this is known as bone fracture: it is the deformation of the bone, and that elevation and sensation upon touching, and only when you press upon it with your hand.
And therefore, when there is no apparent deformation in the location and it does not feel painful upon touch when you press on the bone, and the patient feels little to no pain, then it is not a fracture.
It is possible that it is a deformation or small fracture, where you do not press upon it with your hand and feel pain, but rather apply medications of which you have had success in the past at the appropriate time and place; then it is very tight due to subtle tightness.
And you should know that the location, when it is arched and does not split into two or anything else that does not happen in it naturally, if the entire part of its counterpart is torn away, then you must begin from your hour of correction of the habit that happened to it post-facto with cautery.
If the post-facto cautery causes an abscess, then leave it for a few days until the abscess ceases; and afterward, apply that according to any manner or means of elevation and engineering that you can devise.
And you should know that the restoration and stitching of it is lighter than the bone in which the satagical incident happens.
And afterward, tighten it according to the return of its remembrance.
If there are only slight satagies in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from two sides, if it is the hand or foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two strings or one string and your hand.
And your position holding the member should be according to its natural shape, while the tensions on the stretched member are released, then you pierce to return those additional parts to their proper place and according to any way that you can in their locations.
And be careful according to your strength not to harm the patient with your operation, nor cause any injury; and pierce according to your ability, applying one bone to another in its best form.
And be sure at that opportune moment to apply your hand to it, and if you notice any other cause, correct that and engage that with the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid violent extension and compression, as foolish doctors often cause abscesses with their operations, or they cause contraction in the member, as we have seen this happen through the operations of their foolish motions.
And the quality of the tightness of the member is what you should consider, because you must know that broken members are diverse in their smallness and greatness and in the form of those.
And regarding those that are small like the arm and elbow and similar to those, understand that the envelopment should be of very thin cloth.
Those who suffer from such a condition as gout, where the joint or limb is swollen and hard, should know that it involves all parts, connecting the large member tightly to every other part with stiffness equal, so nothing enters it.
And then, as it begins, you should start the patient's evacuation of flatulence, applying appropriate lubrication to that area, over the site of the fracture using three or four wraps depending on the member; and tighten your hand slightly on the ligament.
Then, move to the upper part of the site of the fracture, and tighten less than you tightened the location of the fracture. Then, gradually lengthen the wrap around the site of the fracture, and gently ease the tightness little by little, until you take from the location a great gap.
Then, take another bandage and wrap it around the other side over the site of the fracture, moving the wraps away from the fracture; and perform your operation on the tightness of the wrap and its mollification according to what we said about the first wrap above.
And then place between the folds of cloth or linen, which conforms to the contortions of the fracture, if there is contortion; otherwise, do not place any cause upon it.
And then place upon the other side, and wrap these star-shaped compresses neatly around it, as soon as the swelling or abscess is under control, and place your attention on what caused the abscess and the inflammation; leave that for a few days; and then tighten the bandages around it.
And the bandages should be of various types, well-formed; or of willow wood; or of palm fronds; and each bandage should have a certain width according to this form and figure.
However, note that the bandage placed over that fracture should be thicker and more tightly wrapped than the others; its length according to the measurement of the member in magnitude and smallness; tighten the bandages on the other side as per your initial tension; and then tie them from above decently as we have said about the tension, and it is that your tension should be according to the location of the fracture more, and the longer it extends from the fracture, the less the tension.
And take care that the threads are stronger in thickness and fineness, and numerous; and if the threads are thick, as you have seen in certain operations where pauses the thread of cords twisted from them, it is a great error when the tightness is equidistant.
Indeed, very fine threads are not suitable, for you will not be able to achieve the desired tightness with them, and you will not realize that there is less than a finger between one thread and another.
And if the disease is localized in the extremities of the bones, tighten the bandages in those places without causing injury, using linen or woolen threads until it ceases.
Sometimes the fracture is similar to an epidemic, causing disruptions in the chain, and it comes to mind again in those mentioned in the second chapter due to its particularity.
And you should know that a completely severed member is not immediately straightened by binding; this is because when the member is large, it cannot be covered with bindings right away, but rather after several days, or five or seven, depending on your certainty of preventing an abscess from forming.
And this is the manner of splints that the ancients used to restore, which are placed over fractures and dislocations and twists.
The method of splinting for the restoration of fractures, suitable for complex cases and especially for women and children, where heat or friction should not be applied: take flour dust, which is the core of the flour that prevents the movement of the millstone against the walls of the mill.
And if that does not work, take a piece of thin and not too delicate fabric, cut it to shape, and apply the splint.
Another method of plastering to restore fractures and dislocations and twists: prepare a mixture of assafetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and migra, which is obtained from the milled salvage of all parts of the nettle; mirra and aloe in equal parts; alcohol in double the amount; mix all these ingredients with licorice water or egg albumen if the patient's condition allows it; then apply this plaster, as it has a good composition and restores slightly broken bones, and confers benefits to many people.
Another method of plaster that provides relief for fractures and twists: prepare migra and add white alder in equal parts, milled nettle, mirra, aloe, acacia, and Armenian honey in double the amount.
All these ingredients are mixed in a mortar with a strong force, then sieved and prepared with water or egg albumen, and administered as needed.
Method of plastering joints and bones separated from their locations, and pain occurs accidentally in these and in cracks and fractures; take fine wool and immerse it in warm wine and oil, and apply it to the affected area.
This plaster is not intended for restoration, it prevents pus formation and effectively expels pain.
Another method of plaster that restores closed bones: take leaves of the fig tree and poppy flowers, mix them all together and make a plaster from them.
Method of a rapid plaster administered for the restoration of broken bones and when you wish to resolve the healing of an abscess: take roots of alder, chamomile flowers and violet flowers, all ground; mix them with wine, let it be thoroughly triturated and sealed in a jar, if the member is not scalded.
If it is scalded, then apply that to the affected area with cold water from parsley or any other cold water.
Another method of applying a poultice with stronger effect for resolution than the first, when there is a hard abscess, it involves preparing a mixture of chamomile, fennel seed, licorice root, marjoram, violet flowers, camomile flowers, and any other herbs; all are crushed and mixed with either sage water, rosewater, or wine, according to the condition of the member and its color.
However, Hippocrates does not state in his work that it should be placed on the affected member before its restoration unless certain preparations of wax and oil are made; he recommends a mixture of both coarse and fine materials.
A goat's hair can be used as a poultice on the member after its restoration and for conditions that require cooling, just as myrrh, lint, and similar substances are used for similar purposes.
A method of applying a plaster for injury and pain: take equal parts of millet, chamomile petals from man's hair or goose feathers, and salt, mix them together, strain and grind them, and make the plaster.
If the amount is such that it covers and loosens the adhesion, and indeed it is separated, consider whether there was no pain or discomfort, nor was a bone broken, in which case it is not worth disturbing from its place, for then you should not dislodge before morning. And if there is severe pain or pressure or swelling at the site, then immediately remove or loosen that plaster, and do not apply a new one.
Take a piece of linen and a sponge from the sea, make it moist, and immerse that in hot water until the pain and discomfort cease and the joint is relieved; then let the member rest for an hour; next, place over it clean wool soaked in vinegar or rose oil, and wrap it up for a night, ensuring there is no risk of infection, and helping to reduce inflammation and the pain in the joint.
And then repeat that delicate constriction and apply a small plaster, not tightening it with your initial tightness, but gently pressing it until it heals.
And if the abscess, swelling, pain, inflammation and all other symptoms have subsided, and you feel a need for a plaster and constriction, then repeat that as you did at the beginning.
And if no cause occurs in the member from those we have mentioned, then do not remove it, but wait three days or four or five or seven; and sometimes all this is left for twenty days, as you see fit, due to the loosening of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and it approaches the coagulation of the flesh over that.
And then adjust the constriction more than your initial constriction, and adjust the thickening of the patient's food according to the recall of their condition.
If you examine the site of the fracture and find it already dried and weakened but not covered, then know that nutrition is forbidden to reach it; so immerse that part in hot water several times a day for three days, and ease the tightness a little, allowing this operation to bring nutrition to the member, and heal it moderately.
But what these foolish restorers of a member's fracture do another time when it is not restored at the beginning, according to its covering, and is restored according to its tortuosity, is an error according to their operation, and a great fear, and if it were a skilled surgeon who did this, he would increase the ancient wounds in his free moments and heal them towards this.
And you have not seen any of them do this, so it is all the more reasonable that they should not do it.
**Section: On Fractures When They Occur in the Head.**
The fragments of fractures are diverse, and their shapes vary, and the causes are distinct, for some fractures are caused by the impact of a blow that shatters all the bone within the joint, leaving it as shattered as a fragment of wood, hence this type is called 'ascial'; or space cuts through a part of the bone, cuts the flesh, and the incision does not go entirely through its posterior side; and this type of fracture is called 'levatio absoluta'.
And the severity of these two types of fractures is either great or slight, and they can be caused by compression or distraction; and their cause is a blow or impact on a hard object, and they resemble each other in appearance.
And this fracture is either penetrating, causing the panniculus (fatty tissue) to herniate around the bone, or it is on the surface of the bone; and the severity of these two types of fractures can be great or slight.
And when it is a fracture that is confined to the bone, in the delicate part of the hair root, and for this reason this type of fracture is called capillary.
This is a description of a fracture caused by impact or sudden force, where a thin layer of bone cracks and breaks away from the main structure, similar to what happens in a hairline crack. It often occurs in concave areas, such as when an ery (maybe a bone or joint) experiences impact and subsequently fractures.
This type of fracture is primarily observed in the bones of children, especially when they are very young.
These various types of fractures, in their stages, also appear as separated stars. (This could be a poetic or metaphorical way of describing the fractured bone structure.) And then, the patient should have a complete rest in this position.
And I have come to know all these types of fractures by examining them, and by trying to understand their appearance and the state of the flesh that is on them.
This specific capillary is known for being discovered when the bone is exposed, cleaned, and covered with a attempt, as the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, one must consider the beginning of the patient's illness, and if you examine their symptoms, it reveals the cause of their pain, just as vomiting due to anger, extension, loss of consciousness, absence of speech, fainting, acute fever, discharge of pus from wounds, and redness—all these resemble symptoms in serious conditions. Therefore, unless it is evident that they are sane, one must not attempt to heal them.
If one examines non-corrosive symptoms, one hopes for healing, and then begins to treat them.
The cause is that if the pain has come to you at the beginning as it does and this occurs in the days of winter, then be aware that you must study the bone's exterior from the 13th day according to your disposition.
And if it is during the summer days, then be aware that you must keep an eye on the bone in front of the 7th day, as what remains of the bone is corrupted by the panniculus, and accidents that we have mentioned may occur.
And if the fracture has already reached the panniculus covering the brain and it is in small pieces and inflammation, then be aware that you must incise the fractured and inflamed part as I have mentioned before.
And it is that you cut open the patient's thigh, discover the bone according to its usual place and manner, as possible according to the figure of the plague, and bind it over the patient.
And if you find yourself with a bone fracture, pus or abscess, carefully approach it with something that covers, and place clean cloths soaked in wine and oil on the area, and allow the swelling to subside until the abscess is healed and be certain of the pus flow; then begin with the circular incision around the bone and its removal.
And this is according to one of two surgical methods.
And one method is that you make an incision in the bone with a straight scalpel, and this is its form: Then apply another scalpel to it, slightly wider than the first one; and this is its form:
Then apply the scalpel with a wider cut than the second one.
And it is necessary that you use many scalpels, some of which are wider than others; and some of them shorter. They must be of sharp edges at their tips, made of iron or steel.
And use their help to facilitate percussion over the incision to prevent damage to the head and harm to that area.
And if the bone is hard and dense, be careful that you do not pierce through its circuit in front of administering the incisions with the instruments, which are called non-deep cuts.
And they are not called this way, but rather those that do not reach the end of the bone in the testis to which it is attached, so that at the cut, its extreme or margin is round, or like a small circle, which prevents submersion and the passage of the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take a great number of these cuts, each suited to the specific nature of each bone, as long as you are present in all parts of the brain, the end of which is sharp, and the quantity in length and breadth is according to the amount of specificity of this test.
And this is the method of three kinds of treatments: When drilling through the fracture of a bone, place the treatment instrument on the bone and turn it as you know that the bone is penetrated; then change the position of the instrument and stop at whatever point determines the thickness of the ray or surrounds it.
Then, using scissors or similar tools, make an incision between any parts of the bone, creating a thin space from which you can drain the pus as described earlier, to remove the bone or your hand, or due to any other cause that prompts you to use certain instruments designed for this purpose, such as tenacles and fine forceps.
And be careful that the instrument does not touch any part of the healthy tissue.
So, once you have drilled through the bone and separated it from healthy tissue if it is connected to it, you will extract it, be careful to scrape and clean it on the roughness of the bone itself with a tool resembling scissors, but ensure that it is both thorough and gentle compared to other scissors.
And if you cut any part of the small bones or joints, take hold of it with ease using what is appropriate for you among your tools; and then apply a cure to the wound with liniment and bandage them as we have said.
And another way of operation is gentle, free from pain, which has been practiced by the Greeks and praised for great glory; and this is how it is said: It is necessary for you at the beginning that you begin to uncover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most severe and evident, as soon as you have uncovered that part and paused, fix the end of this cutting tool slowly and carefully, of which this is the form:
And the lenticular cut is wide and does not cause any harm, while the acute cut is in two parts, advancing in length, so when you have done this; adjust the lenticular cut to the shape of the face of the acute cut on the bone.
And then carefully strike the incision of a limb with a small mallet until all the bones are easily separated as it is rotated; be sure of the pannicul that does not occur in it accidentally in any way, and if the medicant was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of their affairs; certainly, he was asleep.
If, however, there is some cause attached to the bones of the pannicul in certain places of the body, then make an incision on that part of the instrument lenticular, and separate it from the bone with ease, for it is separated from it without difficulty and without pain.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the pannicul, and that which is separated or left attached to the bone is the facia, containing in it hardness and delicate fibers, then cover those hard spots and eradicate those delicate fibers with precise razors, which you have prepared in various numbers, so that it will be possible for you to apply them in all places to the most appropriate extent of their use, according to how your operation turns out on the broken bone and its shape.
And be sure to administer in your treatment the reason why the bone begins to swell from these cuts, and then use it for the subtle pus of the swelling, and do not cease doing this continuously until you reach administering the heavenly and subtle pus of all of them.
In any of the other small breaks or subtle cracks, be sure to administer treatment according to what you have to achieve the correction of it.
And it is cause that it is not retained about all of those who have studied in that art. And let us focus on what we have written regarding great fractures.
And if the pannicul (fatty tissue) is tightly bound when you eliminate the bone, then be sure to take a cloth from it according to the quantity of the swelling, submerge that in warm oil and place it over the affected area; then take another cloth folded or tripled and immerse that in vinegar and water, and place it over the first cloth, making it as soft as possible without damaging the skin; and then apply a dressing of salt, and do not tighten that unless necessary based on the size of the swelling.
And leave this treatment for a day or two until you are certain of the safety of the apotheca; then remove that and administer medicines as necessary, such as linseed oil and flour of herbs, and powder of roots and aromatics, and similar things to these.
And you should make this powder from these medicines that is sprinkled on the affliction when it is dry; and generally, administer to that person all medicine of the proper kind of which he or she abstains and does not suffer.
And be careful according to your virtue that the affliction in your treatment is clear; and do not let there be any obstruction of ointment or other things; nor should you add violence to it; for when it is adjusted over the panniculus of the brain, it corrupts that and brings about a bad outcome, and causes great harm to the patient.
And it happens in the skull of the head, as when it is purified, the bones are affected and even more so when the treatment of it is delayed, and it becomes black on its surface; and therefore consider carefully if it affects the patient's condition, knowing that it is harmful to all of his or her faculties.
And if a darkness does not occur from the medicine that is placed upon it, but rather from the virtue of that medicine which causes that darkness, then take a quantity of honey and crushed olive oil in equal parts, and with those linements wrap the affected area; then place your hand over it; and treat it with the healing spices that are appropriate until it is healed.
Chapter III.
On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken in two places at once, but rather one of those bones or some other part, so that there are two bones in it, because the broken part is cartilaginous and not shattered, and damage to it occurs only through attrition, tortuosity, and sinusitis.
If one of the two parts is broken, then you must insert a small piece into its nose, and use that to hold together the fracture from within with the same indicated tool, and from outside with another, until the nose returns to its natural shape. And do this to facilitate for yourself, and be careful not to cause harm during your operation on the patient's pain.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and it does not heal there, then you should equalize the pressure at the end of the line where the swelling is greatest.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should do as follows:
And seek to restore it on the first day after the fracture, if possible; otherwise, carefully apply cold or hot compresses, depending on the pain, for seven to ten days until healing is complete.
And insert a piece of clean cloth into the end of the nose at the site of the fracture if it is in one part, or use two pieces of cloth if the fracture is in two parts, making sure that they are thick enough to fill the nasal cavity.
And so some of the ancient restoratives are that the swelling be infiltrated with a border, and changed throughout the day, but it is not seen by me; after learning that the joint is infiltrated with albumen of chicken as a paste of flour; and then lay it until the bone is firm and the cartilage is hardened.
And in some cases, it is found in the nose instead of swelling, due to an acute fracture of the nose that prevents breathing.
And this cause is not necessary; and if you wish, do it, and if you prefer, use swelling.
And if another case of post-operatory infection occurs, apply a plaster to the nose with wax or a strip dipped in hot vinegar and rose oil, or a mixture.
If you do not prevent gangrene, then cover that part outside with flour of sizami and powder of confited almonds mixed with egg albumen, and place your hand over it to stop the flow of blood, and do not tie a nose to it for any reason.
If your nasal bones are broken or cracked, then you must clean them and extract any fragments using suitable instruments; then apply a cut along the fracture and cure it with what incarnates and solidifies, and plaster it as required.
And if you suffer from an infection inside your nose, then you must clean it with steam and insert lead tubes until it is completely healed.
**Chapter IV**
**Restoring the Mandible After a Break**
When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not severe, observe if the fracture is solely external, not split in two and curved inward, then its healing will be light.
And if the fracture is on the right side, introduce your left little finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left mandible, insert your right little finger, pushing gently from within to facilitate the healing process, while your other hand supports the external part of the broken bone, ensuring proper alignment.
And if the mandible fracture is already separated into two parts, then you must apply extension to both segments, ensuring their alignment is as correct as possible.
And if there is a tooth dislocation and separation, you should use those of gold, silver, or cedar thread; then place a cerat over the broken mandible, wrap it with a doubled cloth, and cover that with a large, carefully made pad, or a single piece of material the length of the mandible; finally, secure it as appropriate using the equipment at your disposal, without damaging it.
And command the patient to rest and be calm, and abstain from eating excessively large meals.
If you estimate that the shape has been altered in any way on the third day, then cut and release the affected area; correct what has already been altered, apply a powder made from flour, or albumen from eggs, or sesame flour, since you will have removed the plaster, and place wool over the poultice.
And having thus placed and adjusted the poultice over it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave it, do not release it until it is healed and strengthens the fracture; for this fracture usually heals tightly in three weeks.
And if another complication, such as an abscess, occurs, then administer what we have mentioned about the treatment of the fracture until it heals, and drain that abscess.
And if the fracture is a severe injury, consider whether it's a broken bone or dislocated joints, then you must carefully hold those dislocations in place with what is appropriate for that condition during removal of those from the instruments.
And if the openings of the wound are narrow, you should enlarge them with a flebotomy according to the extent of your need.
And once you've held those dislocations, and it's not possible to remove them any further, you should then open the wound's opening if it's narrow; otherwise, place a bandage over that one of the dressings appropriate for it, until it heals.
It seems like the text you provided ends abruptly, making it challenging to determine its context or continue the translation accurately. The term "Capitol" here might refer to a chapter in the medical treatise, but without more content, a direct translation is not feasible. Could you provide additional lines from the text for a more comprehensive translation?
On the restoration of the fork when it is broken.
When the muscles break the fork (bone), it can be fractured in one of three ways.
Depending on the fracture, it may be broken but not separated, or separated into two parts that do not occur simultaneously; it is harder to restore it; or it occurs with complications, making restoration difficult.
And for that operation, when the fracture is with complications, you should have two assistants; one to hold the broken fork and assist, and another to stretch the muscle at the site of the break.
Then reduce the fracture to its original shape, making sure it is not in a state of excessive bulging or concavity.
And if you need more extension, wait until the pressure from the bandage on the wound is lifted using cloth or wool, and adjust its length according to your necessity; then extend and raise the fork and tighten it with your hand as much as necessary to engage the friction according to what you feel.
And if you cannot reach the end of the fork to the external parts, due to its length being insufficient, then wait until the patient's pain is relieved, and place a cushion over their thigh, approximately halfway in size.
And the attendant should press on the muscle at the joint while lifting the fork's end towards the fracture, and then you will correct the fracture and engage it with your fingers.
If you feel any stiffness in the fork and it is hindered, then you should cut through it and extract those obstructions to facilitate its use.
And if it is retained in the bone, you will make an incision from it with one of the knives that you have prepared for this purpose, having previously placed the fork, the instrument used by the chirurgian, aside; and this is the form of the instrument:
It resembles a cup, and its depth should be according to what you have needed it for, whether the bone is large or thin.
The length of it should be according to what is possible for the operation; there should be two ends, thus, with one end wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the plague that you have incised when you extracted the fragment from the bone is wide and secure from aperture, then you will adjust both edges of the wound with sutures.
And if the rupture is minor or you fear infection, use a clean cloth and poultice according to the amount of plague tear.
If infection occurs, then apply a cloth soaked in hot vinegar and olive oil, and place it over the area.
And, as long as the bone does not become infected; and so that you may notice the malady each day, when the ligament becomes soft or you see the bone already infected, then correct it and strengthen the bandage.
Then hold the patient's sleep over their collarbone and place a small cushion beneath it to slightly elevate their sleep during the night; so that at that time, the supporters of their arm from the side of that bone are elevated, and thus is raised the fracture of the furcula to the elevation of the muscle; or, alternatively, their arm is bent at the collarbone.
And do not loosen the ligament unless you notice swelling or an abscess within twelve days.
Then renew the bandage if you see that it is falling off, adjust its tightness, restore it, and leave it until it is healed and the fracture of the furcula is coagulated.
And it is tightened and supported according to its most severe state in 28 days, and in some cases, it is experienced by some people in less than that time.
Chapter VI.
On the restoration of shoulder fractures.
The blade of the spatula is broken at its lateral location, not from its central part but from its edges.
And therefore, when the central part is broken and it is broken in the middle location of its body, and it is not known but by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture, you should prepare it and reduce it back to its natural state in every way possible with the aid of a tool.
Then apply a fine powdery flour made from wheat and stop it with; and apply a dusting of doubled cloth; and place the blade gently on one side of a thin table according to the quantity of the broken spatula, or a little more.
If the sheet is concave in any part of the spatula, then you should fill that concavity with a substance to make it even.
And then tighten it strongly with a tongue of human origin, constricting and firmly holding the sheet in place so that it does not come out of its position.
And consider the moisture daily; every time it becomes softened, tighten it again and adjust the sheet if it comes out of place.
And attend to the patient on their side.
And the spatula is restored in 10 days or 25th (day).
And therefore, when this period is completed, you will dissolve the binding, and you must be certain that it is from among the bones whose beginning does not cause fear or the dissolution of their union.
And if you proceed from the location of the infected bone and place a ligature there, then cut it open, stop it, and treat as we have said regarding the fracture of the furcula in the case of apostema caut if this should happen here.
**Capitol VII.**
**On the Restoration of Broken Legs.**
Legs are sometimes broken in the middle, and this requires prolonged treatment; because their ends tend to heal more quickly than the middle, which often becomes deformed.
And one of the consequences of a break in the middle of the leg is that it bends inward, causing severe pain, difficulty in moving, and all kinds of symptoms, such as heat, swelling, and vomiting; and it is evident in the hollow of the broken bone and not hidden from feeling.
And the restoration of it is that the patient be placed on their back, and place a cushion between their shoulders; then press upon their muscles, and adjust their ribs to the contours of their body, performing the operation with subtlety according to every manner possible and appropriate for this, so that the form of the bone returns as it was.
Then apply a plaster and stopgap using a thin sheet of salve or cloth, similar in consistency to a bandage, wrapping it around the broken bone gently; pay close attention to the bandage throughout, tightening it as needed, and relax its tension when it softens.
If it becomes necessary to cause the discharge of any corrosion, inflammation, pain, or abscess that occurs in the area, then cut and drain it, removing the plaster and rectifying what has happened by way of healing it; adjust the bandage if needed, ensuring it is for the patient's benefit.
Chapter .viii.
On the restoration of broken ribs.
You know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur lightly, but in serious places that affect the back; and to the ends of their joints, distant from the impact, it does not cause such pain as those that are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of him is not concealed from the sense, you must inquire of him according to his words.
And the restoration is such that it heals the fracture as they say, according to the manner possible, within which it is swallowed according to what covers, and then apply a plaster and tighten the broken bone with a splint, if necessary for that.
And if the fracture of the ribs is inclined to the internal parts, it causes severe pain and punctures for the patient, just as punctures occur in those who have pleured, and because of this the bone becomes inflamed; it causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of bitter matter; and this is a difficult cure.
And already the ancients have ingeniously devised this most cunning device.
And of these things they say: cover and stop the intake of food for the patient that causes inflammation and swelling, so that the belly becomes inflated and extended, and the rupture is driven out to the sides.
We should avoid this lest it cause a slight injury to generate an abscess, if it happens; and if it already has, then help it immediately.
They also say that certain things should be applied to reduce wind and suck out strength; and it seems reasonable, yet there is fear that the wind may throw off excess fluid to the area due to weakness.
They also say: cover the area with cloth that has been soaked in hot oil cauterization, and place poultices between the ribs until it is filled, making sure the bandage adheres according to its rounded shape; and it is treated for the patient's illness with pleurisy of food and medicine.
And if the disease causes a violent contraction that cannot be endured, and the bone punctures painfully, fear for the disease, then cut open over the spot, uncover the broken rib, and place your hand above it to hold it still, recall the instrument that preserves the health, the memory of which is preceded, and cut into the bone easily, and extract that.
And it is appropriate to adjust the two lips of the ulcer if it is large, using cautery, and treat it with plaster until it heals.
And if an abscess occurs inside, cut it open and apply dust in warmed oil over the spot, and treat the disease with what covers the abscess inside.
And elevate him on pillows on which he sleeps, until it is healed.
**Chapter IX**
On the restoration of the fractured spine of the back and neck.
Sometimes, the bones of the neck can fracture and their cartilage can be damaged, resembling the fractured spine. And if this happens to anyone and you want to know if they will recover, consider: if their muscles are already relaxed, stunned, and dead, and they cannot move or strain those parts, and when you press them with your fingers or pierce them with a needle, they do not feel pain, then you should know that they will not recover, and in such conditions, it is deadly.
And if you feel pain in the parts that are strained and pierced, then know that the pressure on the bone is relieved and the illness will heal with treatment.
And if you see the spine of the neck resembling this and want to know if it will heal, consider the patient's feet.
When you notice that it has already softened, the pain occurs in those parts where it happened before, and when you lie on your side, you have difficulty breathing and moving at will, sometimes it raises itself onto its sides and wants to urinate but cannot, then know that it is fatal, and do not attempt its cure.
If no cause occurs from those, then the cause is better and more easily resolved.
And the treatment for it is that you pierce at the seat of the abscess with a hot cauterize iron placed over the affected spine or oil soaked cloth, or apply vinegar to the abscess; place that on the area some times until the abscess of the cauterize iron becomes sedated.
And now place a comfortable and firm bandage, tighten it around that area, and instruct the patient to rest and be tranquil, and not sleep on the side where they feel pain until it heals.
If the dislocation occurs of a leg bone or any cause that is already separated from it, you must secure it with bandages and hold that bone; then adjust the two edges of the wound, suturing if necessary; and also care for the flesh around the swelling, as long as it heals.
If the end of the bone is broken and it is the final stage of healing, you must then insert that piece with your left hand into its place, and with your right hand, hold the broken bone as tightly as possible; then apply a plaster and bandage over it, if necessary, and strengthen it.
And if you feel broken bones within it, then do as follows: secure those, hold them in place, and treat the wound with the treatment that precedes healing.
**Chapter X.**
On the restoration of the joint.
The bones of the joint are often broken, and when they break, the fracture of them is not uncommon in the extremities of those parts, and they are sharp at their length and decline into pieces; and it happens to the patient with pain in that place and a feeling of weakness, when there is a fracture.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over that part which is above the fracture, as it were, taking hold of it.
If the fracture is at the extremity of it, then you should bind that part according to what you have learned by experience, in such a way as to bring it back to its natural shape.
If the fracture is in the long bone or that it has already declined into pieces, then you should make the patient lie on their stomach, so that you can prepare for the restoration of that fracture. And therefore when you have wrapped her up, apply the plaster to her, and then place on top that board of wood or iron, and tighten by pressing without fear of breaking or removing the star (or bandage).
Wrap the concavity with something that fills it and ensures the tightness is even, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or side.
If an abscess forms cautiously, then stop the extension of the abscess and its restoration until it is calm, and apply to it what was mentioned before; then return to the restoration of the abscess, and tighten it thus with a cover.
And if it occurs in the joints or bones is broken, then you should treat them.
Chapter XI.
On the restoration of the broken assistant (or, potentially, "on the healing of the fracture of the attendant/helper").
The adjutori is what lies between the thigh and the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, its restoration is in one of two ways, of which one is to take a piece of wood roughly the size of a medium-sized stick...
And if both ends of the ligament are seen to be torn, then suspend it from an elevated position.
Then guide the patient onto a side, and pull the broken arm out over the stick until it reaches the point of curvature in the middle where it is attached.
And then suspend it over some heavy cause, or the minister should extend this to the other parts as well; and the physician must apply pressure with his hands to the fracture until it heals properly.
And another method is to have the patient lie on their back and raise their chest with one hand, while the other minister holds what is above the fracture with his hands; and the other takes the discharge from below them; and each of them extends themselves according to their ability.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, strengthen your grip on the fracture with both ligaments and have each of the two ministers extend themselves in opposite directions.
And so if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then you should stop half of the ligament over the tendon and leave the other half below the fracture towards the shoulder.
And if the fracture is near the shoulder, then you should stop the ligament at that place and over that shoulder.
Immerse that in easy water and facilitate the work; then, when it is immersed according to its shape and applied with proper application, tighten it gently unless an abscess forms.
If an abscess forms, leave the tightness within six days and place a cloth soaked in vinegar and oil over it to soothe the abscess; then tighten it again.
The method of tightening is to place a plaster over the fracture, then wrap new cloth around the plaster; adjust the arm on the assistant, and keep your hand open over its muscle.
And unwrap the cloth and tighten on the assistant's arm to keep the arm in place; if there is no other cause that prevents it, the broken bone will heal properly.
And then use stitches.
And it is that one should place over the fracture a splint that is both thick and strong compared to the other splints; and between each splint, space out the distance of the finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break, adding three parts from the total.
And then tighten the splints with the tension and rigidity that I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And it is that the tension over the fracture site should be tighter. And the less tension there is along the fracture, the lesser the stricture will be.
And thus, considering the position of the splints and the tension as we have said in the time when you restore the member to its proper place, then do so.
And if you fear gangrene, leave off the tightness and the ties within the seventh day as we have said.
And likewise, consider the dressing on all wounds for three days to prevent a second occurrence of protrusion or inflammation; foods that reach the member should be restricted due to the excess of tightness; and thus, rectify everything as we have said.
If you are certain that nothing of this nature will occur, do not remove the ligature but leave it for three days or more.
And the patient's rest should be on their back, and their hands over their stomach.
And place on the broken member a warm poultice of wool, and consider at every hour during the night or day that the form of the severed limb is not loosened or dissolved, or that the dressing becomes soft; thus, rectify this with all your skill.
And now hold the patient's food according to the order we have mentioned above, so that the food is subtle at first until it begins to tighten, and then you will notice that the food becomes thicker in them.
The custom of the assistant and the leg support is that they should be tightened for 10 days, and you will notice that they become relaxed and should be given baths and medicated with ointments that rectify this condition.
And if the fracture is old and infected, you will not relax that ligature and stitches for one or two months.
**Chapter XII**
**On the Restoration of Arm Fractures**
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the humerus and the radius; of these, one is smaller, and it is this bone that is called the 'little arm', and the other is larger and is situated below the smaller one, starting from above.
And if the larger or smaller vessels are severed, they are often cut at the same time.
And when the smaller vessel is severed above, its restoration is easier, and its healing is much quicker.
And when the vessel of it is severed below, the fracture of it is severe, and its healing is difficult.
And it is worse when two bones are broken at the same time.
Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the smaller vessel above, it is appropriate for the doctor to restore it, as small extensions should be facilitated before it becomes entangled.
If the larger vessel is what is severed, then it requires more extensive treatment.
And if the two wounds are simultaneously lacerated, then you must press the extraction of the foreign object with much more force.
And you must place your hand in such a way as to promote the restoration and extension of it over a cushion, and the wrist of your hand should be at a lower level than all other parts, so that the pain is centered on a well-prepared pillow.
And place a cushion in front of it or adjust its position, so that the pain does not shift or move.
Then the assistant should extend their arm to the side, away from the patient's hand or limb, and another assistant extends theirs above it similarly.
Then the doctor should align the bone within its cavity as best they can.
And if in the treatment of the bone there are obstructions, you will pierce and reduce all the weight to its place with your virtue.
And if there appears to be a separated fragment that will not respond to treatment and restore itself, then you should sever it according to the method we have described above.
If the fracture is severe, you have already dealt with it in a previous chapter, and so now take care of that one.
And if there occurs an abscess at the beginning of your restoration, then you should apply a bandage made with oil and white wax, gently between precision and subtlety, tighten the bandage over that area to loosen the abscess; remove the bandage and apply a paste prepared from ground chalk, and place stars; and let the star be placed over the fracture, both more distant and firmer.
And you know that the names of the bones in the arm are seen in the major arrangements, either in a single fracture or in two fragments together.
Then apply your pressure over the site of the fracture with greater strength and vehemence, and as the tightness around the parts above the fracture or below it increases, ease the pressure slightly more gently according to how the patient's pain subsides at the beginning of the chapter.
And the bandages that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough, and the thread by which they are tightened should be neither too fine nor too coarse, as we have recommended.
And consider the member and its ligament after some days. And if any cause occurs which requires correction, and as the pain strikes the member, then cover it with a water-soaked compress until the pain ceases.
And do not constrict the member until it relaxes, then return to the original tightness.
And if the tightness is already softened and the bone has regained its shape, resembling those before, then correct everything with your virtue.
And consider more if the nutrition is blocked from reaching the member due to excessive tightness, then it is necessary to soften that slightly and leave it for a few days until the nutrition flows to it, and then strengthen it.
If the patient does not have any of the causes of pain that we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to loosen it within a few days or around those times.
And hold the patient's hand suspended by their virtue of agile movement, and make them sleep on their back.
And you should know that this fracture is healed in 30 days or 33 days, or even sooner in 28 days, and all of this depends on the disposition of the complications and the state of the virtue.
**Chapter XIII**
**On the Restoration of Fractures of the Hand and Fingers**
You should know that the hand and fingers often suffer fractures, and these do not heal properly unless the natural movement is preserved.
And when the hand or finger experiences a fracture or dislocation, you must ensure that the patient remains calm and places their hand over the affected area to maintain its position.
And the physician should carefully align the broken bones and ensure they are properly aligned, using splints or other means to maintain their position.
And then cover it with a plaster and stopgap, otherwise gangrene may occur; and return the cloth to its place according to the quantity of the area, and you have already wrapped that in linen cloth.
If the fracture is in the deep parts within the belly of the palm, then make it like a piece of cloth, and command the patient to squeeze that part of their palm which is fractured; then tightly wrap a long cloth around it.
And the cloth under the body should be like a piece of cloth in which it is immersed, so that the body is applied to the palm; and tighten it as much as it covers.
If the fracture is in the external parts, then cover it with cloth and another piece of cloth on the part left in the palm, so that the hand is covered and straightened; and tighten the bandage, thus as the hand is rotated to its normal position between the joints.
And if you suffer a fracture in any of the bones of the hand, when it is the little finger, it should be splinted according to its position and held tightly with the palm, and if you wish, you can place a small right-angled splint beneath it to elevate the fracture and prevent further damage.
If the fracture is in any of the other fingers, just as in the middle finger, or index, or on the ring or little finger, it should be splinted and bound to the finger with which it is affected; or all the fingers can be bound together in sequence, which is better; or a small right-angled splint can be placed over it, as we have said for the little finger.
And consider, in your restoration, and appropriately position the caustic aperture and opposition - against your operation - with what covers when you encounter any cause of those, as described in the narrative of it.
**Chapter XIV**
On the restoration of the broken bone in the thigh.
The bone in the thigh moves and its fracture is determined according to the extent of the damage and the presence of pain.
And the restoration of it is done thus: the ligament is tightened over the fracture and another ligament is placed beneath the fracture, and the patient is laid on their stomach and face down.
Then the minister extends the ligament to its full extent according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
If it is desired to straighten the thigh, then the ligament should be pulled from the opposite side towards the knee, so that its extension is achieved, and the other ligament left beneath the fracture.
And if the fracture appears to be severe, then make the ligament proper over it and extend it to the neighboring parts.
Then the doctor should align the bones with both hands, reducing them as close as possible to their natural position, and joining the bone by a good union. He must then cover it with plaster and bandages, otherwise the member may become gangrened. If gangrene occurs in the member, then leave it for some days until the gangrene has subsided, and afterwards resume your treatment.
The bandage should be made as follows: It is necessary to wrap around the fracture a hard strip of cloth, folding it two or three times, and remove any excess; then wrap the leg until it reaches the thigh and the root of the wound.
And insert a long thin piece between the thigh and leg near the joint, allowing the ends of the piece to protrude from both parts, then turn over the bandage and adjust it over the thigh and leg, removing any excess.
Then apply pressure over the thigh at the site of the fracture, and use one stick on the bone of the leg.
Then fill the void between the thigh and leg with soft cloth, to ensure that the constriction is coagulated.
And commence with a strong compression from the middle over the site of the fracture using three or four wraps, and as you extend further away from the fracture site, your compression should be weaker and lighter and more moist.
And extend both ends of the piece to the opposite parts until it reaches the ankle of the foot, and tighten both ends of the sticks from the other side to prevent the ligament from shifting from its place.
And then apply the compression over it so that it does not affect the infected member with gangrene or pus or similar; and if any cause of those arises, then carefully remove it from there and correct what happens immediately, as we have said before.
If there is pain in the bone itself, then cover it with what you have available; otherwise, apply a poultice and remove the cause, and treat that from which the recollection of the pain arises until it is healed.
In some cases, this fracture of the thigh is so severe that it cannot be aligned with simply using bandages, as we have said in the aid and in the arm.
However, in restoring it in such a way, do not cause the patient to limp; and if it is restored alone, then apply the other leg to it, but it is necessary that the limb from which there has always been pain, should limp for some time.
And you should know that the condition is severe in 40 days or a little less or a little more, and all of this depends on the diversity of the complications and other dispositions.
**Chapter XV**
**On the Restoration of the Broken Humerus**
You should know that the fracture of the humerus in the arm often results in prolonged suffering; it frequently causes muscle atrophy.
If the fracture occurs, it is not only a crack or break in its parts; this is a great affliction or torment, and all of this has been at the expense of sensation.
And the restoration is such that it should be equal to what was broken in its parts, within the limits of what can be added and joined together in a way that is both accurate and facile, and in accordance with construction.
And then apply a compress and place it over that round wound, if needed; tighten a bandage around it as appropriate.
And then consider all the dispositions that we have recommended in other fractures, thus taking great care and similar to those that oppose any accident that is appropriate for its healing.
Chapter XVI.
On the restoration of the broken leg.
You know that in the leg there are two bones of which one is thick, and it is called the femur; and the other is thin, and it is called the tibia.
And it happens in some cases of fracture that the two bones of the arm are affected, and therefore restoration is made to them equally as with the arm itself, and the operation on them is one.
And if two bones are broken together, the leg is completely shattered.
And if the bone of the ankle is broken in pieces, the leg is fractured in several places.
And if the bone of the ankle is broken in a large and thick manner, it will be felt deeply, and it is among those conditions that are not easily healed.
Then administer extension, compression, and traction of the bones according to that engagement.
However, if the fracture of the leg is recent and has not yet undergone many stages, extension should be less and more gentle, and it is better to let nature heal it with your aid.
And in the leg is any cause for operation on the arm, and when you bind the steels and complete all the tie operation, then you will take pieces of hard wood on which the causes that are left are based, solely on palm branches; arrange them from those to which a little roughness is required, and do not use the hands, and let the length of those be according to the length of the leg, and from within to the most distant part.
And then wrap each leg with a cloth in two layers according to its length, place one end of the leg's bandage at the joint of the thigh and the other on the opposite side, ensuring they are properly positioned within the foot's deep spaces.
Then secure the two bandages at three points on each extremity and in the middle, as this tightness prevents the leg from bending at the joints, keeping it in a stable position.
And now, a piece of leather is applied according to the length of the leg, securing it in place to ensure the limb remains still.
Especially ensure this is done in cases of fracture, and when that condition is properly diagnosed.
Then, each day, examine the leg and carefully study its condition, paying attention to any signs of detachment or inflammation or other similar issues. If any such cause arises, promptly apply the appropriate treatment until healing occurs.
Chapter .xvii.
On the fracture of the talus bone and the bones of the foot, and on their treatments.
The talus bone does not suffer fracture entirely; rather, it is the bones of the foot that sometimes suffer fractures; and the joints of the foot rarely suffer fractures, but they do experience strain due to improper positioning.
And if the bones of the foot do suffer a fracture and those bones become elevated above each other, then the patient should lie on their side with the affected foot prepared accordingly.
Then place one foot over what is elevated among those bones, and press and crush them, and bind them until they return to their proper place.
And then apply a plaster and stop it, leaving the foot's belly on a small table with two legs.
Then tighten it around the foot with its natural flexibility, since you have wrapped it with cloth and other causes of which you are in need.
And as the pain passes three or four days later, you will loosen the ligament, since you will find the bones entangled, or broken or dislocated, and the operation on those is as known to you.
But if someone says it is broken, then restore those, intertwine them as they were and reconnect them to your hand in the restoration of those said bones. Then place this splint according to the length of the finger, and slightly bend it on each side; and leave the foot on this table which is now reconnected, and tighten its natural flexibility.
If what is broken from the bones is two or three pieces or more, then place your hand on each side of the quantity wrapped in lion's cloth, tighten the table at the bottom of the foot, and stand on one of the table's heads to make an incision in the foot's belly so that it has a good hold.
And it is important that you do not forget to consider all the causes mentioned to you in the other fractures of the accidents we have discussed; and pay attention to any accident related to this.
**Capitol .xvii.** (or .XVIII, depending on the numbering system used)
On Fracture of the Condyle of the Femur, the Os of the Patella, and the Mandible of the Man.
When the condyle of the femur is broken, make a cut in the curved surface, then slightly incline it towards the back, and hold it in place behind.
And then the midwife fills the canal with hot water and applies it to the joint as desired; the woman is made to bend, and slowly her two legs are raised until everything is drained out, so that the canal is opened before the extraction of the joint, and the broken bone returns into place.
Then she places poultices on the patient's back, and when they want to urinate, they gently massage the joint to facilitate it, then drain the urine, return to the previous position, and then return to their initial posture.
And do this for seven days or around those times, for that is when it is restored.
And if you wish, take a bladder of sheep and stretch over the joint's opening a tube made of cane; then insert the whole bladder into the joint, and slowly blow air through the tube until the bladder is inflated inside the joint, for the fracture returns.
And then it is filled with a poultice and left for some days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the thigh of a man or woman is cracked, then administer for its restoration and healing the same thing we have recommended for the hip bone.
And what is right is not overlooked in these proximal fractures, which rarely occur, especially to those who have little knowledge or experience with this my book; for that fracture signals to you in the greatest dispositions for direct restoration and stricture of it, and therefore understand well.
But in the case of a man's leg when it is cracked, take a hot compress from above and place it on the leg; then wrap it with cloth, and have it wrapped up, and leave it for three days or so until it is healed.
Chapter .xix.
On the restoration of broken bones when they are fractured.
It is convenient for him who suffers a fracture, especially if the bone is large, as in the thigh or any similar bone, to cauterize it immediately if the conditions of flebotomy allow it, as we have said above.
And if the infection spreads to the blood, then you must cauterize it as quickly as possible by applying pressure with a clean cloth, while also elevating the affected area if possible.
Then begin to restore the fracture as soon as possible on that same day, and do not delay it, if otherwise there is a risk of gangrene.
If an abscess forms cautiously, leave its restoration within the ninth day, until the abscess is healed, and do not approach it on the third day or at any time afterward, as you may cause further complications.
If a bone breaks and is prominent in an exposed wound, cover it to prevent further damage and use your fingers or tools with ease and minimal extension to reduce the bone and stabilize the area.
If the extension is beyond your preparation and the condition of it requires your personal tools, then reduce it using those tools, a device made of metal with a length of approximately seven or eight digits (possibly referring to a tool's size), and its width according to the amount of damage; and for this reason, it is necessary for the doctor to have on hand three or four such instruments of varying sizes for treatment in all types of fractures.
And both should be done with minimal force to prevent any further damage during the operation.
And it is of great importance to examine the extremity where the pain is most severe; and pull it firmly from above, stretching it outward from the inside towards the outside.
And this is the shape of it:
And it is called "volent labre" or "hernial aperture" in Greek, indicating a small opening.
For the part where the acute extremity is elevated above the prominent bone's extremity.
And it pushes inward as soon as the bone returns, and should be wrapped with some bandage.
And therefore, you should wrap the extremities of the fracture between them, and if the broken extremity is thin, and does not take the instrument for good purchase, then you must insert the tip of that bone within it before the instrument can grasp it.
If you cannot return the bone to its proper position, then cut away that part which is obstructing it using scissors or saw in whatever way you can.
Then, take hold of the one that is rooted in the bony roughness and with small cracks.
And when the bone is returned to its place and the hernia is reduced, if it causes violent pain, you will know that the bone has not been restored to its natural position; and then do this so as to bring great relief to the patient.
Once you have completed the restoration of the bone, immerse a black healing cloth in vinegar and, especially in summer, do not place any oil or other substance on the wound to prevent putrefaction and corruption.
And then apply stems at the appropriate time during the complete restoration of the bone, and leave the wound exposed so that you can incise the abscess with scissors and use wraps according to the extent of the abscess.
And be very careful not to aggravate the abscess with the fracture, as you have seen that foolish doctors often cause this by making mistakes on their patients, leading to death or severe corruption and putrefaction, which is unclean. If the abscess is slightly closed, soft, different from the other fractures' tightness.
And if the abscess is large or a bad abscess, and you are concerned about these accidents which we have mentioned, and you feel pain in that place, do not press on it, but rather wrap it with a hard cloth instead of bandages and tighten it around those areas.
And when the illness has begun, one or two days later, and pain is generated in it, you remove from them the cloth that you had placed over that affected part, and then administer certain remedies, which by our custom are used to treat these illnesses, such as tetracycline and similar substances.
And it is appropriate for you to wash the wound and consider the illness each day and evening until it is consolidated and healed, and ensure that the member is prepared in such a way that the pus runs from it to the parts beyond with ease.
If the illness passes many days and is not consolidated nor does the pus leave the affected limb, then you should know that here are only temporary remedies to contain the illness. And of those remedies, some are separated and removed, while others are not separated and involve placing the member in a position that causes pain; you should incise them as is possible for you.
And if the wound is infected with pus or ulceration, it is a sign of infection or putrefaction, then you must apply whatever is suitable for its cure, which is preceded by a description in its chapter.
And concerning that in which I must speak and you present your case: when the fracture is severe, it protrudes from the member, resembling those of the thigh and its muscles, and does not show any attraction to touch, nor should you attempt to extract it, for it may cause death after several attempts; leave it as it is until it heals on its own, which can take up to twenty days or more; and treat the wound if you see it, otherwise leave it alone.
**Chapter XX.**
**On the cure for inflammation that occurs at the site of a fracture.**
Motas observed accidents occur during the healing process of a fracture, especially near joints, and it is hindered by the shape of the member; thus, it prevents the member from its natural function.
Then consider whether the displacement is recent and administer those medicines that have stopped it thus far, such as aloe, mint, and similar herbs; take some or all of these, and apply those with a stiptic quality, or albumen from chicken, or agrestive (sour) herbs, and rest the affected area in a compress, and constrict those around it with good compression.
And note that the compression should not be loosened for several days; then loosen it and apply another, as long as the displacement persists; or place a plate of lead over it, as lead has the property of reducing all swelling in the members.
If the displacement has already occurred and the member is in a state of contraction due to necessity, then cut it off above the healthy part, incise the superflous or prominent, or remove it entirely as soon as possible; and tend to that until it heals.
Chapter .xxi.
Regarding the restoration of a fracture, once it is healed, then the delicate member should be wrapped gently according to its natural shape.
When a bone fracture is healed, and the delicate member is gently wrapped, it should not be done for frivolous reasons: among which one is the abundance of solution to the ligament and the binding of the fracture, not according to what is needed; or because of excess stiffness of the ligaments that prevents nutrition from reaching the member; or due to excessive swelling; or because of superfluous movement at the wrong time; or because of a constriction of blood in the body of the patient, and for the debility of the member.
And the cure for this is to restrict the patient's diet and make their heart tender so that the blood is multiplied in it; and apply baths; and insert gauze and joy into it.
And then place your hand over the member, so that the pressure draws to it the necessary nourishment, or continue applying moisture with lukewarm water until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural form.
Chapter XXII
On the healing of fractured bones when they are restored crookedly and the operation of covering them is prohibited.
When it happens to the already restored member, then the healing of its crookedness and protrusion from the bone fracture and bending should be pursued, and this is how the shape of the member is adjusted; however, the member is not prohibited from undergoing its natural operation, as long as you receive the advice of one who considers that member newly fractured.
Indeed, there have been many foolish doctors and healers who have done this on our earth; and this operation is most reprehensible, losing much fear the sign of which is deadly.
If recent claudication and nodation are present, it is necessary to immerse them in warm water containing herbs that soften the joints, such as althaeas, nettles, melilots, and similar plants; apply a softening plaster to them, prepared well with linseed oil; or take mucilage from nettle roots and apply it wrapped in wool or olive oil, or use plasters of fat figs pressed between columbar leaves, which are like those called 'amerments' for strengthening bones.
Sometimes, it is dissolved by frequent gentle friction applied to the most moist parts, and exercise of the limb should be administered at regular intervals throughout the day.
If the deformity has progressed and is firm and twisted, becoming a stone, and its removal by surgical means is necessary, then it is necessary to drain the pus that has collected on the surface of the bone, and the continuation of bone decay must be stopped; incise what remains superfluous from the joint of that member with delicate bonesaws, and administer relief to it through rest and study.
Chapter .xxiii.
On the subject of dislocation.
Dislocation is the condition where one of the body's joints becomes dislocated, preventing any movement, distorting the shape of the limb, and causing severe pain and injury to the patient.
So when any dislocation occurs, it should be reduced as soon as possible; if it is delayed, the joint becomes stiff and its reduction becomes difficult.
And for this reason, if it is not reduced immediately when the joint becomes stiff, spasms and severe pain occur in the affected area.
When this occurs, you should perform flailotomy on the patient and place something between the dislocated joint to relieve the stiffness; then immerse the affected limb in warm water and oil, and reduce it gently.
And every part should be treated with the remedy of which the recollection will come to its proper place.
And you have already arranged the parts of the dislocation as previously mentioned in the fracture; from the upper part of the body, it enters the lower part of the body.
Chapter .XXIIIII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
If both jaws are dislocated without fracture, the dislocation of both occurs in two ways: either they are pulled out of their place by a slight movement and become slightly relaxed; or they are entirely dislocated and distorted, so that saliva from the injury escapes, and neither can keep them open nor close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped around itself.
When the dislocation is slight, it often returns to its proper position on its own without a significant cause.
If the dislocation is complete and severe, it is necessary to apply gentle reduction of the dislocated part as soon as possible without delay.
And the practitioner should have a firm grasp of the patient's head, and the physician inserts his thumb into the jaw joint gap of the dislocated mandible inside the patient's mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts two fingers together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and all other digits outside which correspond to them; and orders the patient to cease moving their jaws and relax until they return to their proper place; and the physician similarly holds the mandible and gently manipulates it until it returns to its location.
If reduction is difficult, especially when both mandibles are simultaneously dislocated, then evaporation therapy with water and oil should be applied until a gentle reduction of both can be achieved without delay in reducing either one.
And so when we return and find them equally engorged, with the mouth of the hernia closed and not relieved, then place a layer of cerated cloth over those parts, and apply it with wax and gently rubbed oil; and afterwards treat them with ease and gentle bindings.
And let the patient with the hernia sleep on their back, with their head between two pillows, so that they do not strain either to the right or left; and do not force any further cause; having fed them well, wait until the pains are relieved and the jaws unclenched, then let them eat what they wish.
And this should be facilitated, and do not work on the opening of the mouth for eating, drinking, or exhaling until the jaw is unclenched and healed.
And if it is difficult to reduce the jaws when they are dislocated at any time and not returned to their proper places, then fevers often occur along with persistent vomiting, and severe pain is felt in the patient's stomach; and they often expel pure bile.
And when you see this, you will know it is a loss; and you will often see the man who has suffered from this in a few days.
**Chapter 25**
**On Reducing Dislocated Furcula and the End of Muscle**
The furcula is not dislocated from its place within the thigh by its attachment to the leg; and sometimes it is dislocated at the outside joint, and this is evident from the sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms. And then you close the area with your palm tightly, so that it returns.
And then apply pressure to that dressing and compress it firmly.
Apply the edge of that which is dried on the thigh, and continue it to that same area, without being dislocated on any day; then cover that it be reduced and enclosed as we have said and as it is in your equipment.
And then apply pressure to that dressing, and compress it, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it heals.
In this method of treatment, the healing is reduced when the extremity of the muscle is separated from its place.
Chapter XXVI.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
You should know that muscle is not dislocated but in three ways, one of which is dislocation at the attachment to the bone on the far side.
And the second is that it is dislocated at the attachment from its muscle, and this is done carefully; and it is not dislocated at the attachments behind the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the attachments in front by the nerves.
And it is most commonly dislocated and comes out at the attachments on the far side after the tendon, especially in those where there are few muscles, it is slightly dislocated; but in those where there is a lot of muscle, it comes out with difficulty.
And many people suffer from sudden percussion or impact, and the muscle of the affected part is quickly inflamed, and it becomes paralyzed due to what has already been dislocated.
Then understand that your strength enters where you are overstretched by it, and then you proceed with the treatment of it.
And it is known that dislocation occurs when the tendon slips from its place; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the sound muscle, since you find diversity among them manifest; and you find in the head of the muscle a concavity and leave the tendon slipped after touching the head of the muscle thus as if it were a hook, and the patient cannot return their hand to its normal position, nor limit that movement.
If it is dislocated at the foot or in its vicinity, and you find a clear sign of injury, and it is not hidden.
And from this dislocation, gentle reduction is done when it is fresh and the patient is young.
And the reduction of it is that the attendant raises his hand onto the parts above; and he applies gentle pressure to the patient's thigh, strengthens the joint in its proper place, and the attendant raises his hand and extends it over; and then he releases it so that it returns slightly.
If, however, what we have said does not return, and only the beginning of how the dislocation occurred, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water and administered drugs that soften and relax as if they were cut with fennel, fenugreek, and melilot in water.
Then return the patient to their back and place them on the edge of their thigh, waiting for the mix of relaxation and tension, and the doctor applies his hand over the wait, raises the head of the muscle with strength, pulls the patient's limb so that it is not hurt by the parts below, and another minister holds the patient's head, so that it is not hurt by the parts below, as it returns to its place.
And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: and so make present a man who is taller than the hernia, and stand on that side, and insert his muscle between the hernia's touch and raise the hernia's touch away from its place beneath until the hernia is suspended in the air, and then pull the hernia's hand away from its parts below the abdomen. If the hernia is lighter, then understand that something else causes it to be suspended, so treat it carefully, for once the dislocation returns, it may become more serious.
And it can also be reduced in another way: take a long stick with the head of which is rounded like a mortar, neither too thick nor too thin, and place it beneath the hernia; so that when you rest its head on drape lions, the hernia stands according to the length of the stick, and extend your hand from him to the other part, and strengthen the other part, for the joint returns to its place at great speed.
And if the reduction is difficult due to all the causes we have mentioned, use this remedy: take a stick of a length equal to two arms' span and a thickness of four digits, and shape it in the form of a tiny bow.
Then cover the head with a round cloth to prevent the stick from causing harm.
Then place yourself under the stick holding the hernia, and stretch your hand or arm over it, covering the stick with your fingers, while keeping the other hand on the support and the arm.
Then place your arm on a scale at the appropriate width, stretch your hand towards the opening, and let the other side hang freely from the opposite end, so that the joint can be adjusted within a moment.
And when the treatment of the patient is complete according to any manner possible for you, and you see that there is a cessation of the tickling sensation from the excessive quantity of wool; then prepare a plaster with powder from mills mixed with egg albumen over all the muscle, thus ensuring it is thoroughly spread out, and tighten the tickling with a decent compression; and let the ligament be turned over onto the plaster, and attach the patient's hand to the collar, and leave it for seven days.
And it is necessary to restrict the patient's food intake slightly, as long as the member is comfortable, for it aids in the healing of the condition.
Then provide the patient with more food after seven or five days, and then exercise movement; and if it stops hurting and does not become worse, know that healing has occurred.
If the joint is dislocated due to excessive humidity or any other cause, then it should be treated with a cautery of three parts, as mentioned in the chapter on cauteries.
And if all of this is done and after five days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the bandage and pressure are reduced on him several times, but it is not fixed and he cannot raise that arm away from his body, then you know that the nerves of the muscle, which are at the head of the muscle, are already damaged or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
In the case of dislocation, you must first reduce the foot and ankle or the back parts, by applying pressure and extending the muscles, until it returns to its original position.
And the same treatment should be applied to any other tight areas, and care taken until it is healed.
And if the healing becomes severe in the affected member and delayed in its movements, then the disease uses frequent baths until the gravity is alleviated and it returns to its original state.
Chapter .xxvii.
On the treatment of dislocated hips.
You know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; it is dislocated completely, most notably in front of the rear part, and the dislocation of it is not concealed by any vestige or touch, according to how the figure is dislocated. When you reduce the dislocated hip joint, it becomes manifestly clear to you, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor can it move its muscle.
And you should also consider that once the dislocation has occurred and become chronic, its reduction becomes more difficult, especially if it is in the rear parts, for this type of dislocation is the most difficult of all and causes the greatest pain, often resulting in death.
And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that his hand be extended in two directions, and his arms expanded, and the attention of the doctor be on the hip and over him, and he pushes the joint with the fingers of both hands until it returns to its place.
If the dislocation is in the front parts, then return it by bending his hand with his other hand, until it strikes the hip with the tip of his palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey to reduction, then apply violent extension and very strong force.
And it is that two assistants extend the arm, and they hold this extension with two assistants so that it is not weakened during the extension.
Then turn the arm completely around, as it is wrapped with a long, folded cloth over his hand, or bandage.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he applies some oil to it so that these causes which help in the lubrication of the joint and facilitate its return. And then he gently manipulates and rubs the joint until it returns to its place.
And then reduce the hernia so that it is held in place over the mass in which there is stiffness and the execution of albumin of egg, and be extracted by loosening the descent, and the arm be suspended from the collarbone, and left for some days.
And then it should be loosened; and thus, if the joint is formed in its place, you loosen the ligament of it and leave that.
And if you see that the joint is not strained, then repeat the bandage and ligament, and leave that for some days until it is extracted; and then loosen it.
If it occurs due to gravity during the reduction of a joint and its disposition is in motion, then administer humidification in a bath and subtle friction, and consider, as long as it is relieved; or rest on the affected joint, if it's a matter of excessive movement; and apply compression, leaving that over the bone during day and night. And then apply pressure, and immerse that in a bath; when it subsides, rub the joint with gentle friction, repeating over the affected area as many times as necessary to stop the movement, once, twice, thrice, etc. in immersion in bath, until it is calm.
And if you wish, place a warm, moist compress on the split of the cow, and wrap it tightly; do this several times, as that is moistening and returning to its position.
Chapter .xxviii.
On the treatment of dislocation of the elbow, it is concerning the joint that connects the arm and the hand.
In cases where the hand is dislocated, its reduction upon dislocation is delicate, unlike other joints, yet it is crucial to act swiftly in reducing it as soon as it is dislocated, lest the location become inflamed or develop an abscess.
In reducing the dislocation of the elbow, you place the patient's hand on a table and gently extend their arm; the physician then places his or her hand or palm over the joint, pushing it back to its proper position.
However, it should be considered that if the palm has already been injured, then the patient places their back on a table during extension and reduction; and if the dislocation occurred previously behind the hand, then the patient's arm should be positioned intrinsically over the table for the physician to grasp the joint.
And therefore return as soon as possible, which is good; otherwise, strengthen that compress gently, give time, and let it be; for if you do not, the patient will not bear or allow further reduction of the hernia for several days.
However, the Roman joint should be treated according to its mobility; do not consider any cause of the disease other than that the hand is softened and cannot grasp any cause; know that the nerves are crushed or torn, and it is only by cauterization near their attachment and strongly securing them that you can give any relief.
Therefore, once the patient's condition improves, place the compress we prepared and let it rest and tighten for several days; then relax and let it rest, and exercise your hand over the area.
If the movement of the hernia is stopped and no gravity occurs, apply gentle pressure with water and friction a few times until it is relieved.
Chapter .xxix.
On the treatment of dislocated joints.
Sometimes the joints become completely dislocated.
And when a joint is dislocated on the back of the hand or in the palm, you should squeeze it and push the dislocation back into place with your fingers, provided it returns to its normal position.
Then support the joint's head, suspend the affected part, and leave it for two days.
Then suspend it and stretch it until it is correctly aligned on the same day.
And at night, according to the aforementioned method, hold it in that position, continuing to stretch it during the day and exercising with movements, and hold it in the night; do this for several days until it is completely straightened.
And make it appear as if this is what happened, if it is dislocated in the mother's womb, and connect those parts together and perform the first operation on it, provided that it heals properly.
And make it appear as if this is what happened when it is dislocated in other parts.
Chapter .XXX.
On the treatment of dislocated spinal vertebrae.
When a dislocation occurs in any of the spinal vertebrae of the back or neck, and it remains in an incorrect position, it is not curable, for death often follows for the patient.
And the sign of this is that the management of the patient's condition is outside their control, and they cannot hold it; sometimes, the limbs of the patient become limp or both legs or both arms, or one of these; or a vertebra becomes dislocated, because sometimes it is dislocated and sometimes it is removed from its four parts.
Therefore, that one is thoroughly cleaned from behind and is named peritonitis.
The treatment for it is that you must consider whether the peritonitis occurred due to childhood, because in those cases there is neither cure nor complete healing.
In cases where pain occurs from an accident or impact or similar to these, the ancients spoke of lengthy treatment methods, of which the greatest benefit returns; but you have already been briefly treated of that which requires little excuse due to its excessive nature, by my close proximity to understanding, which I have here exposed and formed from various tools of which I will now demonstrate and space out this treatment.
And those are not cured except those that occur in the back itself due to what you have mentioned.
And the illness has spread over its face, extending from one side to the other of the body, and it causes great pain so that the patient's hands cannot be moved.
And then a straight stick is placed, stopping at the ground at the end of the patient's foot around their head, and another stick holds their feet in the other extreme of the foot.
And the minister holds the stick, but it should not be buried in a pit; and another minister holds the other according to that form.
And then they wrap around the patient's head and gently pull the hair, binding it with a strap; and extend the end of the strap to the stick that is against their head, and fasten it to that; and tighten the other strap over their hips, holding their legs, and adjust all the straps, tying them to the other stick which is against their feet.
And then apply the case with the extension of the ligament to the root of the bone, and let not the two bones and the ligaments in their places where they are fixed be damaged, but nevertheless they are not firmly held as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or he places them on a table, and then adjusts the patient's feet on the table until they return.
If it does not return in this manner, then take a table whose width or length is three arm-lengths, and dig into the wall of which we have said that it is closest to the disease a place where the end of the table can fit. And then place the weight of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and pushes strongly until the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
And if you wish, open it again with your hand; and since you stand on the ground, place the patient's head at the back of the punch with two fists, the length of each being a arm's length, and place their head in the back of the punch exactly with two fists; and let the distance between each fist be a palm, and already there is a trace made in each fist where it turns, and each should be firmly stopped on the ground so that no more harm occurs.
And make another fist around which the turn is made, and twist it in both directions of the two fists.
And at the end of it is a trace where the fist is formed, the length of which is a palm in what is twisted; and the other two fists are similar to that one.
And then tighten the ligaments you have straightened on the patient's foot at the trace where their head is placed, and the ligaments you have straightened on their body in the turn that is to be made for their legs.
And then you must take each turn and have a minister twist the turn with their hand, and the doctor applies the same procedure as we have said.
And when the spine is returned to its place and the area is marked, then apply a compress of dry, clean cloth, and stop; then place a second compress on top of it from a table, whose width should be three or four times the area of redness, and its length should cover the affected spot of the spine.
And then, using the method we have mentioned, apply a light diet with delicate foods to ensure it is healing.
And if any danger is perceived in the area at the end of healing, then medications that soften and soothe should be administered through a long course, as we have recommended; these are usually given orally and include a thin layer of lead applied to the affected spot.
And in some cases, there occurs an imminent danger at the rear of the spine bones, and it is caused by that dislocation; and it is that bone which you must immediately protect from this medical treatment, as it will strongly cause death to you.
**Capitol .xxxi.**
On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
You know that the hip joint and the muscle joint should not be dislocated so easily, and it only happens to those who experience other joints with minor displacement and curvature.
And the hip joint can be dislocated in four ways: within the joint itself, or outside of it, or in front of it, or behind it.
And it is most commonly dislocated within the joint itself, and rarely in front of or behind it.
And the sign of a dislocated hip within the joint is that when you adjust the patient's leg with the affected hip, it feels longer, and the pain is more prominent than on the healthy side, and the patient cannot flex their foot normally; here the limb is stuck in a curved position, and you can see the bent knee from the side (apostat).
And the sign of that which suffers from dislocation is when parts are separated outside, as the accidents of it are contrary to this accident.
The sign of one who suffers dislocation to the front parts is when the leg expands completely but still causes severe pain in that area, and if it pierces through to the outside and cannot be moved forward; then the patient's urine becomes retained and their testicles become swollen, and you must move the patient's leg over the thigh.
The sign of one who suffers dislocation to the back parts is that they do not expand the leg, nor can they bend it in front of where the pain is, and the patient's leg becomes shorter than the other, their testicles become softened, and the head of the affected area points to that location.
But the reduction of the symptoms of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and long-standing, that it has already been treated by itself or by your own administration with rest and according to its disposition; therefore, it does not require further treatment for a complete cure.
Place it on that where the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four types of dislocations, then you cut to it as you return the joint and stretch it inward and outward, and turn it to the right and left, for it returns strongly and does not require other treatment.
If it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong support and extend the patient's leg from the joint farthest away, or attach a strap or something similar over the leg; another minister should extend your hand over the area so that he places his fingers between the toes of the patient; and near the base of the thigh, tighten the strap with another minister holding the end of the strap.
And extend the leg or the inner part to angulate the joint at the fork's part, or from the rear part to the front of the spine.
And make the extension of all these at once, as long as the patient's pain is elevated to their chest and their legs dangle.
And this specific type of extension is especially common to all four (parts/extremities).
And therefore, if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it will be good; otherwise, it will be necessary to consider all kinds of things regarding its treatment.
In the reduction of the hernia, when it is dislocated and the dislocation is within the parts (of the body), the patient should be turned onto their side; then, the ligaments should be tightened around the root of the thigh in the area between the head of the thigh and the place where the pain radiates; and finally, extend the ligament above the part of the angle to the highest point of the furcula.
And another assistant should firmly hold the patient's arms, press the swollen part of the affected thigh, and extend it outside forcefully for extension, so that it returns to its place.
And this particular type is of a lighter cure which reduces this member more than others.
If it is excused from you and you do not obey the treatment of this particular type of cure at all, then know that both feet of the patient must be tied together lightly, with a ligature, on both the toes and both the soles.
And the length of each of its parts is by the amount of four times, and the patient's leg is extended more than the other by a quantity of two times.
Then the hernia should be suspended over the top of the foot, and it should be in the lower part; and the length of it from the ground is the amount of two bras.
Then command a strong youth to cut off the top of the hernia, and hang it from another youth, and the other youth should reduce the hernia with strong pressure, for the joint will return to its place at great speed.
In the proper reduction, when there is a dislocation in the outward part, it is necessary to keep the patient in a posture as we have recommended in its immobility; and the ligament should be tightened on the affected thigh specifically and also on the patient's chest.
And then two fists should be placed, one on the patient's feet and the other on their head; and they should be held firmly with fists adjusted at the middle of the legs, over which damp cloths are wrapped, so that the hernia is not harmed by the hand's penetration between the thighs, so you must prevent the extension to the sides from being pulled.
And each minister should extend their part, and the doctor with his hand tightens the reduction according to art (or skill).
And when the dislocation is in the front parts, you should ensure that the leg is slightly extended, and according to this method, the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the affected joint, then with his other hand, he pulls towards him, and at this moment, he holds the extended part of the limb on the opposite side.
And if the dislocation is in the back parts, you should not let the patient extend the limb towards the front, but rather elevate it above the ground; once you have ensured that it rests on a firm surface, as we mentioned regarding the position of the body when an ankle joint is dislocated outward, and according to what we said about extending the limbs and ligaments, there should be no further harm.
And it is necessary to apply compression with a splint on the area where the joint is dislocated.
Therefore, after the reduction is complete according to what covers—and the sign of the reduction of it is not hidden from you, since you extend from the wound two legs, and when you see those nails and the patient extrudes their leg and you expand that as an excuse, then you know that the member according to what covers has returned—and now you arrange two things and place a bandage and extrude a dressing so that the width is not harmed in any of the parts; and keep the patient at rest for three days or four.
Then carefully remove the ligament and the bandage, and compare one leg to the other.
Now, if you see those nails in front of you, then you will know that the dislocation is already healed, and therefore let the patient leave.
And if you see any cause for softening, then return and apply that dressing again, and pull it out according to your initial stretch, and let it rest for three days.
And then, after that, he should be made to walk slowly for some days until he is strengthened.
**Capitol .xxxii.**
On the treatment of dislocated joints.
The joint (denolh) is dislocated in three ways: when it is out of place at the sides, within (dedintz), or in front (dejos mays) of its normal position, but not when it is displaced behind (detras).
And the sign of a joint's dislocation is that the patient applies their leg to the affected area; then you will know that the joint is dislocated.
And the restoration of the joint in all ways is that you make the patient cease their movement directly, if possible; hold their two legs against their chest, and rest their foot between their thighs; then carefully adhere to the joint with your palms, and tighten them between your fingers over the joint of the patient until it returns to its place.
And the sign of its release is that the leg adheres to the thigh in a non-painful manner.
Then apply a plaster to make the leg adhere to the thigh, and then wrap those parts with bandages for three or four days, and afterwards remove them.
And do not use the afflicted limb for walking for a few days, until it is healed and comfortable.
If the reduction of the hernia is not urgent, then administer a strong extension to the limbs whose use was previously mentioned in the treatment of the hernia described above.
**Chapter XXXIII**
**On the Treatment of Ankle Dislocation**
The foot, at times, is deformed by slight removal, and at other times it is dislocated completely; the dislocation occurs either inside or outside the joints.
And the sign of the dislocation is that the foot appears swollen, proceeding towards the part where it is dislocated.
The cure for the dislocation is of quick relief, and it consists in gently reducing it to its place and immobilizing it until it heals.
But in the cure when it is completely dislocated, it is necessary to stop the harm right away, and have a strong and capable helper pull from behind at the middle part of the foot in its proper place.
Then take your right hand and raise the foot from the superior part, and with your left hand, gently pull from the lower part of the foot at the location of the ankle.
And then gently pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and with your left, for two strokes, extend it; push the toe of the foot towards the bed on the right side where the leg is working.
And do this two times as we have counted.
And then push the foot towards the bed on the third stroke, and you are at the ankle.
So if you return in one stroke or two according to this manner, and you turn the foot inside out, it is good; otherwise, continue the operation over it again, as that returns.
If it is forbidden for you to reduce it in this way that we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground and stretch a firm cloth between their thighs, and wrap them in a blanket so that the hernia does not slip out.
And then the first line translated: And now the attending practitioner holds the patient's limbs, and another practitioner stretches the foot with their hands or with the bandage that lies on the top of the foot; and another extends each of these practitioners against the extension of the leg, and the padding between the thighs of the patient retains them, so that the matter of it is not pulled to the sides beyond its extension.
And then the next line: And the physician adjusts the dislocation with their hands, and another practitioner holds the healthy limb on either side, so that the dislocation returns to its ease.
And when the dislocation returns to its place and it is declared that the reduction is healthy, then apply a plaster and reinforce those bindings strongly, and tie the foot with bindings to the leg.
And be mindful of the nerves that are behind on the sole, so that the binding over those is not violent and injures it severely.
And then place a bandage over it for two days or three; if the inflammation subsides, remove the bandage.
Then, on the third day or the fourth, remove the bandage; forbid the patient from movement for ten days. If, against the doctor's advice, the patient must move and reopen the space, there is a risk that the dislocation will not heal properly, leading to further complications.
And if an abscess forms, then apply what we have described regarding the treatment of pain and inflammation in another part of the body, as long as it is not against the course of treatment previously outlined.
Chapter XXXII
On the treatment of dislocation of the feet's joints.
Know that one who is dislocated should be gently pulled to a certain extent in its treatment; and what is not difficult, it will heal quickly.
If the dislocation is in some sensitive part of the foot, then you should cease the patient's pain by placing their foot on a level surface or table, and keep it that way as if they were walking.
And then you should stand by the foot, place your own foot on what threatens the joints, gently press it until the dislocation returns, and ensure that what was dislocated is now aligned and does not reappear in the prominent area.
And then you should place a board under the patient's foot that takes the entire foot, with two ends, and gently but firmly hold it in this position for three days; after that, you should remove the board and allow the patient to walk slowly for several days, until healing is complete.
**Line-by-line Translation:**
On the types of dislocation that occur due to injury or fracture or any other similar event.
When any of these causes occur and you proceed with the treatment for it and restoration, you often witness successive cases of death.
And for this, he who presumes to cure it without understanding, but rather that one who is skilled in the art, of great experience, merciful and compassionate, should act slowly, not rashly or presumptuously; and use only gentle medications that can be easily withdrawn if necessary, leaving the judgment to divine power, unless you hope for healing from perdition, alleviation of malady, and have some hope. And therefore, endeavor as much as possible to reduce it at the beginning of the cause, rather than to use severe cauterization.
And now, if the member returns to its proper place, then administer treatment with a mild cautery and cure the affliction with suitable drying herbs.
If the dislocation is a fracture and occurs in separately broken bones, then you should drill through their joints, as we have previously mentioned regarding simple injuries of this type in the preceding locations.
And observe and beware, according to your virtue, of the instrument in the ways of fear, as my previous teachings have warned; for it is better for you to honor your Creator, maintain your glory, and bring health to your true body in due time. Thus, you complete the words of Albucasim perfectly, for which God be blessed. Amen.
