O you, dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine along with its fulfillment, and I made the end through its expositions and by its declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of the hands, namely surgery.
And because the work of the hands is neglected in our region and is foreign to all, the science has been lost and severed, and nothing remains of its force except for small descriptions in books by the ancients that the hands have moved. And from this has come error and vanity, and intentions are closed off and science is kept at a distance.
I think I want to animate it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition, declaration, and abbreviation. and will come together with the forms of cautery tools and other instruments of the work, along with the adjustment of their declaration and preparation as needed.
And because no good masters of the hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected. And one who undertakes this should excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, as far as he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and veins and the moving and resting places of them, and where their channels originate.
And for this reason, Hypocras says that the name with the name is much, but with the work is little. and especially in the art of the hand.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not aware of the things previously mentioned, should be careful that he does not fall into error and harm people;
so that I have often encountered many of those who meddle in this science and abandon themselves without knowledge or experience.
For I saw a foolish surgeon who lanced an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and he lanced the arteries in the neck; because so much blood flows out that the woman dies between his hands.
And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone in a man's urinary tract; and the stone was large; carried with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if they cut it out he would certainly die.
And I saw another surgeon who treated the Duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was an injury;
and the ignorant surgeons pulled on the break above the wound so hard that they dislocated it, and did not leave any padding on the wound, and left him like this with an open wound;
and commanded that he should not reset it;
and he remained like this with his leg swollen and the foot, and he came to ruin.
I was called to come to him, and hurried to come and reset the leg; and when I dislocated it, it was put at ease and felt no pain.
However, the corruption had already settled in the limb, and he could not heal it;
and the corruption did not cease from spreading through the limb until all of the limb was destroyed.
And I saw another case where a doctor lanced an abscess that was swollen, and then it became inflamed due to the maliciousness of his lord.
Because when a ulcer is free of melancholy humor, it must not be touched with iron unless in such a place that one can completely remove all that which is corrupted.
And for this reason, very dear son, you need to know that the work of medicine is divided into two parts: that is, work where there is danger in many conditions;
and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
So it is necessary that you be careful, so that foolish people cannot speak badly of you.Car li savans ommes qui sont en art traittanz, por ses consillanz qu’ilz donnt, doivent être mesurs en chescun le
So take up your weapons in this way, and approach your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you will achieve salvation and be praised;
and let the dreadful illnesses of deep sorrow
and set aside your arms from that which causes you to doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you may pass from this world into the other of glory.
Galen says in some of his warnings: Do not take on a difficult disease unless you are called a foolish doctor.
I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cauteries and hot iron cauteries, and it covers the head down to the feet.
and includes the forms of instruments, and the tools for cautery, and all that is necessary for the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and includes leeches, wounds, extracting arrows, and similar things;
and it covers the tools and their forms.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twisting, and similar things;
and it covers the head down to the feet, and includes the tools' forms.
Thus, as we remember the work, it is fitting that I say something about the nature of each temperament and their harmful effects.
I say that the qualities of medicine, and understanding illness, are the most lengthy speech and subtle knowledge, and the secrets of remedies;
and of this spoke many of the sages, and agreed upon it;
and I am content with little of their words, for I fear length.
I say that cautery aids universally in every complexion where it has matter, except in two complexions: that is to know hot complexion without matter, and dry complexion without matter.En la complexion chaude sens matiere, il n’a point de matere, si qu’il ne peuit cauterier:
In hot and dry complexion with matter together, some people have spoken and said that cautery is of great aid;Car li feu s’en va sur la matere et le corps reste en repos; and others said the opposite:Car li feu s’en va sur la matiere et ne touche Because fire goes into the matter and does not touch the body;And they say that cautery is worth nothing for illnesses that come from heat and dryness.Mais en la complexeion flege But in the phlegmatic complexiona the nature of fire is hot, and should not be treated with heat for hot illnesses, nor for dryness;Et en la complexeion sanguine, car li feu ne se doit mie adrezier a la maladious qui vient de sang, car il est de nature cha
and those who say the contrary, that cautery does great good for hot and dry diseases that come upon men's bodies. For when you compare the human body and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found this to be true through experimentation.
Nevertheless, one should not employ it except for those who have experienced it and who know through long practice the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of men's complexions, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and their outcomes and the season of the year.
Of other complexions we have no fear, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the doctors agreed and concurred about the cautery.
And know, my son, that cautery combines fire with the secrets of cures, and is of greater goodness than burning cautery of medicine.
For fire is simple, and it does not spread to any other part of the body apart from where it is applied, and it does no harm if properly used.
Burning medicines move from one member to another, causing grief and poor healing in the member. And by chance they may kill the patient.
Fire, because of its height and the goodness of its substance, does not do this unless there is an excess.
And that I have found through experience and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and been in the truth of things;
and because of this I excuse myself for the length of my speech, for I do not wish to take away from you the secret that is hidden in fire, and the nature of its work, how it drives out illnesses of the body, as the philosopher explains in his demonstration. receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed on what time cauteries should be performed, and chose a favorable moment.
And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the harmful humors are driven out by the help of cautery. And especially if the cautery is for painful and urgent conditions that cannot wait until a later time when greater harm might come to the limb.
And never think, dear son, as fools do, because the illness that is healed by cautery does not return; and they say it thus:
and they say it thus: but it is not as they believe; for cautery is only a medicine that moves the complexions and dries the humors which are the cause of the pain; it is worth more than other medicines because of its swiftness, its virtue, and its lordship.
And it is possible for a disease to come sometimes according to the complexion of the patient, and the location of the disease, and its virtue.
and the excesses are gathered in him through the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless cauterization is administered to where he has little excess and moisture, as with dental cauterizations for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return. but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine, and that is evident;
but they do not believe that cauterization comes after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauterization is the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment in any disease and they do not work, then we turn to cauterization, and it does work.
Therefore, it is clear that cauteries are indeed the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding of foolish people.
The ancients said that cauteries made of gold instruments are better than those of iron, and they only said this because of the quality of gold and because of the height of its substance.
and said that the heat of the cautery does not make blisters, but this is not true, for I have tested it and found that it is true in some people.
and gold cauteries are better than those of iron, as they said. And yet, when you heat up a gold instrument, you do not know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools down immediately;
and if it is heated too much, if they are heated in fire, and so there are enough obstacles.
Here I have arranged this chapter from the head to the feet so that the way is easier to find.
This cautery is good for moisture and coldness on the head, and there are two types of disease caused by it, one called "soda", and by many humors which descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and also from many diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged with purifying medicine for three or four nights, depending on what the nature and age of the disease can tolerate; And then have the patient's head examined.
And then have him sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on his knees;
Afterwards, place the palm of your hand between his eyebrows, between his two eyes; And then bring your two middle fingers down, and let it bleed then heat the cautery called "olive", of which this is the shape: And place it on the spot marked with ink, and move your hand up and down while squeezing it gently; Then lift your hand slightly, and examine the spot if you see the bone under the skin; And if you do not see it, reheat the cautery as I have instructed you until you see the bone;
Afterwards, take a piece of silk and place some soft cotton inside it and tie it up, and place it on the spot and leave it for three days;
after moistened with cotton in butter; and leave it until the burn is healed; afterwards, treat the wound with an ointment called 'tetrafarmaçon' until it is healed.
And they say that when the wound is left open for longer, it drains more effectively; and because of this, pus is expelled.
And some say that one should let the cautery burn so much that part of the bone is burned, and then have what is burned of the bone resected and then cured.
And some say that one should leave the cautery on for so long, and press down so hard that it cuts through the bone as widely as the ring that women put on their fingers to draw out humours;
and one must keep the wound open for a long time; afterwards, one should treat and bandage it.
And these two methods of cautery do not seem good to me at all, except in some people where there is a fear;
and I think I should let him go;
for the head is weakened by the continuous secretions of nature, as we witness in other members;
and likewise when the head is weakened by illness and the first appearance of cautery is gentler for me, I therefore work towards a joint salvation.
When there is chronic pain throughout the head, lasting a long time, one should use herbs and pills for illness, and purgatives for the head, as well as oils and plasters; and if one performs the cautery that we mentioned earlier and it does not help, Take care that the head of the ill person is not of a hot nature, and that it is not too cold; then cauterize him under that cautery which we mentioned above. After that, do cauterization on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and do cauterization in the place which is called "vessels". and there are places where one puts leeches; and lighten your hand so that you do not go up to the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere;
and the cauteries on the horns should be thinner than those used to cauterize the middle of the head, and that is the form;Aprés ke li cauteres soit fitz sus les cornes,
of the cautery of the head: After that, when sudden pain arises in a part of the head, and the disease is spread to the eye, and the shoulder is purged by purifying medicines, and all the other remedies I have described in the division of diseases, and none of them help: then make cauteries according to two methods, namely of medicine and fire.
The cautery of medicine is that you take a piece of alder, remove the bark and wrap it around both shoulders, and then make the sign of the cross on the skin where the pain is, in such a way that you can place the piece of alder underneath the skin.
And when it is placed, tie it and hold it tightly and leave it for twelve hours. Then untie it and pull it away from the alder, and leave the wound like that for two or three days; Then place a long piece of cotton soaked in butter over the wound until it heals.IIe cautere de feir est que tu prendes une fumee de chanvre, et le fent bruleer
The cautery of fire is that you take hemp smoke and burn itAfter the wound has healed, treat the scar with ointment until it is gone.and then the patient should
and if you see fit to use some of the burning medicines that I have written about in the twelfth treatise on burning medicines.
The fire cautery is done in this way. Heat the cautery tool until it is the right temperature.
And it is called a "cleft" because the head is formed in the shape of a cleft or pit, and in the middle has a small protrusion;
and place it over the painful area, and hold your hand and gently turn the fire a little bit, so that half of the thickness of the skin is burned;
and quickly take your hand away so that the artery does not burn and flow profusely with blood.
Afterwards, put cotton wool soaked in vinegar on it, and keep it there for three days; then apply wet cotton wool with butter, and then heal the area with ointment until it is healed;
and if you wish to cauterize this hemorrhoid with the cautery called "culterium", do so at the very tip only, and be careful not to touch the artery in this hemorrhoid which is not old.
of hematoma
When you treat a migraine as we have previously described in the sections on diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the cautery previously mentioned in the medicine section and the fire do not help, then you must heat the cautery tool called "cultellare" until it turns white.
And you sign the area over the vein with a line of about half an inch in length, and move your hand away once, and press it so that you do not cover the artery and go all the way to the bone.
And beware of the jaw that mutes when one chews, and the nerve should not be affected so that there is no muteness or spasm in the patient, and beware of blood flow from the artery when it is cut, for this can cause great fear both to the unskilled and inexperienced person. and leave the work halfway done;
but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when an artery is cut, and I will show you where it opens in this book.
And if you see that this cautery is not sufficient for the disease and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals.
And if you see that he needs the cautery we mentioned in the chapter on extraction of the artery, with the cautery tool that has two knives; and this cautery is better and more effective than the other one.
from pain in the ears due to coldness
When there is pain in the ear from cold, and one has applied dissolving medicines and other treatments that we have described in the division, and the pain does not go away, then heat this cautery, which is called a «point», with which there is a needle at its end:
After you have marked the area around the ear where the pain is located in both ears, or in one if it is only there, and then move slightly up from the root of the ear, where you will make the incision; and has six points around each ear;
after treating the area until it is healed.
of the torture of the mouth
Wounds that must be treated with cautery are only those that cause pus, as we have said in the sections on diseases;
and do not use cautery on sores that come from dryness and nerve pain.
When you treat this type of wound that discharges fluid from the ears and nose, and cleaning the head and gargling do not help, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another a little above the temple, and the third in the junction between the two lips;
and place the cautery in the part that appears healthy, and cauterize above the head of the ear, a little below the horn of the head, and another one on the temple as long as a finger; and leave the cautery on until the middle of the heart is burned;
and this is the shape of the cautery:
And the appearance of the tweezers that we have put before, but it is a bit more subtle and the tweezers should be a bit thicker;
after cleaning the area as I have said before, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it thus as we have said, and it does not help, and the patient has a fever, then make 4 cauteries: 2 on the 2 horns of the head, and 1 in the middle of the head, and 1 in the place called "vessel", as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach;
and treat it as we have said before.
of litharge
For this disease, give the patient large pills that cleanse the brain.
After washing the head of the patient thoroughly, place a mustard plaster described in the chapter on plasters upon his forehead.
And this is how to do the cautery: if he does it as I have said.
If he is healed like this, it is good.Si li peilz sont lons et igals, et s’il ne le point And if the hairs are long and even, and if he does not feel any pricking, make three cauteries on his head, going from above to below, and space them two fingers apart.
And treat it as the others, and if you see any swelling, and the patient can endure it, make a cautery in the middle.et s’il ne le peut demorer ains qu’il se mueve ou se desaluit, tu le remets a leu; et se li estraint les eulz, li fai III and if necessary, two others on the two horns, and cure it until it is healed;
and use the cautery called "olive", as I have said before.
The head should be cleansed of hair and of what we mentioned earlier;
after resetting the dislocated head, then cauterize in the head and on each horn, and once behind and three times on the spine of the neck;
and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is severe, then do three cauteries on the spine of the back;et si tu veiles le fere sanz douleur et sanz grant lesion, covient que li cauteres soit ben fitz et frids. and leave it until the most sensitive part is burned and lift your hand; then cure it until it is healed, and use the cautery called "olive" as we mentioned earlier.
of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first cleanse the brain of hair and other remedies that we have mentioned in the division when the disease is great and suffering from taking medicine.
And if it is a child who cannot bear it, make him gargle and chew, purifying the brain often with good meat;
after the king comes the head in the middle, and do the cautery according to what we have said before, and the cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the disease is external and bearable, do cauteries as I have said for someone with paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cautery be olive according to the manner that I have said.
If the disease is in an infant, make a small cautery according to this method:
When through the cause of melancholy there are corrupted humours and thick phlegm, then cauterize with mild cauteries as we have said for paralysis.
And if through the cause of melancholy the humours are inclined towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give them something to drink that will cleanse the brain, according to what is said before in the division.
After the king comes the head of the disease; Then make a well-made linen bandage, like a circle, and place it on the head;
and let the disease be crossed, and be well held from all sides;
Then offer the linen, and put on a poultice of old goat's butter; and the hot cautery temperately, so that he can bear it; after emptying the ring from within the head, and leaving it to cool;
and do this to the patient once a week with other good treatment, until he is healed.
Or, if you wish to cauterize the eye, make several small points on the entire cautery tool.
This cautery method moistens the brain greatly;
and then put wet cotton in mutton tallow and grease of goose.
of their eyes When awfulness first comes to the eyes through the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient drink that cleanses the head, and guard it from all moisture, and make him sweat in a bath several times while fasting.
Afterwards he has his head shaved and cauterized in the head, and he does two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of the eye is to both eyes together, or one if it is to one;
and cover all the veins and arteries that are under the skin, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple;
and beware of bleeding, and if you see too much blood issuing, stop it as best you can.
And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and the incision, the cautery how you should apply it;
and sometimes a cautery or hatchet is made under the two bones at the back.
and it can be seen that they are cold phlegmatic superfluities, then he should make the cautery which I described earlier, descending towards the eyes: I cautery on the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries or hatchets under the two bones; and if there is more need, then he should cauterize bleeding above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
When you treat him according to what we have described in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three nights of cow's milk; after the king, the head, and the cautery with olive oil. and make the cauteries called "clavicles" over the two joints, a little under the hair.
and be careful of the artery that you do not cover it up.
And this is the form of the cautery that is called "clavilis":
When the film of the eye becomes soft due to illness and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery tool called "olive".Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste maniere. The fire cautery is done in this way.
And if you see to make two cauteries over the two joints as long as the joints are;
and do not leave the hand there except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to what I have said.
the hair that pricks the eye Sometimes the hair in the armpits turns inward and pricks the underarm, and cauteries are done according to two methods; one is: that is, with fire or with burning medicine.
The fire cautery instructs the patient to let the hair grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow long and even, then put the cautery to the patient's skin. Afterwards, draw on paper a figure that is also like the hollow of the myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be between the hairs.
Then place cotton soaked in egg white and sweet alyssum musk on the eye; then heat the cautery with which this figure is formed.
Afterwards, cauterize over the figure that you have drawn a little bit at a time many times so that the heat burns the area.
And the sign of the treatment's success is when you see the skin raised and the hairs standing upright at the edge of the eye.
then loosen your hand, and let it be for three days, then place wet cotton in the buttocks until the scald is healed. after the wound has healed, treat it with ointment until it is healthy.
And if afterwards the hairs grow, and the skin becomes soft, then restart the cautery on the same spot, just as you did before;
and if the hairs fall out, then cauterize it until the skin returns to its natural state, and is even, and the hairs do not prick the eye.
The burning cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf;
then take French soap and live charcoal, of each one-third, and grind them well together; and make it quickly so that it does not cool, then spread over the shape you have made like a myrtle leaf, and place some on the paper; and if the disease is in one eye only, then one must treat that one, and if in both, then both; and place under the eye moist cotton soaked in egg white;
and let the head of the patient be in a healthy position and place your hand showing the medicine, and press it hard and move it all the time that the patient feels biting from the medicine, for he will feel biting as from fire.
When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your body. And when the biting has passed, lift up the eyelid, and look to see if the paper is also lifted up as it was by the constraint of fire or by incision; and if so, then all is well.
If not, then continue with the medication on the area until the work is equalized and the eyes are put in place.
Then put wet cotton on the burns until they heal, and then treat the area of the ointment that is called "diaper" and others, until it is healed.
And if you need to be careful with your work, so that it does not break the medicine on them.
And if the paper becomes soft afterward, and the hair pricks in the eye, then continue the medication on that area which is softened by the paper properly, just as you did before; then treat it until it is healed;
and this is the shape of the bellows:
And know that men's eyes are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this, the constraints should be;
and the right way is not revealed to those who have dedicated themselves to this art.
on the treatment of fistula by cautery
When you are treating a fistula as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then you must perform cautery on it according to this manner. Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
Instruct the patient to put his head in your lap. and hold his head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or drop.
After that, place wet cotton in the white of an egg or in juice of parsley on his eye;
afterwards heat the cautery which is made thus:
and shaped like a quill pen on one end, and on the other end is the cautery;
if you want it pointed at both ends, or if you want it also shaped like a tent;
but that which is shaped like a quill pen is better for your work.
Afterwards press the fistula if it is open and draw out the pus and dry it; and if it is closed, then open it and draw out the fluid;
Afterward, put on the hot cautery, and hold your hand to the cautery at the part under the eye, so that your hand does not make foolishness. and place the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery right up to the bone, that would be good. If not, then renew the cautery again once more, and if you need another one, leave it for three days;
Afterward, put on wet cotton in butter, and let it be cured by the dry ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, then use corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered; and treat it according to how it comes in his eye.
And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula which some of the ancients mentioned. Pay attention to a fistula, and probe the site; Afterward, put in the slit one small needle so that it is at the base: and make it the size of an egg; and hold your hand over the cautery firmly, and do not move the patient until the plaster has set;
and you should put wet cotton on the patient's eye, soaked in vinegar or wine:
the plaster will heal the fistula miraculously.
And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization that we have described, then it is good. If not, one must administer an incision to the nail, and bring the fistula back into the body of the nail according to what is appropriate in its own place.And if the cauterization does not heal the fistula, then you should make an incision on the nail, and bring the fistula back into the body of the nail according to where it belongs.
cracks in the lips Many times there are cracks in the lips which are called "hairs," and especially so in children's lips.
When you treat these cracks as we have described above in sections, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small blade-like cautery according to this form:
And it will gradually heal those fissures until they are closed;
then treat the area with ointment until it is healed.
When an abscess forms at the root of the gum, or in the uvula, or palate, or tooth roots, and there is swelling and pus and it becomes a fistula: and you treat it as we have described in the section on incisions, but it does not help: then you must have the cautery according to the size of the fistula. after the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand steady so that the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and then go around it from behind.
and do this once or twice after the treatment we have described for fistulas, until it is healed.
and if it is treated thus, that is good. and if not, then you must expose the area and remove the rotten bone, according to what you find in his shoulder.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it doesn't help, then put the head of the patient in your lap. after heating the cautery whose shape will be described below, you apply it to the tooth by placing a piece of cotton on it.
and place the hot cautery gently within, and hold your hand steady so that the patient feels the heat reach the root of the tooth;
then remove your hand and repeat with the cautery as desired.
afterwards, fill the patient's mouth with salt water and let it sit for an hour and release the forces.
And in this manner, the tooth that was loose is now firmly fixed, and the gums are softened and restrained, and the putrid moisture is dried up.
of toothache
When tooth pain comes from coldness, or there is coldness or whiteness, and the remedies of medicine are ineffective, then cautery is needed in two ways:Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il and cautery with butter and fire cautery.For fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and
Butter cautery: take butter from a cow, and its end in a spoon made of iron or bronze;Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des sai take cotton and wrap it around the end of a tent-peg, soak it in buttock's milk, and apply it to the aching tooth until it is relieved.
and do this often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth. And if you see it moistened wool and cotton in cold buttock's milk, and put on the aching tooth, and put on the hot iron until the fire comes to the gum of the tooth.
The fire cautery together is such that you take an iron or bronze rod, and let it be thick so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
Afterwards heat the cautery, of which the shape will come later, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled.
Do this often, for the pain will be removed that day or the next day.
And the patient must fill his mouth with good butter quickly before this cautery, and then let it cool down.
And this is how to make the cautery:
And take any part of the body you want, according to what you are able;
And this is how to make the cauterizing iron:
of scrofula When scrofula is cold and moist, and not subject to digestion by medicine, then heat the cauterizing iron so that it becomes very hot, and let the smoke come out of the iron from one side to the other;
And place the hot cauterizing iron on the abscess once, or as many times as necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess;
And if the abscess is small, apply the cauterizing iron according to the size of the abscess, and leave it for three days. and apply moist cotton to the burn until the scald is removed;
thereafter, treat the site with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
When moisture prevails over the channels of the lungs, and particularly when it comes from a cold constitution, then the patient should first be purged with medicine that dissolves.
After that, he should have cautery at the root of his throat; and be careful not to go any higher than the throat, but only burn a little.
After that, he should have another cautery at the junction of neck and head, at the top of the spine, and it should be a cautery called 'clavicle' as we have described earlier;
and treat the site as we have said before until it is healed.Appré le fai I cautere sus la jointure de leus coudies, et apret les teneures qui li
When all diseases of the chest are from cold moistors, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and is an old disease if he .II cauteries on the breast in their homes; and another cautery between the breasts between II;
and is the cautery which is called "clavicle" according to the form which has already been said.
And if you see, make cautery with piercing all the cautery which is called "points" of whom the form is before in the disease of the ears;
and let the points be to XXX, or around.Et soit l’espas de li poins XX a la cote selonc la granture del mal;
After healing the wound according to what is said above, and let the cautery be performed three times according to this form:
And therefore are cauteries easier to do, because you make them .iiij. times.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After that, anoint the patient on his back and sides;Et si tu vois que li malaide s’esvaigne et ne revien por le cautere, et qu’ And if you see that the illness is relieved and does not return due to the cautery, then gently lift the scrotum with the fingers of your left hand;et qu’il teneit ains lieve li testikels sel
and if the joint is dislocated within, heat the cautery which has two prongs like a needle here is the shape:
and cauterize the skin until it pierces all the way through, and you will feel the heat of the cautery with three cauteries;
and for this cautery is made with a cautery which has three prongs, so that there are six cauterizations;
and the nerve is like the subtlety of a tent and this is the shape of the cautery which has three prongs:
And sometimes it is placed upon this one nerve, because there are eight cauteries on it.
Afterwards, put on the cautery with crushed pepper with honey; Afterwards, let the patient rest and do not move the limb for a long time until he is fully healed.
And if it is dislocated above, then little will happen; therefore, perform the cautery on the thick part of the cautery needle, or a lot of cauteries by pricking.
For the joint is closed, and moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
When coldness and much moisture enter the stomach and draw it out of its natural state, and when there are many cathartics in him, and he is not helped by usual remedies and treatments, then the patient should be made to lie on his back and extend his legs and arms. Then afterwards, make three cauteries one below the heel of the foot by the amount of a bean, all around the clavicle, and two cauteries on either side so that the shape of the cauterizations is triangular, and there is an equal distance between them so that they are not joined together when they grow pus;
and let the cautery be so deep that it pierces both parts of the heart, and let the shape of the cauteries follow this form without adjustment:
And if you wish to cauterize a large cautery within the stomach according to this form:
and whoever is afraid of this cautery, cauterize a small point and sign on the stomach according to the amount you wish to cauterize: then cauterize with all the cautery that is called "points.
After the treatment of the disease that we have mentioned earlier, until it is healed.
When the liver hurts from cold and moisture and from excessive flatulence as it has been moved from its natural complexional position: and the disease is cured by what we have said in divisions, and if it does not help, then the patient should be bled from his finger; and sign within three cauteries according to this form and shape and quantity on the liver, avoiding the hypogastric region where the gut of man comes from;
and there should be the thickness of a thumb between each cautery; and the cauteries should be held gently and not pressed too hard on the body;
and let half of the cautery burn, and let the patient lie straight on his back with his feet elevated;
and if he cannot, then let him lie down, and stretch out his legs and raise his hips;
And if you wish to cauterize with the steel, be skillful and wise in the art, and beware of burning the entire body, for you would cause the whole body to dry up. And let it come just to a boil, for the skin is very delicate in that place, and you can tell by looking.
When there is an abscess in the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if he is in a cart, let the patient feel pain not too strongly;
and if he is on the ground, then let him feel acute pain.
And then when this treatment has been applied to the ulcers, the patient should be laid down with his head elevated;
and then sign with oil on the site of the abscess, and then heat the cautery which is shaped like a rod, by which the form [of the cautery] is made: And cauterize with the cautery until the ulcer is burned, and go down to the bone, until all of the pustules are gone;
after the treatment according to the treatment with bandages until it is healed;
and no one should use this cautery except for those who have studied the art of medicine for a long time, and through whom these diseases have sometimes deteriorated.
Therefore he can work boldly, and in any case I think it is better to let him do so.
with the cautery of phlegmon
The ancients said that one must do cautery to a ulcer with roots of aristolochia, and in such a way: take a root of aristolochia that is long, the largest you can find, and dry, and as thick and as long as your finger; and moisten it in oil, and burn it on a cautery between the throat and neck, and two smaller cauteries slightly lower down on the part which is underneath the beard;
and two cauteries between the fifth and sixth ribs, declining slightly backwards; and one cautery in the armpit, and one over the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two as you go down from the armpit away from the cautery that is between the shoulders;
and do not press your hand at all, but do it smoothly as when applying perfume.
And some ancients said that someone should use a fire cautery like a razor, heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches that abscess. and jump to avoid the pain, as we have said about the liver abscess.
But in this procedure there is fear of death for the patient, or a fistula occurs that cannot be healed.And some say that if one uses an iron cautery like a razor and cauterizes between the ribs, it will reach the heart; and sometimes pus flows out and the patient recovers, as we have seen happen.
of the mouse
When you treat the illness of the moon as we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not help at all, then they rely on three methods of cautery which are all good.
Of these, one method is to make three cauteries, or four, by lining up according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver cautery which we mentioned earlier;
and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and let the patient be careful on his back;
and another way to cauterize is to heat the cautery which has two prongs, as we have shown in the shoulder dislocation;
and gently lift the skin where the mouse is, or the side of the patient's body from which the arrow came towards the left, and let the elevation be according to the skin, according to the length of the body, and the cautery according to the width of the body.
After I tie the two nerves inflamed so that the heart is pierced from the other side, and then I draw out the cautery, and thus there will be four.
And if you see, cauterize with all the cautery on three nerves.
After the scrofula has been cured for a long time, it is better than any of the other remedies mentioned above.
Cautery is no good for an idropic, except in the manner that is called "asclytes.
When you cure it according to the methods we have described in parts, and your treatment does not help, then you should do four cauterizations around the armpit, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the breast, two behind the back on the spine, and one on the buttock; and let the cautery be close to the spine of the heart.
Afterwards, leave the cautery open for a long time, and do not stop the treatment of the malady after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and the two intentions will come together with God's help.
The form of the cautery for the belly is the clave that we have shown before; and those for the back are olive-shaped, as shown earlier.
When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsical and filled with yellow water, you should cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger; and move your hand with the cautery without turning it.
Nor enter too deeply, as they say against the yellow awl, and let the cautery be according to this form:
After that, make two cauteries on each leg, at the tip of the tibia; and let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other above, in the middle of the leg;
and leave the cauteries untouched for a long time without healing, until the water comes out;
after that, do the other cauteries that we have mentioned.
When a person has abdominal distension caused by coldness and moisture, and the retaining and digestive functions of the stomach and intestines are impaired and cannot be healed through other means of treatment; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with great virtue, then make the large cautery on the stomach according to what he has spoken of before about the cautery of the stomach, make the cautery circular; and 4 cauteries around the body subtly throughout all the cauterization ключ, and 2 cauteries on the hips.
And if you see abundance of moisture and the patient suffering, then make cauteries on the elbow, and one cautery on each shoulder, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good support.
on the treatment of hemorrhoids:
When hemorrhoids are in the rectum, one or more, and they are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and are treated as we have said with division, but it does not help, then make cauteries: 3 on the spine of the back, that which is entirely under the armpit, poke and poke little by little in a triangle shape, and 2 cauteries under the body on both sides;
and if you think his stomach is cooled and the meat does not cook, and one sees swelling in the face, then make the large cautery on the stomach as it is said before, and another on the liver, and another on the heart throughout all the cauterization ключ; and let the cautery remain uncovered for a long time. After curing the area until it is healed.
When you apply to the ulcer, heat the cautery until it is like a razor, and then place it firmly on the ulcer; and hold your hand steady so that the cautery comes to the base of the vein, causing the blood to clot;
do this once or twice, and if there is a lot of ulceration, cauterize each one as we have described; after treating the ulcers, apply healing ointments until they are healed;
and if you cauterize with a large cautery on an abscess, it will bring more relief.
When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will discuss in its place, such an illness comes that it cannot be healed except by cautery.
When a fistula occurs, and there is suppuration and a discharge of rotten moisture, you should examine it thoroughly with a thin needle, and be mindful to probe as deep as the tent goes.
After heating the cautery until it is like a razor, insert it into the fistula according to how deep the wound is, and then reheat the cautery as needed until the affected flesh is burnt, once, or twice or thrice, depending on the amount of tissue involved;
and beware of burning the nerves which are within it, and the large veins.
if the fistulas go to the bladder and intestines, beware of those places, and do not make fires too hot, and think that they are not dead;
afterward cleanse the place until it is healed, and if the wound is sore and the matter has been discharged for a long time, then know that the wound is completely healed;
and if the matter is not discharged, know that the wound is piercing and corrupting the bone at its depth; and thus with one of those we will mention in their place.
When cold pain comes with wind and does not take the woman's desire, then you must make a cautery on both sides of the back with the hot iron we mentioned earlier;
and if we cauterize it with milk, it will have three cauteries in a line, and they will be of greater help.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then he should be cauterized in the part above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic hairline begin, on the right and on the left, and each cautery should be as long as a thumb;
and he is cauterized on the back, where there are two cauteries if you need them;
and the cauteries are claved according to the form previously mentioned.
When the womb is cold and moist, and does not leave one hopeful of conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their terms delayed; and when they come, they feel great pain: then you must make three cauteries around the wound, as we have said in the cautery for the bladder, and two cauteries on the back;
and let the cautery be performed with a key, as we have said.
When the viscous moisture descends into the box of the hip and because of this it moves out of its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together;
and if the dislocation is found in the hip joint, then you must cauterize the patient on the hip joint with a cautery resembling a circle, and sign before the place around the joint as it turns, so that the joint is within the circle;
and let the cautery be performed like those by which one cauterizes the stomach.Quant la boiste de la hainche est disalote, si covient que tu disloques les cuisses,
And if this cautery is not present, then make three great olive cauteries, and let the cauteries be as deep as all the warts.
and cure it until it is healed.
of hip pain When pain comes in the hip socket, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient has been treated as we have said in the division and the treatment does not help, and the illness is old: then you must purge the patient of the gross humors with smelly pills, or other good-smelling pills alike. After that, make a cautery;
and the way of making the cautery is according to two methods: that is to say, together with burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Fire cautery has many methods, one of which is as follows:
that you cauterize upon the bone of the hip three cauteries triangularly according to this form, and make them deep and large, and let there be between each cautery a space the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be olivary;
sometimes one cautery is made in the middle upon the head of the hip, according to this form: there are four according to this form:
And if you wish, cauterize with the circular cautery which we mentioned earlier in the dislocation of the hip;
but do it in such a way that the circles contain the whole hip, and all the thickness of the flesh is burned.
And this is the method done in sciatica, when the pain stays in the hip and does not reach the thigh or leg.
And if it comes to the thigh and leg, make two cauteries where the patient says the pain is, and one cautery above the ankle, four fingers, on the left side a little;
and let the cautery be with a hot iron, and burn the thickness of the skin;
and if the pain extends to the sole of the foot or near it, then he should be cauterized where he feels the pain for three or four points with the cautery called 'points'. And if necessary, have him cauterized more;
and if he feels that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then have him cauterized with a hot iron or circular cautery; and be very careful in all your cauterizations not to leave the iron on so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and do not cause greater harm and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who had cautery done on the ankle of the foot, and they left it until the leg was all swollen, and the foot as well, and it was pierced and corrupted all through the foot. After a stomach ache from which he died.
And if the pain is in two places together, do cautery in one and the other according to this manner.
And for the cautery of the hip, from which there is this method, make an iron as thick at the tip as a thumb, or a little less, and pierce it with holes in between so that the distance between them is the thickness of a thumb joint;
and have the hinges of two parts, and also like nuts, and let there be one handle of well-made iron;
and this is the form:
And it should be heated until it is bright red and dripping with fat, and then placed on the box of the sick hip, and turned onto the healthy side;
and the cautery is used once, and left for three days; and then make an ointment of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the treatment with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we use this cautery sparingly because of its appearance, and we see few who use it;
and yet it is a good cautery, which can be endured by those to whom it is applied.
The cautery of medicine burns when you make the instrument to cross between in such a way that the rim of the door descends, and it is made of brass or iron with one side long, and in its height there are two inches, and between each there is the quantity of the thickness of a finger. and they are open beneath and above, and join together according to this form:
After placing the box of the hip on the patient lying on his sound side, and then press your hand strongly on the box of the hip. After that pour between the two circles of the hot iron which has been heated in the fire for a little while, and let the patient endure the heat and burning of it.
For he will experience biting just as from fire;
and when the biting is passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the hip gently, and let it be so for three days, and apply butter as long as that which is black from the burning is removed. and let him for three days until the pus drains out;
and this would be the final treatment after the dressing of wounds until it is healed.
And if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make the instrument that colors like salt according to what you did in the hip joint;
and this is how the hot color is made, and I have written it in the treatise on the correction of medicine. Take alkali and quicklime, as much of each, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot. where there is a small hole so that the point of a pin can enter;
where there is a small hole so that the point of a pin can enter; and put on top of this another well-plumbed pot, and put on top of it an alkali and heat and a gentle color on top, until there are two fingers of powder above the colors which you will have well mixed with your hand;
and let it be thus until the water and pieces fall into the plumbed pot, then take all that color and pour it over heat and alkali as before.
And then there will be much fever, which is administered through various medical procedures and cauteries on other limbs.
Because it does the same harm as fire, and there are other remedies with which one can cauterize the hip, such as thistle honey and anardana fruit mixed with soap.
And Galen relates a cure where a man was cured of hip and sciatic pain, and he praised it highly, saying that no other treatment was used, and that the man was healed in a single instance after this cure was performed, and he bathed as instructed below.
And he said in such a way that you apply the litarge powder green and dry, and grind it very finely with a little fat, and place it on the hip and thigh and leg where the pain is, and bandage it;
and leave it for three hours, and according to the intensity of the disease, not feeling the burn anymore.Et puis tu destrouves le cautere et la lie, et mets autre cautere soubs, et dist a li sain
And then he makes him enter the bath until his body is a little warmed up, and he makes him enter the bed, and the pain will go away completely and he will be healed.
And know that no one should use such medicines after a bloodletting.
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's dung, it helps a lot;Et quant li poignet de la hainche est desaloiee et se met le pie soubs li corps, si covient que tu la remettes sus li pie, et si covient
and the cautery must be performed in such a way. Take lamb's wool and grease it with old oil, and place it on the hollow between the big toe of the foot and the other one called the little toe.
Take dry goat's dung, place it in fire until it becomes charcoal, then put it on wool and leave it until it turns to ash.
Do this again and again, until you feel it reach the hip and the pain ceases.
This method of cauterization is called "goat's dung cautery.
of back pain
When pain comes in the back, whether from sitting or from impact or from excessive discharge, or from similar appearances of expanded cold matter, none of these indications are suitable for cauterization except for that which comes from the diffusion of cold matter.
After the patient has been purged of foul humors with fetid pills or similar remedies, draw three lines on their back where the pain is located, and make V cauteries in each line according to the strength and amount that the patient can endure.
The cauteries should be performed using the instrument called a "poke." et li cauteriste doit estre presté de sa main, et li poins doit estre embrezés de l’oil ou
and if you see, make three cauteries or four using the key-shaped cautery according to this form:
This disease often affects young children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a tight armpit when they wake up, and fear; and you will find it in the last spine of the back, and the appearance that comes above the other spines.
When you see this and you cure it, then cauterize it with the cautery of salt according to this form. So that the purple cautery equally affects every part of the spine.
And if you see, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery tool 2 or 3 lines apart, and have the points close to each other.
Afterwards, heal the area according to what we have said, and be careful not to apply cautery on any area that is swollen and in a state of inflammation which may be affecting nerves.
There are two types of cautery: one is by fire and the other is by salt. The salt cautery is better; it does not burn the flesh or the bone or the nerve, but is a great remedy for pains that come from the head.
When joint pain is from moistors that are expanded in every member of the body, and when it comes to feet, which the doctor properly calls "podagra," and when it is from a cold cause and does not heal with medicine, then it is healed by cautery in such a way:
make the mouth of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if it is necessary to prick the sole of the foot, then use the entire cautery tool on the «point.» And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, which often happens, if you make cautery on each knee three or four times in each part, all over the olive-shaped cautery;
and if you need to do more, then do it, but don't hold your hand against the skin any longer than necessary so that the heat doesn't scorch.
And if the pains descend to the knee and the back, administer the cautery we mentioned in his chapter.
And if there is pain in the hands, make a point around the finger joint two lines away from it;
and if there is no pain in the fingers, then make a point on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
and if the pain comes from the wrists or up to the shoulders, then cauterize each part and treat the patient well and take medicine.
For if you give him good treatment and purge phlegm, he will be healed with God's help.
When diarrhea comes from anger, and the bowels descend to the testes and this is new, then when you see it being treated, it shouldn't be done that day; and let him eat things that loosen the belly so that the feces descend from his belly;
after you make him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to tense his belly so that the navel is pulled in, and bring your fingers to your hips, and sign from under the waist onto the bone of the wrist, and throughout a sign that resembles half a circle above the body;
then heat up the cautery with which this form is made:
until it is white and exudes pus. Then reset the bowels to their place; and the assistant holds his hand so that it does not return;
and well open the thighs for the patient, and put under him a pillow and a servant on the thighs, and another on the feet who holds his hands;
then put the cautery on the sign all around your hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, do it again until you reach the bone; and carefully guard against the boil erupting when you perform the cautery; so that you do not burn yourself; and so that the patient does not die, or suffer some other harm.
And know that when you do not come to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
And it is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size, and for larger people also large according to their size;
after 3 days treat the site of the cautery with butter until the scorch is healed;
after that treat it with other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for 40 days so that the wound can close properly;
and it is necessary to keep his bandages on for a long time so that the boil does not emerge when he tries to move around.
And after 40 days, when he wants to stand up, let him use a well-made crutch, and use it for another 40 days;
and has good rest, works little and guards against too much drinking and eating, and against speaking too loudly;
and when he follows this advice, he will be completely healed.
And I will say hereafter about the treatment of cutting on his head.
When ulcers come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they are not growing any more, then do the cautery with the fire according to its quantity, and burn the third of the skin; after the cauterization according to what we have said;
and some of the ancients say that one should cauterize it with a three-pointed cautery according to this form:
but first mark the place of entrance and make a line across the width above the ulcer, and another across it, and hold your hand in the middle of all the cautery.
But the first cauteries are lighter and gentler.
of old pain in any limb When pain comes in any limb, from falling or being struck, and that pain lasts a long time, and the treatment of medicine does not help, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "point", and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and its torture and its location.
if he is healed by the first cauterization, that is good;sinon, tu le remets ou il est, et te reprouves de tout ce que tu
if not, you reset it where it was and try everything in that name again, and do another cauterization on the one near which it is, because such is the custom that it should move to the nearest limb, so you must do the cauterizations until the patient is healed.et si li cauteres ne se peuit faire en celui leu, ne plus le remets, car il ne se doit demourer en celui membre;
Sometimes ulcers are helped by cautery with great relief, especially those diseases that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Now when you see it cauterized, take heed if the disease is in its early stages, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not disappear or remain, and you doubt that the corruption will spread throughout the disease, then make V cauteries on the head: I burn the scalp nine times, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hairline; and two on each horn, and one behind on the nape of the neck;
and leave your hand so that the cautery reaches the bone, and as much so that the scorches come out so that the vapors of the thick humors can come out;Apres qu’il a l’escorce et la chair secce sus le chief com je vos ai dit, metez une fife de lin en l’escorce qui est plus pross de la fin des chevous.
After the scorch and dry skin appear on the head as I have told you, put a piece of linen in the scorch that is closest to the end of the hairline. And
And if the hair is scattered all over; and she is losing hair obviously, then you should cauterize her scalp with the cauteries that we have described above, and one cautery on the top of the head, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large cautery on the crotch, and another one next to it, and two cauteries on both shoulders; and two cauteries on the elbows, and two cauteries on the tendons of the feet, and one cautery on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the knuckles of the hands;
and be careful not to burn the nerves that are located behind the anus;
and sometimes make one cautery on the bone of the wrist, and another one on the bone of the stomach, and another one on the liver.
And you should know that the more you do cauterization, the more it helps, and moves him to profit.
And you should know that the patient feels no pain from cauterization as a healthy person does, because the body is already entirely corrupted.
And it is necessary that the cautery be large or small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of the irons.
Afterwards, treat the area with a paste of flour and honey and other treatments until it is healed.
When swelling comes in any limb and is cured by medicine, oils, and poultices, but it is not healed, then he should do cauterization on the limb according to the size of the limb.
And let the cauterization be a little bit inside the thickness of the skin. Then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
And sometimes cauterization is done to the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that makes the limb mute, and thus the swelling is removed.
And yet one should not interfere with this unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the nerves that move the body.Car s’il est trop oignie le nerf, adonques li enfleure ne se porra ostre,
When the disease called "albaras" is awakened, and the instruments of medicine are of no avail, then cauterize it with a cautery somewhat deeply, according to the quantity of the thick humors, until the whiteness is removed, and its color changed.
then treat with a poultice of wheat flour and lentils, with rose oil, plantain leaves, blood from the bowel, and blood from the almond vein, each ingredient in equal parts. and mix it all together, then bind it with a cloth and keep it in place until the patient is healed.
the treatment of sores by cauterization
When a ulcer comes at its beginning, and you see it stopping, then cauterize it with the cautery that looks like a circle, all around the edge of the ulcer.
And still, the wise men say that one should also cauterize the middle of the ulcer:
but I do not think this is good, because I fear that it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen this happen more than once.
and a more direct thing is that it be cauterized around, with the cautery which is called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it is slow to heal because of the excess that it causes or because of the age of the malady when it is decrepit (that is, very old) and he has little blood, or because of the season; and you see it hastening to die: then cauterize it all around with many small cauteries, piercing; afterwards leave it thus.If you find a wound that is suppurating and has Because it will hasten death.
And if you see it piercing all the way through, then heat the cautery tool from which comes the form:
And place your hand in the middle of that disease called "adubelati" until the cauteries pierce the skin, and let the cauteries be such that the patient feels them spreading out in such a way that the flow of the pus is relieved.
Afterwards, treat it until it is perfectly healed.Et si li malaides ne se peust curer de cele maladie qui est apelée  «adubelati», adonques le metent en milieu del bed et le cure par cauteres que il n’ait point de sang; et s’il ne peust guérir, la mort l’alera.
Another kind of illness there is which is called "corroding", and it is nothing other than a melting of the limbs, for it melts the limbs just as fire melts dry wood.
If you find this disease in a place that can endure cautery with fire, then heat the cauteries small and large, according to what is appropriate for the location of the disease;if you find it in a place that cannot endure cautery with fire, then take the cauteries which are made from iron and stone and which are called  "circles", and heat them, both small and large, as is fitting for the location of the disease.
after you cauterize it all over until you reach the healthy tissue underneath, and none of the corruption remains, only the healthy tissue is left.
And then leave it for 3 days, and put on the cauterized spots a poultice with oil until the burns from the fire are healed, and all the corruption is removed.
After that, treat it with ointments that generate heat.
And if after 3 days, healthy flesh does not grow back, that is good;
and if not, then begin the cautery again on what remains of the corrupt tissue.
And this wound has sometimes been cured by medication instead of fire cautery;
but nonetheless, fire cautery is the greatest help, and I have already described the cure for the medication ague in the division: take as much as you need.
of sores that come on the feet Many times it happens that through defect a disease called 'clot' according to our understanding arises in the feet, and is a large, faulty thing that blocks the toe.
And the cauteries for this disease are according to two methods. They are: fire cautery and hot water cautery.Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres: cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.
Fire cautery should be heated until it is as hot as a feather, and made of good iron to the size that it can pierce the nail on all sides, with thin edges;
after putting it all hot on the nail, turn your hand all around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail; and leave it thus for three days until pus begins to flow out; then make a poultice of wild mallows ground with salt, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted by its roots.
Then treat the area with a soothing ointment until it is healed.
And if they are turned the wrong way round in the body, and often happen in hands and feet, then you must treat them with hot water cautery; and it is done like this: take an iron or bronze rod, or a needle, and put it on the nail and the wart, that is to say, warts; and put the rod on it so that it cuts all around, then put a little hot water on it, and hold your hand steady, and press your hand as you turn the rod so that its edge comes to the root of the nail, and it can find the hot water deeply enough to reach the root;
and let the patient endure the biting of hot water for a little while. then leave it thus, and it will pull out by its roots.
Thus do one after another, until you draw out all those who are in the body, then cure them of the wounds that engender pus.
When someone shakes from coldness of the nerves, or from quartan fever, or other, you must make 3 or 4 cauteries on the spine of the back, 1 cautery between each spine. and 1 cautery on the penis, and 1 on the stomach with olive-oil cautery;
it will cease the shaking and hasten the health from the cold disease.Car les ners tremblent par moistor qui vient de l’estomac, et le feu qui vient del nerverie du dos
Sometimes they appear as sores on the body, or stinking pustules, that come from large corrupted matters.
Indeed, the nerves shake from moisture that comes from the stomach, and fire that comes from the nerve centre in the backSo it is fitting, when they first appear, to make cautery on each tip of the pustule: with a thin cautery wand made from myrtle wood, whose tip is taken up in fire, or with long roots of aristolochia, or with a lens-shaped cautery.Et si est en la teste, si covient que li cauteres soient fitz sus la teste; et s’il tremble de fievre quartaine ou d’autre maladie,
And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow from thereforth, but the superfluities from which they come are broken, and they are healed.
but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
Many times there are great bloodlettings from the artery which is cut at the wound that comes from the opposite side, or in the incision of an abscess, or in cauterizing a limb, and in similar things; and it is very painful to stanch.
And yet when this happens to anyone, you must hurry to place your finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it very firmly until the blood is staunched beneath your finger, and no more drips out;
then put into the fire several small and large olive-wood cauteries until they are all red;
then take I, either large or small according to the wound and where the artery is running, and apply the cautery to that vein where you are holding your hand, and keep the cautery there until the blood is staunched.
And if it bleeds again when you lift your finger from the wound and the cauteries are extinguished, quickly take another of the cauteries that are in the fire.
And do not cease doing this one after the other until the blood is staunched.
And be sure not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and no other harm should come to the patient;
and know that when blood escapes from an artery, one cannot staunch it well by himself when the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods we have described: either by cautery, or by extraction when it has not been treated, or by a strong ligature, or by medicines applied that have the power to staunch blood; and it should be bound and compressed skillfully.
Whoever administers a tight bandage or places burning objects on top, or similar things, will not benefit if only a little.
And if this happens to someone and they do not have any mirrors or remedies at hand, then they should place their index finger on the wound as we have said, and press firmly until it is stretched over the wound and vein. and do not move the finger but moisten it with cold water often so that it is very cold until the blood is congealed and swollen and stretched.
and make inquiries beforehand about what he will need in terms of cautery and medicine.
We have told you in the first chapter about all the illnesses that require fire cautery, or burning remedies, and their origins, and the instruments, causes, forms of cautery;
and have placed in this chapter from the head to the feet, and I will go through this same way in this chapter so that one can more easily find what they are looking for.
And thus as I begin this, it is fitting, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauteries, and therefore greater caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in treating wounds, and in extracting arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things. where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to attempt foolishness. For many kinds of people come for treatment. if they come from such people who are so accustomed to their illness that they die easily because of the familiarity with their disease and the severity of its nature;Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes and from these one must fear.Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu,
And of these there are those who give their senses to you and say:'When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset Wait, I am drawing"; and the disease is desperate.
You should not consent to those who come to you with this method, but place greater importance on your honor than your desire. Do not open recklessly but wisely what you are certain of and what you can obtain and heal.
and use prognosis and diagnosis in treating your illnesses to which salvation may be converted;
and this will aid you to that good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Very dear son, Our Lord gives you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Now I have outlined this chapter for you in discussing chapter chapters, according to what is before the chapter on cautery, which I have discussed from the head down to the feet, so that you may more easily find what you need.
Know that this disease often comes to children when they are born, and when the neck is stretched too tightly from the child's head;
and sometimes it comes from an unknown cause that one does not know about.
And I have never seen this disease except in children, and in all those I have seen death hastened; and for this reason, it seems to me that I should divide the treatment into several parts.
I saw a child whose head was full of water, and whose head swelled up every day so that he could not support it;
and he believed that it was water, and this moisture gathered under the bone above the throat, between the heart and the bone;
and the treatment is such that if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, you should make a large incision in the head;
and it should be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture flows out;
and see the shape of the spleen:
If the fluid is deeper and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see the edges of the head opening in each part, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand from within, and it does not return to you: Then you must split it open at the top with three cuts according to this method:
And after the incision, draw out all the moisture forcefully. After closing up the cuts with bandages and powders, pour in wine and oil and leave it like this for five days;
Then remove the stitches and treat the wound with tenting and ointments, allowing the head to heal evenly, and give the patient dry meat from a dry pot until the limb is comforted and healed.
And another method of incision is that you look at where the abscess opens, and the gathering of pus;
because sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Cut it then where the abscess opens and the pus gathers, and fill according to what you are able;
and guard against covering the artery; and let blood flow, so that the patient dies from blood loss and the evacuation of moisture.
When someone suffers from a condition called "cataract" in the eyes or elsewhere, and the disease is old, and the treatment of medicine does not help, then the last resort is cautery with which one will cut the two arteries.
Therefore, when you see them covered, have the patient lie on his back; afterwards, rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries become visible, then press the patient's neck tightly with the cloth; then look where the vein beats, and the spots on either side are after the ears, and they are pressed down;
then sign the spots inwards, then cover one and press with a sharp spatula on both sides until the vein comes to the bone, and this should be done from the head.
And if you see that, put the spatula under the artery and cut it from above, cutting through as well about two fingers across.
And when the vein is cut, let the blood flow continuously upwards.
And if the artery does not open to the touch, then you must measure the amount of space three times, then sign inwards and press until it comes to the bone;
and that which is needed for the blood to flow out is six ounces, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the fullness of the artery.
then look at the wound. if there remains a point on the bone where pus does not come out, then open the wound and drain it, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
of the emetic When ancient vomiting comes, and a sharp catarrh, due to moisture from the tears and heat in the temples and ancient madness and similar things, and he is treated by various methods of medicine and all that does not help him, then we should open the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
And the method of extracting them is that the patient should press behind his temples, and listen to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is not very strong compared to some men who are too cold;
and if it is weak, the patient should hold his neck with some cloth, then rub the area with some rough cloth, and wash the area with warm water until the artery opens clearly; then take the spatula, which has a flat shape: then gently cut the skin until you reach the artery, then pull it upwards with tweezers and carefully separate it from the tissues beneath in every part.
and if the artery is thin, then turn it with the hook to the tip of the nail, then cut off that part according to the quantity of the two fingers. For if it is not cut, then the sick person's life hangs by a thread.
And draw out the blood for a third of an inch, up to half an inch. Et s’il vout adobir la croute et la
And if the artery is large, then you must tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread so that pus does not come before the healing of the wound, and let the blood flow naturally.Et s’il vout adobir la croute et la
Then cut away the excess between the two ties in that same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with a hot iron up to the bone until the shoulder is cut through.Et s’il vout adobir la croute et la
and it is a good treatment, if the patient does not have a fever and is of a hot temperament. For fire cautery is helpful in drying out moisture: therefore it is even more beneficial for moistness.
Or, for the extraction of arteries, one must fill the area with old cotton and place it under well-made tents;
and when they are removed, they should be treated with dry remedies that promote the formation of scar tissue, and with tents, until they are healed;
and if, without cutting the artery as much as you work on it, you hasten to cover it with cautery, then employ the area with vitriol and hold it in your hand so that the blood is staunched; and if you do not have that at hand, then put your finger on the area until the blood congeals, and apply cold water to the area until the bleeding stops, and then press it as necessary;
And there should be a finger's width of space between the two knives, and then when you have cut into both sides, place the hot iron upon it until it reaches the bone, and close the vein in two places. and they should be spaced far apart between the two shoulders because they are not fused together by this cautery from top to bottom;
and this is the shape of the cautery:
and that which is more painful and easier to extract the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cutting cautery in two parts, but the cutting should be well-spaced to guard against their heat for a longer time. For when the strumenti is too thin, it holds its heat less well.
of tears When the tears from the eyes are flowing down the veins that are above the forehead, and no medicine benefits it, and you see the face of the sick person turn red, and feels movement in the forehead as if trembling; and if they are pale and moist so that the hair of the eyelids has fallen out, and the eyelids are scorched and blistered from the heat of the tears, then this treatment is necessary. And they called it the "crushed cure" in old French, and it is that you do to the patient who has this disease by making the hair on his forehead, then make three slits on the forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead;
And they called it the "crushed cure" in old French, and it is that you do to the patient who has this disease by making the hair on his forehead, then make three slits on the forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead; and one of the slits should be about two fingers' width from the bridge of the nose, running down towards the nose, and the other two on either side of the eyelids, and beware of cutting the arteries that are on either side of the eyelids;
and keep your hand away from the jaw, and each cut should be about three fingers' width apart across the forehead;
and have ready a piece of sponge and plenty of bandages to wipe away the blood, then fill the spatula with two parts of the mixture from which comes the form:
from the incision that is on the temple all the way to the second incision; and scrape all the skin that is between the two incisions down to the bone, then do likewise from the middle incision to the other second one, and then remove this spatula. Then insert into the first incision the instrument called "culter", which is very sharp on one side and smooth on the other, and it is shaped thus:
And place the knife's edge towards the chest cavity at the heart, and the flat side towards the bone, and push it in until it reaches the median incision.
And close off all the vessels that descend from the head into the eye sockets as far as the incision extends to this one which opens from the brain, and then likewise do so in the middle incision to the other outside;
and then draw out blood equally, and express the area for the taken blood;
then place in each incision a tent of old cotton, and place on top wet bandages soaked in wine and oil and garlic, and be careful that hot abscesses do not come to it;
and on the third day loosen the bandage, and administer a large quantity of tepid water, then treat it with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, and other remedies used for treating wounds, until it is healed.
When someone suffers from acute cataracts, and you see the eyes sunken and small, and the vision weakened, and the eyelids burnt: and the hair falls out, and in the head there is great pain, and the patient sneezes; then you may know from these signs that those substances and this cataract come from many veins, and the mother fluid that is in it, is thus.
And you command the patient to turn his head back, then make a large slit in the middle of the forehead, and another from the broad nose. And begin the incision from the left temple to the right temple, and let it reach to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move the jaw;
and when the bone is uncovered, he should suck all the blood with a sponge and then open between the two lips of the cut and put in old cotton and linen bandages; then he should bind damp cloths soaked in wine and oil over it, and guard against hot abscesses;
when it is removed, you should rub the bone until pus starts to come out, then clean it with drying substances that cause the pus to dry up.
In this way: take two parts of chamomile and four parts of cress, and make an ointment out of it; and administer it to wounds to dry up pus everywhere.
of the ear stoppers
All that falls from the ears is one of four things:ou bien est de la chair ou de l’os, ou sang ou mukuge, et si doit on regard or grains, or a stone, or similar objects like iron. or seed, like peas, beans; or fluid things like water and garlic and similar things.
When it falls into the ear, whether stone or other matter that does not adhere to the ear, nor grow in the ear, then put the ear to the sun.
If you see the stone, then distil a little violet oil or oil of sweet fennel, then administer an emetic; and make him sneeze with incense, and plug his nose when he sneezes, and put cotton wool or cloth around his ears; and plug the ear from above.
Often this treatment works;
and if it does not work, then administer an emetic with subtle pincers, in which way there is the following form:
If it comes out with the pincers, that's good;
if not, then administer an emetic with the tip of a sharp, small blade;
and if it does not come out with that, then make a brass needle and put the tip of the needle into the hole in the ear firmly, and stop up around the needle with soft wax so that the wind cannot enter with the needle; then treat it further, because it often comes out as we have said.
and if it does not come out in this way, then use glue on cotton and put it around the nail. then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it is, and pull it out.
And if it does not come out with all these things that we have said, then split the ear so that pus and fluid can drain, and for a spasm;
and the way to split it is that you first make an incision in the head of the patient, and draw blood according to the amount of its strength, then have the patient sit between your hands and turn his ear up, and split a small opening at the root of the ear where the cartilage connects; and cut it like a moon, as far as you can go to the stone, then suck it energetically with your mouth;
and cure it until it is healed.
And if there are grains in the wound and it swells, then administer an extractive remedy;
and if it cannot come out, then administer a thin spatiumile according to this formula: and administer an incision on that spot.
But do not do this if you think the grains are moist from the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces;
then extract it with subtle tweezers and with a sucking instrument, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.
In acute conditions when fluid drains into the ear, the patient should first sneeze from congestion, and open the ear with old cotton. And let him lie on that very ear where the water is. If it jumps out because of this, it's good.
If not, take many small stones according to the length of your finger, thin and light, and heat them slightly in fire; And he puts a hollow reed in the patient's ear, and it protrudes from his foot on the other side, and he pierces another stone upon the stone which is in the ear; and he does not cease to pierce from stone to stone until the water flows out entirely, and thus it flows out completely;
and if you see that he has a reed, and puts one end in the ear, and the other end in fire until the hottest reed is burnt;
then do the same with other reeds until the water flows out entirely, as we have said for the stone.
In extracting a foreign object from the body, if it is small like a louse or similar, remove it as we have said in the section on division;
but if it is large enough to be felt, apply the forceps for extraction;et se li corps soit grant et pesans, si doit on le lever et le mouvoir tant qu’il soit estrain, car s’il li estran en and it is the easiest thing to remove which is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the section on distillations, and the treatment does not help, then you must look into the ear towards the sun: if it appears that there are no worms, then squeeze them with tiny pincers, and if they don't appear, then take the skin where the shape is.
It is tight below and loose above. And put the thinnest end of an ear pick into the ear according to the amount of suffering of the malady, then suck firmly on the entire skin; do this repeatedly until all the worms emerge.
And if they don't come out, then stop up the ear with cotton as I said in the section on stones;
and if they do not protrude as we have said, then administer the distillation that the ancients have tried in the removal of worms, and you will find it in the treatise on distillation.
and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all this equipment, whose form is as follows: And it should be made of silver or bronze with small holes underneath, and open on top for distillation.
And to force the distillation into the instrument, use a bronze vessel especially made for this purpose. And if you see fit, take a razor and wrap cotton around the tip. Then pour your oil or juice, and whatever you wish from your remedies into the tube, and let the tube be in the ear.
Then put the razor, wrapped in cotton, into the ear and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled into the outer ear. and let the patient feel the heat within, and let the distillation be heated over fire so that it is distilled into the ear; and beware that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as good.
of the ear stoppers
Some children are born without any holes in their ears;
and the same thing happens in adults due to wound plugging, or from pus forming inside the ear, and this plugging sometimes occurs deep in the ear, so it cannot be seen;
and sometimes the hole is pushed out, and one can see it clearly.
When it occurs deep inside, and one cannot see it, it is a sign of poor healing in many cases, and in such cases, you should expose the ear to the sun; and look inside: if you see the wound exposed, then treat it with this spasm:
And it should be sharp and pointed in front and behind, so that it does not cut the ear;
if the wound is on the soft flesh of the ear, then hold it with fine pincers and cut it lightly until all the flesh is removed.
And if the growth is deep in the ear, take a narrow, thin razor and heat it slightly in the fire, then apply it to the body of the ear.
If you feel that the patient feels pain when you hear it, pierce lightly and be careful not to cut the nerves of the ear;
then put a tent into the ear according to the size of the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.Et li tient legierement tant que l’ointement soit absorbe, et remets le tent, si tant com il ne se blece point. Hold it lightly until the ointment is absorbed, and remount the tent, so that it does not hurt. Do this every day until the wound is healed, or take a tent and moisten it in rose water, and dust on powdered vitriol;
and if you see the ear swollen, then you should draw out the tent and move another moist tent made of cerate that is made from rose oil and wax, until the swelling goes down. then heal it until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, soak a sponge and cloth in cold water, and apply it to the ear; and use other treatments that stop the bleeding from the distilling veins.
The hair that grows from the ears when they are moist and dry, you should straighten with tweezers and pincers, and cut off the root of a spatumile; then put powdered vitriol on the spot.
And if there is pus under the skin, then gently cauterize with a lens-shaped cautery, and after the incision the muces come out;
and many times they return, because nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, then those roots are burned and do not return.
of hail Many times come in papers from themselves one thing that looks like gravel in its shape and hardness, and because of this disease is called "hail," and is a gathering of thick moisture on the paper above and below. the works are such:
the works are such: Take care if the hailstone is silent on both sides, and that is an easy thing to know;
Then cut it open widely, then scrape off the skin of each part gently, then take it with tweezers, and peel it.
If you cannot peel it without piercing the paper a little, it will not harm the patient;
And if the tear is large, then sew it up, and treat it until it heals;
And if it is small, do not use much force, for the natural oils will restore it immediately and heal the wound.
And if the hail is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, then turn the paper upside down, and hold the hail with tweezers, and squeeze it from both sides;
and if the paper is displaced by the incision, that doesn't matter;
and when the hail is squeezed, then wipe the wound with salt water, and clean the area of any pus until the patient is healed.
of the fat around the eyes Exinch is a grease that forms inside the eyelids of children more than adults, and it causes great pain to them, and they experience catarrh in the mornings, and cannot stand the light of the sun because their tears flow continuously.
And because they sleep with their faces down, and because their eyelids are moist, their eyes become puffy and the appearance of their eyes is covered by the exinch, which causes the eye to water. And when you press the area with your fingers and feel the exinch between them.
And the manner of the operation is such that the patient puts his head on top of yours.
Then take a linen cloth and prepare it into a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains exudate from each part, then put it over the wound. And press with your fingers on either side so that the exudate is collected within the circle.
Then cut an opening in the center of the moisture with a spatula, making a slit that is no wider than the wound being drained.
And cut through to the skin as deeply as needed until you reach the exudate. In several applications, exudate comes out of the slit, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Therefore, extract it all with your fingers between your thumb and forefinger, rotating your hand from left to right until it is removed.
and be careful not to cut into the fissure, so that you do not reach all the way to the eye, lest you injure it.
And if the outlet does not open at the beginning of the fissure, then widen the fissure slightly until it appears.
Then extract as we have said, then moisten with rags in vinegar and water, and apply to the site, and extract with bandages.
And if there are such men who grind seal and put it on to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Then the cure until it is healed.
And if there is a hot abscess in that place, then treat it with soothing poultices until it is healed.And if there is a hot abscess in that place, then treat it with soothing poultices until it is healed.
of the hair of papers When hairs grow from the paper which are not of their nature, and they become entangled, then they harm the eyes, and bring about various diseases, as with tears accustomed and softening of the papers and membrane, until it becomes a cause of destruction to the eyes;
and there is treatment according to 4 methods: either by cautery with fire, or by medicine applied directly to the eye, or by incision and stitching, or by canes, according to what I will describe.
You should place the patient's head on your lap, then return the bandage around his eye to your left hand.
If it is converted, that is good; if not, then you push an needle through the thread above it. and cut through the margin of the bandage where the hairs grow next to these hairs and draw the thread above it throughout the bandage and return it to the shaver;
then they should do the same under the bandage, under the hairs next to them, all the way to the great artery by the ear, until they reach the small one.
Then pull the thread out and place a small tent made of cotton and linen under the bandage, then draw a figure on top of the bandage like a mulberry leaf, although the figure should vary depending on how much you want the bandage to rise where it is divided in two.
And if it is on a part that requires this, apply a large amount of paper according to how soft the paper is;
then do the spathanile over the two lines you have marked, and start from the large armpit up to the small one; and let one of the slits be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a hair root, then plug it with the point of a needle in one of the two corners of the heart, then peel it all off;
then sew the two lips together with a thread of fine woollen yarn, and stop the bleeding, and dry up the excess thread over the two eyelids with any sticky substance, if you see fit to do so;
and if not, don't worry about it and leave the sewing and threads for three or four days;
then dress the wound without sewing with dry and constricting things, for paper shrinks when the wound is souded and closed, but the stitch is moved (as the ancients say), and this work is done without fear. and if there is another way:
and if there is another way: and it is that you sign the paper with a shape that is also like the leaf of myrrh, as we have described it, at 3 inches apart according to the form that is here:
then cut out those on top with small scissors evenly according to the shape that is here:
And if you do not have the strength to hold the tweezers, and the object is not even, so take a needle or thread, and put it in among the shape. And put another thread through the large artery, and the second thread through the small one, and bring together between your fingers the threads evenly;
then lift your hand evenly and lift all the skin on which you have signed, as we have described it, then bring together the two lips of the wound by sewing, and dress it until it is healed.
and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with cerate and similar soothing ointments;
and sometimes the hair of the paper is converted:
if you should use what we have said about the incision;
but the stitching in both is more artifical.
The treatment of bones is as follows: and you should convert the paper and cut it inside according to what I have said, then make two bones by art, and two subtle strings as long as the paper and the width of the spathamile is; and cut as two heads from both parts where you hold the threads;
then assemble one and the other subtly above what rises from the paper of the eye, and strain the two bones from their formed parts;De la dislocation de la teste et de la nuque si est que tu convers le membre en la jointe ains que li chiés ne se desjoignent: and let it stay like that for a few days, and the skin that was stretched will die and become hard and fall off as it heals.
If it takes time, if the wound has a lot of pus, then treat the wound until it is healed;
and when the wound is sutured and the paper is lifted, the hairs will no longer grow;
and this is the shape of the two cones that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and breadth:
the work is such that you pierce an aiguille-like needle, and through it thread a silk thread; then join the heads and tie them tightly, and the length of the threads should be a palm long;
then place in the socket another short silk thread, and tie the ends of the thread;
then put the patient's head on your lap;
and with the sun shining on it so that the work is visible, because it is a subtle and fine operation. Then push the needle all the way into the root of the hair, and pierce through the skin gently until you reach the natural hair;
then pull out the hair all the way to the root, and put in the socket that hair, if there are 1 or 2 or 3 or more;
then pull your hand away so that the hairs grow out through the skin with the natural hair.
And if the socket is treated and the hair does not come out with it, then you must pull the socket from below all the way to the thread that you have tied there, until the socket comes out through the hole above and you see it with your eye;
then you will pull out the hair and thread, and close the eye and leave it for two or three days, until the hair grows back in its place and the flesh heals over it;
and if the hair is short, accompany it with a long hair from the eyelashes, and let it grow with it until it is elongated and then pull it out.
of the eyelash When this disease called 'alopecia' or hair loss occurs in the eye, there are two ways:
one is natural and the other is unnatural.
And it happens suddenly from a wound, or a cut, or cautery, and similar things.
And the way to treat it is to split that sutured skin, and loosen the eyelids, and place linen pads inside, and keep it clean until it heals;
and you must not use in its treatment anything that dries and constricts.Et la seconde maniere est que li poilz de l’oil, li quels sont petis, seche et descuit, et s’en For if you do this, the disease will return worse than before;
but work with softening things, such as fenugreek; and the rose of water or altée and flaxseed are cooked, and diaquilon oils melted in any oil, and wrapped in a tent, and the cure of this.
And the treasures of your cure are that you must be careful that it does not harden again according to the form it was before;
and these works that we have said are not strong except as remedies for this disease, so that it does not return according to the form it was before.
This disease, which is below, is truly called "axacrati", and it is natural and accidental.
Accidents come from wounds and tears and cauterizations and similar things;
and the way of the work in it is that you pierce a needle with a double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left eye to the right, so that the threads come out in two places on the body;
then draw the thread through the eye of the needle, and tie it tightly around the spatulum. And if the shape of the paper returns according to what is appropriate, that is good;
if not, then take a razor and insert it into the slit, and turn the paper over, and make two slits along the side within the paper;
and let the slits of the two sides be at the two corners of the incision that you have made, and make angles so that when they are assembled, the shape is like the shape of the letter "I" in Greek;
then remove that thread, according to the quantity that its sides are sharp underneath, from that which follows the paper; then join together the two separated parts and sew them with a lamb's wool thread;
then treat it according to what we have said about medicaments for softening and tenting, until he is healed.
And if the disease comes from a split or a stitch or cautery, then you should make a clean split beneath the hairs of the eyelids, and according to what is mentioned above. then remove the tent between the two lips, as I have said;
then remove the tent between the two lips, as I have said; and the procedure should be performed according to the form of the disease, because it is very diverse in form, and the wise master prepares an instrument with all his power so that he makes the figure return to its natural form.
And the patient himself, according to what he needs in terms of procedure and instruments, in many different ways.
When this soudure happens to men in such a way that the papery eyelid is separated from the white of the eye and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must therefore insert the tip of a razor beneath the papery eyelid and gently lift it upward;
and stretch them until you reach the subtle sphincter, which is neither too tight nor too loose, so that the patient can bear it and the eye is not damaged by the sphincter being too tight.
and make your incision on this membrane gently, so that it returns to its natural shape;
and cleanses the entire membrane, and sometimes they make an incision in the eye for pus to drain, and they flush it with clean water and apply a poultice;
then they place a piece of linen between the membrane and the eye, and put a pad soaked in egg yolk over the eye. and after three days, they use an ointment and poultices until it is healed.
You should know that there are two types of fingernails: one is nervous and similar to hard skin, and the other is not nervous but resembles congealed white moisture; when touched with iron and pinched, it feels nothing.
and both start towards the large tear duct, and grow little by little until they cover the entire eye and all light and movement.
And the method of incision is that the patient should look down at you, then he should open his eyes wide: take the paper in your hand, then use your fingernails like small pincers, and stretch them upwards; then take a needle, and thread it with horsehair, or cow hair, or bull hair, and strong thread; then pierce the needle all the way through, and tie the hair to the eye with a thread, and stretch it upwards, and scrape along the hairline of the eyelid towards the tear duct with subtlety and gentle force, leaving the natural flesh of the tear duct untouched so that the incision does not cause the flow of tears;
and sometimes the nails come off at the cuticle only, and on the nailbed, as we have said; then one scrapes all around the wound, so that this is the shape:
And be careful that the spatula does not touch the fleshy membrane and break it, and that the nailbed is not pierced;
and after making the incision, put a little powdered silver into the eye, and make an eye-patch from lime, and leave it until the next day; then treat it as necessary until it is healed.
And if the nail is not sensitive, and you cannot pierce it with a needle, and the cuticle will not go in, this kind of nail is often cured by medicines;
and they grow as I have described in the section on division, and if you see it covered, then treat the eye of the patient, and take the spatula with a small pointed end according to this shape: And raise the nail gently, and if you see that it does not narrow and the pus is pressing out, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collar made of litharge and red copper ore ground together, and stop up the eye until the next day.
If there is nothing contrary in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then milk it, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then start the work again as before, until it is healed.Si li ungle est ost, adonques tu le remets, et si li est alongie, adonques tu le rompts; car il ne poait demorer a son leu.
then start the other work according to this same method, until it is all removed.
And if the appearance of the flesh in the eyelid hurts in the eye greatly, then suspend it on a hook, and cut off a portion of it and not all of it so that the body of tears does not come;
then distill into the eye red collar made of litharge.
In some people's eyes, red bumps sometimes grow, covering the eyeball and sticking to the eyelids, and they look like a rose of marble;
and the treatment is for the patient to put his head in the right position, then he works the eyes, and then all that body part into appropriate hooks, and hold it there with strength;
then cut the first hair, and go all the way to the root, being careful not to hurt the eye during treatment;
and it is done with the knife of the spurge plant that we described in the incision of the nail and with small tools from which one removes the pus, as the form after this chapter demonstrates;
and when the incision is complete and all the pus removed, then apply the eye of a seal mixed with red colloid and similar corrosive medicines, and place over the eye a cotton pad soaked in egg white so that it is secured from hot abscesses;
and if nothing remains and the blood circulates freely, and you doubt a hot abscess, then leave the eye and treat the abscess with things that soothe hot abscesses;
then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do as often as the eye is adjusted in this way.
However, you should also lighten the treatment of each weak eye in the natural way: and in accidental work, with iron;
and do not push your hand into any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from that work.
Thus are red veins which are covered on the eye, and tolerates one's vision and weakens the eye all day.
So it is necessary that you first examine the eye, to see if it is swollen, and if there is no other disease except the swelling; then treat it in this way:
instruct the patient to put his head in yours, then open those veins all around gently, and let the veins be subtle and doubled according to this form:
And let two compresses be in degrees in .i. body according to this form:
then open those veins forcefully, and draw the blood hour after hour, until you see the veins removed from the eye;
and be careful not to harm the eye with the tips of the spatules, and do this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very careful in your work so that you do not poke through those veins.
And when you have done this, distill into the eye a green and red colloid to corrupt what is left of the ulcer.
And if you cannot collect all of it in that hour, then make a poultice for the eye from soothing things to alleviate the pain of the eyes, and leave it for several days until the pain is relieved and the hot abscess has settled, then begin again according to the method described above until it is healed.
And this is how you make the solution:
The plant called "arissati" milfoil:
When you have treated it with cautery and medicine as I have described above, and it is not healed, then cut into the abscess where it should be, and draw out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.Et si li os est touchez et les forces de la fistule se despartent ou s’estengient, si est la fistule sane;
And when the bone is uncovered, you will see the corruption and blackness; then examine all the instruments by which this form occurs.
It is called "sharp head", and it should be made of iron and sharpened like a file as it appears in this illustration.
And place it over the location of the corrupted bone, then twist it between your fingers and press your hand slightly until you feel that the corruption has been removed.
And do this several times, then dress the wound with drying medications.
If the wound is closed and healing occurs, and the skin of the bowels has healed over a period of 40 days without any bad incidents or relapses, then you may know that it is healed.
If not, if there is anything else but to bring the fistula back to the opening of the navel according to this illustration: and you uncover the bone a second time with iron and sharp medicines; and when it is uncovered, it takes on the shape of the iron according to this form, and let the head of the iron be three-pointed and the shaft be tapered to the tip as you see here:
then he puts it on the bone below the eye, and moves his hand away from the eye slightly, then returns to pushing the iron in until it penetrates the bone and the patient feels it through the pressure of the wind if he holds his hand over his nose;
then restore the area with dry remedies as I have taught you, and when the flesh has grown back and hardened, examine the matter under the nail; if it is a lighter object to the patient.
When the eyes are fully open and there is no disturbance or weakening in the nose, then you must ligature the patient;
then let him sweat, then apply cupping glasses or a hot compress without burning to draw out the poison, then put on an ointment made of acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcocolla over the eye, then bind it with bandages and cloth;
and the method of the bandages is that you fold soft cloth several times, then place one on top of the other depending on how much the eye needs;
then tie it tightly with a sturdy bandage and restart the cupping glasses to draw out the poison without burning;
then remove the cupping glasses and leave the eye bound tightly day and night, and if the bandage becomes loose, then you must tie it tightly again;
then remove the bandage after a day and a night, and if you see the eye healing, that is good;
if not; then restart the plaster, bandages, leeches, and cupping until he is healed.
from a torn woven fabric When disruption comes in the woven fabric, then it opens, and comes out of the paper like a grain of resin, and is terrible to see;
then, if you see it covering, the work is such that you insert a needle into the root of the affected part, just above the elbow joint, then insert another needle where there is a double thread in the arm; and have it pierced, and leave the first needle according to its position;
then cover the double thread and tie a part of the skin around it tightly, then withdraw the needle and put on another wet egg yolk;
and let it be until the thread cuts through the skin, then treat the wound with comforting things until it is healed;
and sometimes the wound is constrained by a cloth wrapped around it on all sides, until it is healed.
And if the eyes cause great pain, then pierce them with a sharp spathum that comes from within the eye, and dry up the watery albumen and lower the eyes, and enter them immediately.
then extract it until it is healed.
This disease called "alcunnati" has no cure except for cow's milk that is collected in the eye, resembling water but not being water;
and the method of treating it is to have the patient sit on a prepared seat and straight, then hold their head with both hands and move it until you see the milk come out from above your eyes; then let him remain thus, and let the light be dimmed and let him see things as he used to;
and if they do not go down, know that it is acute, and if the bowels do not move as we have said.
If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the spatulum and press it gently on the conjunctiva under the cornea and the cornea itself, until the bowels move.
And when it is issued, then distill into the eye a warm mixture of honey and water or fenugreek that has been boiled in water, then let it be treated with another remedy until it is healed.
of the eye waters We have already discussed the signs of acute conditions and how to diagnose them: Now we will discuss treatment according to health status.
You should make the patient sit between your hands with his eyes closed and away from sunlight, then open the healthy eye wide and press it firmly.
then put the paper to your left eye if the eyes are left-handed, or to your right eye if they are right-handed;
then take in your right hand, if the eyes are left-handed, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are right-handed;
then put the tip of the instrument near the edge of the cornea by the thickness of a hair in that white part of the eye where the lesser tear duct is located, then gently push the instrument called "almagda" through, and turn your hand so that almagda enters the empty space; feel for it to reach the hollow:
and the depth of the path of almagda should be at the bottom of the space between the pupil and the edge of the iris: and it is the crown of the eye;
you will see the bone through that film due to the clarity of the corneous tissue, then place the instrument where the water is, and then express it below one way after another.
If the pain descends now, then the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.
After rest for a little, and if the water rises back up the second way, force it out with the instrument, and when it is pushed in and does not rise, gently pull out the almagda by turning your hand a little bit at a time;
then put in some water with a little sealing wax, and leave the eye inside. Then, push the eye out with force, using a wet sponge or lamb's wool in rose oil and an abundance of egg white, and bind it with clean cloth.
We, and those of our time, put on a mixture of comfrey with an abundance of egg white.
And if the almgada cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some people who have very hard eyes, then you must use the instrument called 'albarit', which has this form:
And so pierce only the conjunctiva, and do not go too deep, but make the hole small, then insert the almagda, as we have said;et il li covient boire l’oil, et metre dedens un poc de seil gemme por le conseruer, et li covient leure un poc de sang de son corps par la matinie sus la piere et les membres
and at the completion of the work, prepare the patient for sleep by having him lie on his back in a dark place.
and he should avoid all movement and eat light foods. He should not move his head to the right or left, and should be bound according to his condition for three days.
Then he should be untied in the same dark place, and his vision tested. He should then be shown some objects, and then have the bandage put back on for seven days.
You must not do this during the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but you should lighten it so that the water rises quickly.
If a warm abscess comes, untie the eye before the seventh day, and apply something that soothes abscesses.
and when it is soothed, then loosen the bandage and place a blindfold over its face to cover any light, and let it be in that dark house.
And then exit the house little by little, and return to your senses;
and know that no disciple should intervene in this case. And one came to us who was from Spain, who told us that in his land they made a medicine called almagda, which drew out pus, but nevertheless I have never seen anyone in our land make it, nor have I ever read about it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.Et si on le fait, il faut que li homes soit en bon teint et sans
And these are the likenesses of the forms of almagda, so that those who do not know them may see them;
and they should be made of clean iron:Et il faut que li homes qui le fait soit en And let the heads be of the same subtle metal, and the rear in 3 angles sharp.
At times, various deformed children are born, among whom there are some who resemble scorpions at the base of their feet.
And if there are any with a fissure in their skin of a red color, and if any have a soft swelling of a white color. For those with a soft swelling and not a fissure, you should have the patient sit between your hands facing the sun;
For those with a soft swelling and not a fissure, you should have the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and open his nose, and pour the oil onto those swellings, and draw them out; then grasp what you can with a fine spatula on one side, as long as you know that the swelling is completely removed.
And if anything remains which cannot be removed, open it with the smallest and thinnest instrument so that nothing remains; and if without difficulty, or an abscess forms, cut it as it should be;
and if it is malignant abscesses, then hasten and cauterize them until the pus is drained and all the putrefaction is removed, then pour cold water or vinegar or wine. If it works on the nose, and moisture comes up to the palate, you know he's cured;
and if moisture does not break through as it should, you know that there is putrefaction in the bone above, and the instruments will not work to cut it out:
therefore you should bind a thread of coarse linen around it, and tie it with the fingers of one hand, and between each knot make an interval of a finger or less; and let the patient hold one end of the thread in his hand and pull it through his nose into his mouth;
and many times children do this at school, and it is an easy thing for anyone who wants to do it;
then hold the head that comes through the nose in one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth in the other hand, and pull them apart one after the other while being careful not to tear the membrane connecting them.
Do this until you know that the umbilical cord has been corrupted by the corrupt blood, then cut the cord, wipe away the blood, and wet the cord with Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nose as before.
Do this for three days or more, until the ointment has corroded all that remains of the flesh;
and then put a piece of cotton in the nose for several days until it is healed, and if it needs dry medicines, use them;
and this is the instrument for purging the head, through which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
And it is of silver or bronze, resembling an open lamp, like a cane, and lead them as well.
and if you see fit to make a closed cane, and let the instrument be filled for purging the head;
and it has a handle on the top to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid.
of the heart through the nose
Many times a disease arises in the head of the new-born, called "telul", which grows and becomes large, until it is a sight to behold;
and for this reason you should cut it at the beginning and remove all of its flesh, then place upon it the cautery or burning medicine;
and if one delays in cutting it until it has grown large, then take heed whether it is hard, dark-coloured, and lacking sensation:
don't touch it with iron, for it is an encrusted abscess; for when one cuts it, great harm comes to the patient;
and if the abscess is from a soft touch, not from a pus-filled color, and you see that it can be completely covered, then empty the wound and cover it without fear, and treat the area with dry and constricting substances.
Know that when a solution of continuance comes in one of these soft cartilage-like things, it benefits little, unless in some men.
Therefore, when this happens to someone, check if the wound is fresh with all its blood; then bring the two lips together with a stitch, then treat it until it is healed;
and if the lips are separated on both sides, then you should scrape all the parts of their skin until they heal, then bring the two lips together with a stitch, hold them in place, and apply powdered dragon's blood and ground incense; and place a piece of strong plaster or other binding plaster over the powders, and leave it until it falls off on its own, then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
The method of sewing is to assemble the thread: or with needles as we have said in the sewing of the belly; or with thread, as I have already told you.
of abscesses on the lips
In the lips of men there are hard abscesses inside, resembling beans in size, both small and large;
therefore you should turn the lips inside out, and split each pustule, and squeeze it with tweezers, and cut into each part;
then apply powdered vitriol to the wound after cutting, until the blood is staunched;
and then leave it with garlic, and clean the area of dry matter until it heals.
Many times a hard lump grows on the gums, which the old call 'albulus';
you should hold it with tweezers and cut it at its root, and let the pus or blood flow out;
then put on the spot vitriol powder, or other restraining and drying powders;
and if this ulcer returns after the incision, and it happens many times, then the second time, cauterize it: if it does not return after cautery;
Sometimes they are assembled on the head of teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs which are ugly and rough;et si li dents s’en fuient, si doit aler a leu; and if the teeth escape, then it should be treated; and sometimes the teeth are black and yellow, and green, as far as the corruption comes to the gums, and the teeth stink;et li gencives seche et brulee et trante, si doit aler a leu de cautere et
and the gums dry and burned and torn, then it should be cauterized; and you must make the patient hold his head in your hands, and his teeth or sores appear, so that nothing remains;et tu sais que la coper par le chief ou li gencives est aspre et dure, si covient que tu le raines a l’incision ou au cautere. and thus do for darkness and greenness and yellowness and other discolorations, as long as they remain.
and if one removes what is at the first layer, that is good; if not, then recommence on the second day and the third, until you have removed everything;
and know that teeth require various instruments for removal, according to what the work demonstrates to you, because the rasors used to remove teeth have other forms than those used to remove between teeth; and these forms and others should be prepared for you.
It is necessary when you cure a tooth of its pain that you delay drawing it as long as you can, because it should not be done quickly; because it is a very sensitive substance until one has no excuse to draw it out.Et si li dent est trop dur et ne peut estre traie, qu’il le fust si boin com il esteuit;
Therefore, when the patient is compelled to withdraw, you must be certain about the toothache. Many times the pain deceives the patient, and he thinks it is in the tooth, and has the good tooth pulled out. Yet the pain does not go away because of this, until the bad tooth is extracted, for we have already tried it with these teeth:
And when you are quite certain of the aching tooth, then you must scrape around the tooth all around, spatulating strongly to push back the gum from all sides;
Then you must grab it with your fingers or with fine tweezers in the front and back, so that it is well loosened, then grip the tweezers tightly; And let the patient sit in your lap, holding him steady so he does not move.
Afterwards, pull out the tooth firmly without breaking it, and if it does not come out, take one of those instruments and insert it into each side gently, and move it as you did before.
If the tooth is broken and eaten away, then you must fill the holes with cotton, where the holes are; and if they are gently squeezed with tweezers so that they do not break when being squeezed.
and it is necessary to work gently around the gum to loosen the tooth.
And be careful that you do not break it and leave a part behind, which will cause greater pain due to the root's toxicity.
And beware that you do not act like unskilled surgeons who, through their hastiness and boldness, sometimes break the jaw, and do not listen to what we have instructed.
but sometimes cause great harm through the roots by their probing, or break the jaw, as we have often seen.
And when the tooth is pulled, wash the socket with wine or garlic and salt;
and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, apply powdered vitriol to the socket;
and if that does not work, cauterize it.
The probes used to loosen the teeth should have long points and thick shafts so that they do not bend when you pull on the tooth;
and these are the forms: And they should be of thick members so that they do not bend when pulling, and they should be well-made of iron, and they should be toothed to hold the roots.
of the root of teeth When the root remains in place, you should apply moist cotton on the area for one or two days until it softens, and then use tweezers called "algefri", which make the shoulder look like a bird's beak.
They should be made smooth inside, just as a file is made, and this is the form:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tweezers, you must uncover the skin all around the root, and place the instrument called "althali", which is made of ivory, thus its form:
It should be thick and strong so that it does not break, and if the root slips out through it, that is good.
If not, use all the instruments, of which the forms come later:et li auter chiés soit en sa place tant com il convient, et li membrez soit adoblez par li tenailles, et li armeciers doit prendre leu de la piere s
And one should also use this instrument with .ij. tweezers, of which the form is as follows: and other tools which are before in the reason of teeth, and with this instrument that resembles a large pair of tweezers, of which the form is as follows:
And the other shoulder should be in its proper place, and the bones should be pulled together with the tweezers, and the surgeon should take hold of the stone, and the instruments should be strong enough not to break. know that there are many instruments for teeth:et li auter chiés soit en sa place and also other instruments which are not counted;
and the experienced master surgeon finds by himself his instrument according to what his work and the illness show him, for there are many kinds of illnesses where the ancients did not teach any instrument because of their diversity; and if he does not break or displace a bone in the head or elsewhere, but only probes them, then he searches for the instruments that he needs, which I have told you about, and uses gestures to help himself, by which this is done:
And they should be thick and strong enough to hold the bone so that it does not slip but can be held and removed;
then restore the place with suitable medicine, and if there is a protuberance in the bone that is small, then treat it with this instrument:
When a tooth appears not according to the natural order of teeth and its shape is ugly, especially in young girls, then you should know whether the tooth is new after the baby tooth, and it is not in its proper place, and you cannot push it back or file it down;
then cut the hair; and if it is airy with the tooth, then take this instrument of which there is the shape, and is similar to a small beak, and be made of tempered iron:
And pull it gently day by day because of the hardness of the tooth and so that you do not move the others; and if it is apparent that it can be filed, then file it with a type of file like this:
and is also like the liming tool used for making needles;
and gently files the tooth a little bit at a time, so that it does not move until it breaks;
then smooth it at the end to a point, and if the tooth is too sharp and cuts the tongue, then file down the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not cut the tongue or impede speech.
When the front teeth are loose from a blow or from falling, and the patient cannot chew without shitting, and you have tried binding remedies but to no avail;
if they need to be restrained with a gold thread, for silver threads turn green and rot, but gold never moves.
and the thread should not be too thin or too thick, according to the quantity of space between the teeth;
and if you want to move the teeth, take the thread and wrap it twice between two healthy teeth, then put the tooth between the teeth, whether there is one or more of them, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then restart the coverage until the part where you started, and strain your hand gently and firmly, so that it does not move;
and make sure it is tied at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Then cut the teeth of the thread with pliers, and join them together, and tie them between the healthy tooth, and place it so that it does not hurt the tongue;
and then let it remain thus tight as long as it can stay, and if it comes undone, or the threads break, then tighten it with another thread;
if it remains and serves thus throughout its life, and that is the shape of teeth and the arrangement of both healthy teeth and diseased teeth, as you can see:
And when a tooth falls out, one replaces it in its place, fresh one after another, as we have said;
and only a wise and experienced person should attempt this, and sometimes one makes a tooth from cow bone, and puts it in the place where there is a deficiency, and tightens it as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Sometimes this ligament which comes under the tongue, where nature is, causes one to be born thus; or by accident of a wound;
and the treatment is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and hold his head in your hand, and lift his tongue;
then grab the nerve of the jaw, as wide as the tongue is dislodged from its place, and if there is hardness or swelling, and it is a sudden wound, then hook and grab that nerve firmly;
and be careful that the cut is not too deep, for the artery that is underneath;
and when you have finished, raise the area with rose water and garlic, or with cold water, then place under the tongue a tent of linen;
and apply the cautery to the patient every night so that the wound cannot heal.
And if bleeding occurs, put ground vitriol on the area; and if the blood vessels bleed, then cauterize them with a slow-burning cautery, which is good for this. then clean it with another cleaning until it is clean,
and if you see a black or dark-colored sore, or a hard one that the patient does not feel, then do not touch it, for it is gangrene;
and if it is inclined towards white, and there is moisture in it, then open it with a sharp instrument, and release it from both sides; and if the blood vessels bleed with your treatment, then put powdered vitriol on it until it is stanched, then return to your treatment until you draw out all the poison;
then lift up the armpit and underarm, and clean it with other cleanings until it is clean.
of abscesses in the throat At times, lumps develop in the throat that are called "godath," and they are properly called almonds. And when you treat them as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, be careful:
if they are hard abscesses of little size and a dusky colour, do not touch them with iron.si son grandes et douces si les incises par petite entors qui te semble qu’ele soit en la maniere d’une fure; et
And if they are large and soft, cut them with a small incision in the manner of a furrow; andif the root is large and red, do not touch it with iron, also for the discharge of blood;si son rouges et li racine est petite si le metes sus un linge qui soit f if they are red and the root is small, place it on a cloth that is folded in four, and leave it until it bursts, then you will separate it or it will burst by itself;et s’il est meurs et l’enflure dure, si le met
And if it is swollen and the swelling lasts, place it on a clean cloth, and if the abscess is white and the root fine, have the instrument for cauterizing ready, but first check that the abscess is calm and pacified.
Then have the patient sit facing the sun, with his head in your lap, and open his mouth and press his tongue down towards all the instruments, from which this form is taken.
and it should be made of silver or fine brass like a little knife:
When you press the tongue against all this instrument, and see the abscess, take the needle and thread it through the almond, and draw it out above as much as you can;
and draw up some of the threads with it, then release the instrument, from which this form is taken, which looks like a forceps; and its jaws are curved and one jaw is higher than the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or steel;
And if you do not have this instrument available, use a pair of tongs with the same shape: And it has serrations on one side, and smooth on the other;
and when you have finished with one of the testicles, then finish with the other in the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the patient with warm water, and water and garlic, and if there is bleeding, gargle the patient with water, or cooked pomegranate peels, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding stops. then dry it until it is healed;
sometimes abscesses form in the throat other than the two testicles, so treat them just as the two testicles are treated.
I treated a woman for an abscess that was inside her throat, namely, one of small size;
and her throat was almost entirely closed off, so that the woman could not breathe through the passageway which was blocked, and she could not eat or drink, and would have died in one or two days.
And the abscess had grown so much that it had forced out two holes in the nose.
I hastened therefore at once, and fixed one hook in his anus, then drew him out violently, and drew out a large portion of bowels.
Then I inserted another hook into the other nostril, and I opened his mouth and pressed his tongue.
Afterwards, I inserted the hook into the abscesses, and scraped out a portion of it, and only a little blood came out violently. And thus the passage of the throat of the woman was cleared, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I did not cease to cut the abscess for a long time;
And the abscess grew again, filling up the place that I had emptied, until it became very large.
Therefore I lanced and cauterized it within the throat: Thus it stopped growing;
And I depart from these parts, and am but what God made of me after my departure.
from the grape
When there is swelling in the eye, and it is swollen and long, it is called 'perpendicular'.
And if it is below, large and round, then it is an 'eye'.
When it has been cleaned as we have said in the division, and the cleaning does not help, and you see that the eye is soothed and it is delicate, then you should cover it.
And if it is round and assembled and not long, and it is bloody or of a pale colour or black, then you should avoid incision of it.Quant li sang se pieze par sanz et par veine, il se pieze si fort qu’il ne puet demorer en son leu; For there is great danger to the patient.
When blood seeps through skin and vein, it seeps so strongly that it cannot stay in its place. Therefore, when you see this happening according to the manner I have described, in terms of its whiteness and length, you should have the patient sit facing the sun, and press his tongue against the instrument which we have mentioned earlier; then insert the needle into the vein, and pull it through, and cut off one of the two strands that I mentioned in the incision of the two testicles.
And you should not cut any more than the surplus which is beyond the natural boundary;
because if you cut more, it harms the voice and speech;
and after the incision, proceed as we have said in the incision of the two testicles, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the patient has fear due to covering, then you should use the cautery of the sense of fear.
The manner of the cautery is for acute fever. And the patient should put his head down into the healthy person's armpit, and then press his tongue against the instrument that we mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and spit it out with living hot saliva, neither too thick nor too clear; and use this instrument, of which there is a description below:
And it has a hair or thread on which to place the medicine, like the hairs of a spoon, and you place the instrument with all the medicine on the eye;
and the patient lies on his side so that saliva and mucus flow from his mouth due to the medicine, so that it does not go down into his throat and lungs;
then hold your hand over the medicine and press it onto the eye for about half an hour, until you see it swelling and the stinging of the medicine subsides;
and if you see that [the medicine] is drying out, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument completely into the cotton onto the eye;
and do this often until the cautery is complete, then let it dry and fall off after 4 or 5 days.
And if you need to renew the fire cautery, then renew it, and after the cautery wipe around the eye with cotton dipped in butter, and cleanse what is around the medicine.
And let there be washing with cold water, and let there be gargling until it heals.
This treatment is safer than incision or cauterization.
If it is treated with fumigation in this manner, take calendula and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and wormwood and similar herbs, and mix them all or some of them in a pot, and add garlic, and let it boil.
And let the pot be well glazed with strong clay, and place the pot over the heat source in this way: And let it be of silver or bronze, and let one of the patient's eyes be closed with a cloth over their mouth so that the vapors rise to the eye through the nostril until the eye is numbed.
afterwards he often repeats it, until the vein dries up, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the occurrence of a hot abscess, because many things happen; and do not do this until the end of the hot abscess.
And if this instrument is not available, take a needle and put an egg yolk inside the tip, so that the mouth on the patient is not too hot; because the egg yolk does not let the steam harm the mouth, and it is a healthy remedy together.
Many times there is a bone or spine of a fish or something else stuck in the throat;
so you should pull out what you can see, and press the tongue against the instrument in the sun until you see the object move;
and what does not come out and is stuck in the throat, you should make the patient vomit so that the meat is cooked in the stomach; by chance if the thing turns out to be bad through vomiting;
or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of turnip, or a lettuce root, or a piece of dry bread; and tie the thread to the sponge and then swallow it; and when it reaches the spot, it will stick there, and then you can pull it out;
and if it doesn't come out as we have said, then take the instrument of salt according to this form:
And let the instrument be curved at the tip so that it can enter the throat more easily, and have the tip raised up high; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, or he will choke, nor push anything into the bones inside;
and it is better that the patient spits out the instrument when he vomits, so that the thing comes out; if the bowels move downward, or he draws them outward with all his strength, until they are drawn out.
of the blood of the throat
Sometimes the blood is let, as I have said in the previous chapter, by the use of medicines. And if that does not help, then look into the throat of the patient in the sunlight, and press his tongue with the instrument I told you about.
And if you see the blood, draw it out with a small hook, or with fine tweezers that are fit for this purpose.
And if this does not work, take a curved cane, and put it into the throat of the sick person, then put on the curve of the cane hot iron, and do this often. And if the patient has a fever all day long.
Then take some cold water in a glass, open the mouth, and pour it in without swallowing it, moving it around with his hand frequently; and as soon as the blood feels the water, let it flow out.
And if it does not flow out as we have said, then smoke the patient with assafetida, using the instrument I described in the section on smoking the throat;
do this many times, for it will come out without hurting him.
And the way of fuming is that you put charcoal in a pot, and the bottom is covered with a perforated lid, and through that hole the pipe is inserted.
Then you pour in the smoke, and the patient puts the mouth of the tube in his mouth, closing it so that no smoke escapes, but goes right into the blood.
And now the blood will flow down, and if it does not, resume the fuming repeatedly.
And let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty things, and do not drink water;
and then it will be necessary that she go out by this treatment.
And the form of the instrument used to draw blood is, when one can see it, like curved tweezers that are bent in order to enter the throat; and has the appearance of a sow's mouth, and it has the roughness of limy earth, so that whomever it bites, it cannot let go;
Mouths that resemble abscesses are, according to what the memory comes later from one and another in this book, and they differ in penetration and size;
and there are two ways this happens, either through its own appearance or because of moisture.
And the second way is for the places where they are in the body.
For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundations, and the abscesses of fleshy places are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
And if an abscess should not be punctured until the pus is mature according to its completion;
and some should be punctured when they are crusty and won't die according to their completion, like abscesses near joints.
Because when abscesses come from these joints, and one lets them be as long as they are swollen around the edge, perhaps the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, by which that is caused to contract in that member.
When the abscess is near the main limb, and you delay the puncturing until it is mature, it will harm the main limb;
or if it's near the fundament, it should be punctured as soon as it's mature;
and you should not puncture a crusty abscess without digestion being complete, except for one near the fundament, or it may burst inside and cause a fistula; and cannot heal for a long time.
And you should know the time of piercing the abscess which is dead, according to its development, and that is when the pain has subsided, and the departure of the fever, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and the softening and hardening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs;
and you should make the piercing where the abscess is most dependent, and where it appears soft;
and the piercing should be made where it is longest in the body; and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints, and near nerves and arteries, and in all places where there are no folds. In those who are bent, according to the affected member.Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.
And when an abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to leave the puncture until it is confirmed by completed digestion, as we have said.
For if you pierce it first, the body will be filled with venom from it, and it is full of filth; and by chance harden the lips and his depths.
And for any abscess that is punctured according to the width of the body, according to what the member needs.
And you must treat with small abscesses, small holes; and in large abscesses, large holes, and many slits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess;
and if it has such abscesses where one must cut into the brain, and cover; when it has become as thin as a cloth, and is dead, then one must do as one does with blisters:
and if there are such that split into three angles, and if there are any that one covers as the pouch of a myrtle berry, just like abscesses of the fingernails;
and if there are any where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar covers.
Those that have no head, like a superficial blister, you must pierce fully;
and when the abscess is large, and he has a great swelling, and you pierce it, do not draw out all of the pus in that hour but only a part. then pack the abscess until the next day, then draw out something again. do this many times from great to greater, until all of the pus has come out.
especially if the patient is weak in strength, or a woman carrying child, or a small child, or an old and feeble man. For the pus may sometimes spurt out with the opening of the boil, and the patient might die from it, and you would not realize it.
Therefore, be very cautious when performing this chapter, and when you have pierced the abscess, wash the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a clean cut, then apply bandages of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess with many openings, then you must put in each opening a tent so that they come one against the other;
and if you have cut into the abscess a part of the skin, and you have seared it all around, then you must fill it with old cotton or linen rags without moisture, and let it lie until the third day;
then plaster it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if blood flow occurs due to your work, administer cold water and vinegar, and moisten the cloth, and place it over the flowing area many times.
And if the flow of blood persists, and they administer management and treatment, and the powders that I have described in this book in earlier chapters, and if it is during the winter, and the location of the abscesses is very sensitive, then you should apply hot wine-and-oil-soaked tents and cloths;
and if it is in the summer, and the location is fleshy, then you should apply moist cloths soaked in water and oil, or cool wine and oil, for up to a third of a day, as we have said;
and then loosen the abscess, wash it, and treat it as needed until it heals.
And it is necessary to understand generally in the treatment of abscesses:
I have told you how one should go about treating abscesses, and now see the chapter.
From the head come small abscesses, and they are caused by us being in fabrics, like the goiter on a goose's neck, and there are many variations of them.Et si li chief est hote, et li leus ou li aposteme est hote, si covient que tu mettes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue fraiche, jusc’au tier jor; puis deslie l’aposteme, essue li leus, et cure-le si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.
There are some that are fatty and others that contain pus and moisture;
and some are hard and stony in texture, and there is no doubt if the artery does not cause issues.
And the work of the abdomen is that you must examine all instruments called "endoscopies", from which the form comes later, what it contains.
For if it contains moisture, they will cut it from above.
And when the moisture has been drained, one should scrape it without leaving anything behind that contains the moisture, because it will return if you leave anything behind.
Then plunge cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in water and salt, and apply it to the wound and leave it until the next day; and those who are detained at night.
And then resume the cotton, as before, on the second and third days, until you are sure that it does not stay overnight;
then heal the wound with an appropriate ointment, until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains pus, then open it according to this method, from the length; and cut your fingernails, and scrape off all the scabs, and put all your ointment to draw out pus from under the skin where it lies;
and if the artery pulsates inwards, then do what I told you after this.
And also treat an abscess if it is stone-like, and cut and treat it as I have told you.Si li artere clent, si la traie fuer l’aposteme sus la cotte, tant que li sang ne s’en poie; et si le sang est gras, si met sel et vinyer, et remue li cot ains qu’il s’escanse, et distrai li sang; et se li sang ne s’escante pas, si traie li cot ou il gist sus l’aposteme, tant qu’il s’escanse par le siel de li cotte.
And the incision on the pus-filled, moist abscess is lighter, because there is less blood. And if any of these abscesses on the head do not contain pus, and they were the abscesses that I described on the head of an old woman;
and I found the abscess just like a hard stone, rough and white, and could not be broken; and if one had done it, they would have hurt themselves as much as with a stone.
For other abscesses coming from the head, especially those that come to the heads of children and to the roots of the ears, the opening should be in the highest and most dependent place so that the pus can flow out.
and treat them as they should be.
Many times abscesses occur in the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes they come elsewhere in the body, and they are large, and some are connected with each other.
And each scrofula is properly within its coat, like the nodos and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and there are many similarities among these scrofulas.
and there are many similarities among these scrofulas. There are some that contain moisture, and there are some that do not obey health.
In that one therefore which you see of good disposition to touch, and is similar in color to the body, and has no noise in any part and is not cold to the nerves of the neck or to the artery or the channel, and is not deep;
you should cut it from above, and scrape each part, and the two lips of the heart are hooked, if you have need, as we have said in abscesses of the head;
and draw it little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, nor the artery or the tendons, that the hand does not escape, and do not look too far ahead, lest you cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it will not let you work, put into the wound vitriol powder, or some powders that stem blood flow, and close the wound. and leave it until the abscesses are soothed and the wound softens and begins to heal.
And when the bleeding has stopped, return to your work until you complete it.
Then examine with your finger if there are any small scrofulous bumps left, and cut them out and clean the wound.Et si li sans revien, si prends une fiaunce eune espine de rose, ou un peigne, et la mete en la voinne, qu’
And if there is in the root of the scrofula a large vein, you should not cut that scrofula at its root, but ligature it with a strong double thread, and let it fall without harm.
Then dress the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then cure it.
And if you cut around the entire scrofula, then you should bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them up now, since there is no longer any surplus due to the size of the scrofula. you should proceed to cut around the root of it and pull it out, then sew it up as we have said.
you should proceed to cut around the root of it and pull it out, then sew it up as we have said. Those scrofulae which have an abundance of pus, pierce there where the pus flows out;
and pierce it thus as previously mentioned, so that the pus may flow out; then apply tenting with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is clean, then cure it with ointment mixed with chalk, until it is healed.
The ancients spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and it is written in their books.
For those with squint, the fold of the throat called the "epiglottis" should be cut. and one does not make an incision through it, because all the veins and the portal of the disease are in those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or in the throat or in the armpits.
When the disease is in the channel of the windpipe, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the danger that comes from strangulation.Si li maladie est en la gorge, il covient que tu fendures la gorge et li pormon dou costé, car il ne peut aler si non.
Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, we should cut it under the two circles or four, a small slit across, between the two circles, or according to the amount of the slit in the soft palate; not in the cartilage.
and those places where it is suitable to cut the epiglottis so that there is no cartilage, and the vessels are long from there.
And if the teacher is fearful, then he must stretch the skin of the throat to the very edge, then cut the skin until he reaches the cartilage; and avoid the blood vessels if you see anything, and then cover the wound, as we have said.
and it is demonstrated through the section of the throat where the jugular vein emerges from the broken place, and by the deficiency in voice.
and leave the wound open a little.
And when the hour has passed that we doubt of strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound in the neck and close it all firmly without the cartilage.
then administer remedies that promote the formation of flesh, until it is healed.
Albucasim says one should not do this until the throat is completely swollen, and the patient judged dead, and the lack of breath evident. Then cover the epiglottis so that the patient cannot choke and can breathe through the wound, and thus is protected from death.
And so the ancients commanded that the wound be left open until the evil of the disease had passed and it is passed in three or four days. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and to treat it, until it was healed.
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw a lady take a knife and stab herself in the throat, cutting some of the windpipe;
and I was called to heal her, and found her as good as dead.
I uncovered the wound and found that blood had issued from it, and I judged that she had not coughed up any blood or vomited anything other than through her throat, and the blood was coming out through the wound.
I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and healed her so that she recovered;
and the lady had no mark left but a scar on her throat, and returned afterward to her senses;
therefore I say that one should have no fear in cutting the epiglottis.
This kind of abscess is called a "gorge hernia", and it is a large abscess the color of yew wood, and occurs often in women;
and there are two kinds: natural and accidental;
the natural kind has no opening.
And the accidents occur in two ways, one of which is similar to a cyst, and the other way is like an abscess that comes from an artery. and there is fear, and one should not operate by force except in the case of a small one, and test and probe at all the orifices: if you find it as hard as a cyst, and it cannot be opened by any means, then cut it, as one cuts a cyst, and treat it throughout its entire coat, if there is no pus; and examine it thoroughly, and treat it as it should be, until it is completely healed.
There are many types of cysts, all of which I will describe their similarities:
and now I will explain the difference between a cyst and an abscess.A cyst is a hard lump that does not open easily, while an issue is soft and can be opened with a needle.The
I say that a discharge is heat and feverishness while the ebullition passes, and the swelling is completed. therefore, rest the fever and the heat.
With the nut there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains a pus-filled sac that is colored according to the body's color, and begins like a jaw, and becomes swollen;
and they are according to two appearances: some are dry and others moist, and many colors exist as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the pustule, that you examine and inquire into it first with all the instruments called "entromissoires", according to what its form will allow, as described in the chapter that follows.
And the manner of inquiry for abscesses on the head is that you press in the moistest place that you find in the abscess and move your fingers slowly little by little until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
Then pull out the instrument and take care in what goes out.Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes qui sont selonc la chair, ou le corps si soit en grand dolor, est qu’on
If the moisture runs short, no matter what color it is, treat it as I have said for other abscesses.
And if no moisture comes out after the incision, know that it is fatty, so do it in a cross pattern and pick it up with tweezers and lightly scrape each side, and guard the skin where it lies, so that you draw it healthy with the nail.
And if you cannot draw it healthy, then draw it in pieces so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, it will return to the body many times;
and if a little remains, and the pain troubles you, then employ some corrosive powders on the wound, and constrict the wound, and put warm poultices on it, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
and if it is large, then cut the two lips of the wound, and clean out that which is rotten flesh.
and if the pulsing vein is against you or any other, then hasten and apply ground glass, and leave it for two or three days, until the wound suppurates and the bleeding subsides. then return to covering that which has been left bare.
Behold the forms of the intruding instruments, and there are three types: large, medium, and small;and se li estrumen n’a pas la figure en
instrument is not shaped in , and there are three parts which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are three types: large, medium, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistulas;
are also like the needles used to sew sorcerers, and are made of copper, iron, or silver; those that are yellow in color are more effective, and are best tested with black pitch to surround the curves of a fistula.
There are three types: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the opening.
The shapes of the hooks are very similar, as you can see here:
and there are hooks with two curves in three ways also;
and there are hooks with three curves, and they are also of three types;
and there are hooks with two curves, and hooks with one curve only, and they are of three types;
and all these are necessary in their place.
The heads of these tools are sharp, and some only cut one side, which they use to shave the skin, so that they do not cut the vein or nerve.
and for these probes are handles wrapped in cloth so that the patient does not injure themselves when opening abscesses.
There are three types of them: large, small, and medium, as you can see;
and they are only used in fleshy places, like legs, arms, breasts, and armpits, and similar places.
and sometimes a small tool is made, resembling a pair of tweezers, according to this form, with which blood is stopped. and sometimes it is placed in the place that heals by opening veins and arteries, and sometimes they are bound according to this large form;
Sometimes the breasts of some men become swollen when they become corrupted, so that they resemble women's breasts.
and remain unsightly and swollen; and if anyone wishes to cure them, then one must cauterize according to the form of this line .b. up to .g.: then scorch the fat, and fill the wound with ointment, then close the two lips of the wound by sewing, and let it heal.
and if the breast sags downward, and becomes soft because of its size, as happens to women, then they should make two slits above, like two similar incisions; one of which is attached to the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to line .g.;et tant com il y ad de graisse, escorche la; si qu’ele soit sanee, et le mamele reposit en son leu; then scald the skin between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitches and powders, and what is necessary for the treatment, until it is healed.
And if it is not healed, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to blood flow, you should fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive ointment. Let it sit until it absorbs the remainder of the fat, then clean it until it is healed.
These abscesses which come under the armpits are types of hard scrofula where there are nodules, and some contain moisture.
Those who contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line .b. to line .g.: And when all the bowels which are in the abscess have been emptied, employ the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day; then remove all the cotton and treat it with appropriate ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess is of the appearance of scrofula, they should proceed as we have said in slits for scrofula; and if the wound becomes swollen, they should apply cauterization as we have said previously.Et se li apostemes est desoz le col ou desoz les asseles, si covient que il soit fendu a la radice selonc la ligne m. jusc’a la ligne .g., car en cest lieu il conviens que il soit fenduz selonc la ligne de la nature.
When an artery is cut and the skin above is sewn together, it often leads to abscesses, and likewise, the vein becomes swollen and abscessed.
And if one knows this is due to an artery, the abscesses are long and deep. and when you feel it with your fingers, you will feel the dislocation;
and when it is in the vein, there is a visible swelling;
and it is foolish to cover this abscess, especially when it is under the armpit and in the groin and neck and many other places, for it is large. Therefore, one should avoid cauterizing with iron, and if it is on the head, then that should also be avoided, and for the one who has inflammation of an artery under the skin, a slit should be made through the skin above it;
then cut through the flesh with a sharp knife, and carefully separate the artery from the veins, until it is exposed;et puis oevre la cure de fer par le chief ou il est desoz.
then cauterize the head where it is under. Then push a needle underneath and pierce through to the other side, and compress the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I taught you about extracting the two arteries in the temples;et qu’ele soit bien serree, et que les II perces soient bien coperies, si qu’ele ne se pueda desoufrer.
then point the area between the two ligatures of an introducer so that the pus flows out and the abscess is drained.
then administer the treatment that causes bleeding, until the ligature falls off. then treat with an ointment suitable for this, until it is healed.
and if the abscess is due to an incised wound, you should dye your hand with something that you can get from the abscess all over the skin, then pierce it with a needle held in your hand, and thread a double piece of thread through it, so that you can pull it from the other side; then tie the abscess, as I told you, with one of the two parts of the thread on each shoulder;
and if you fear that the thread might come undone, pierce another needle with the entire thread all through the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tighten the thread in four places.
then scrape the abscess until the pus comes out, then scrape the pus from the wound and leave what is attached.
then place a wet cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then administer poultices and ointments until it is healed.
Also, as abscesses come in the arteries and veins, they come to the nerves when they are wounded, or from too much work, and similar things.
And this happens more often at the shoulders and elbows and in all joints where there are pustules, and it has the colour of the body, and is in various states without pain.
And when one presses it hard, the patient feels pain, and it is not deep in the body but under the skin.
And it moves in no way, neither forward nor backward, down or up, and the one that is in joints should not be cauterized with iron. Perhaps there might be contraction. And those who are on the head or forehead, use the spatulum.
And those who are on the head or forehead, use the spatulum. If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers and squeeze it at its base.
For a larger one, pierce it with a needle and drain it, then cut it open, remove the pus, and sew up the wound to heal.
Sometimes it occurs in bellies and nowhere else; this disease is called "fungus" due to its resemblance to a mushroom, with thin roots and thick leaves.
There are both small and very large ones.
I saw a man with two in his belly that looked more like mushrooms than anything else; they had no difference, were white, had thin roots, and moist fluid ran from them.
I cut them open and found one weighing 18 ounces and the other 6 ounces; the procedure for incising is such that you observe if the disease is moist, and the armpit is white, moist, and has thin roots. If the lump is large, apply the spatula widely, and have the fire cautery ready in your presence.
If the lump is large, apply the spatula widely, and have the fire cautery ready in your presence. For often there are excessive bloodlettings when cutting, and if the blood flows too much, then quickly use the cautery.
And if you see the patient is terrified and fearful of the iron incision, take a well-prepared thread and tie it around the joint as we have said, and leave it for two days;
Then release it, and keep tying and untieing the thread around the joint without causing pain until the lump is cut through.
And if the roots are thick, then fearlessly cut through them for the belly, but you can cut through half of it and cauterize it so that it does not return.
Then treat the wound, and be careful not to cut into the yellow part of the skin which is of poor quality and milky in appearance.
For this is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of cancer next.
when the boil bursts If the appearance of a hernia comes from cauterization of a wound or fissure in a syphilitic ulcer, and it is on the abdomen and in some of the bowels, as happens in other diseases, or from blood flowing from veins or arteries according to what is mentioned above, or from flatulence;
And if it is from the disease of syphilis and an exit from the bowel, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a minor issue without pain, and it opens in various ways. And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then it is more varied; and when one presses it with their hands, it retreats, and then comes back out, and sometimes it is blocked, and increases significantly at the entrance of the bath and with intense effort.
And if it's due to moisture, it's a minor issue, and it opens well when you press it with your hand, and it doesn't constrict.Et se li color est plus fonc que la color dou cors, et n’est pas sens dolor, si est legiere chose, et s’il cort de vo
And if the color is darker than the body's color, and there's no pain, then it's a minor issue, and if it's due to blood, then the abscesses open in various ways: large and hard, and they are fixed according to their size.Et se li aposteme cort de voine and if it is due to wind, then it is soft in the touch, and the actions are such that you observe whether the appearance is due to blood from the artery or vein, or wind.
and if it is due to wind, then it is soft in the touch, and the actions are such that you observe whether the appearance is due to blood from the artery or vein, or wind. Then you must let it heal. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, because of the artery and vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestines or bowels, then you must instruct the patient to tighten his abdomen and hold it straight, then sign around the belly; then command him to lie down soon between your hands, then go around the area you have signed all around the belly; then let half of the abscess rise up above at the great knuckle; then tie it tightly with a strong thread or a strong silk cord firmly, and let the pus be completely discharged;
then cut through half of the swollen abscess above the tie, and push your index finger in, and feel for the intestines; If you remove it from the string, then untie it, and stuff the intestine back into the abdomen.
And if you find the bowel, take it at the anus, and cut off the excess;
And if the artery makes you dizzy or the vein, then go around it, then return to your work and take two needles, and thread them with strong thread, and pierce through what you have done in a cross that you are making.
Then pull the abscess in four places over the needles, and if you see that the needles are pulling out, remove the needles and let it drain until it can no longer, and cut off the dead flesh by itself. Or you can cut it when it is thin and draining, then clean the wound as needed, and close up the abscess as we have said.
Or you can cut it when it is thin and draining, then clean the wound as needed, and close up the abscess as we have said. and draw out the blood or moisture which you find, then cure the place as it should be, and close up the wound.
from sores We have described in the section on ulcers the various types of ulcer, how to treat them with medicine, and how to avoid using iron in the treatment.
And we say that when an ulcer is found in the body, great care must be taken in its treatment, and the ancients say that when ulcers are in places where they can be reached by scraping, as in breasts, armpits, and similar places, they should all be removed when first discovered.
None have ever been healed before me.
And the treatment when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, is to sometimes draw out the disease with black bile.
then make him vomit if he shows signs of fullness, then loosen the patient's clothes to prepare for the operation;
then wash your hands and face, and the patient's head and body, leaving nothing untouched;
and let the blood flow freely, and squeeze well the area in your hand or with something else, and if the bleeding from the incision of the artery or vein is not stopped by cauterization, then stop it by tying it off; then heal another wound until it is healed.
of dropsy We have already discussed in the division the various types of dropsy, and how the accumulation of fluid is caused, and the signs of each type, and how it is treated with medicine, and also by iron.
and one must not touch with iron in these two cases: that is to say, tympanitis and hypothermia, for they are deadly;
therefore when you treat this appearance of dropsy called by doctors 'ectrotus', and the treatment does not help, look to see if the patient is weak, or if they have another illness besides dropsy, such as a fever and stomach pain and similar things; do not touch them with iron, for there is doubt;
and if you see the patient very strong, and they have no other illness except dropsy, and they are not too young or too old, then you must do this; let the patient lie down on his back, and press his belly upwards to force out the water to the lowest part of the feet, then take the spatulum and pierce according to this form; And cut into two parts. at the tip, and yet not so sharp that it can pierce through to the intestines when pushed in, and not cause bleeding;
then examine whether the dropsy is pressing on the intestines: if you should split open under the armpit three fingers' width straight below the armpit; and if the dropsy is due to disease of the liver, then your split should be on the left side of the armpit three fingers' width;
and if it is due to the spleen, then on the right, and the patient must not lie on the split so that the excess fluids do not flow to that weak spot;
then pierce all the way through to the instrument, and stop, and lift your hand to the entire spongy area between the skin and the syringe as much as when skinning in an amount equal to a fingernail or so;
then pierce the ulcer until the pus comes to the surface, and this is the color of the pus, then draw it out, and insert this instrument of which this is the shape: And it resembles a slender silver rod, and is made of thin copper or light brass, and has at the end below a small hole: and on one side there are three holes: and two on the other side, and one on the other;
and the head is cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that scribes make in feathers:
at the top is the eye, so that when the instrument reaches the pus, it will drain right into the instrument;
drain off half or a third of it, for if you drain more than is proper in that hour, the patient may die from the loss of his life-fluids, or he will faint, or he will approach death;
but empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the disease indicate, and his pulses;
then treat the instrument and retain the water, which is now retained by the clot that blocks the orifice above the cyst, about which I have spoken, piercing it according to this method:
then recommence with the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering from it, and treat a small quantity of water;
do this every day, and beware of following it as long as there is any water left but only a little.
And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave it with a lot of water, then treat with hot sand or ash, and with much sweating or bathing and in the sun, and drink some wine; and treat with astringent medicines until he is healed, and cauterize the stomach and liver and spleen after the extraction of the pus, as I have said before.
Sometimes children are born without an opening on their penis, or the opening is small and not in its proper place.
If necessary, one must pierce it with a very fine instrument according to this form:
then put a plug of cotton in the urethra and tie it and leave it for 3 to 4 days, and when he wants to urinate, remove the plug and let him urinate, then replace the plug.
and perhaps this is unnecessary because the urine that comes out does not allow it to stay closed.
Those whose passages are narrow, if they are medicated with a plug of wool, as we have said, will widen.
Those who do not have an opening in their place are constipated, for some are born with the opening at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate unless they lift their penis upward. and cannot ejaculate because the material cannot reach the penis, and this is a serious condition.
And the way to do this is for the patient to lie on his back, then cut off the top of the penis and foreskin, as well as some of the shaft, so that the hole is in the middle, as it should be.
And beware of bleeding which often occurs, and if it does, then stanch the blood with something that stanches blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
of the penis Many times this albarth comes on the penis, and it is an ugly appearance of flesh;it has a round shape like a testicle, and sometimes it goes away by itself, and sometimes not.if it happens in a woman's breast
And there are both malignant and non-malignant ones;the one that is on the penis, if it is large and
you must grab them with tweezers very gently, and cut and clean them all, then place wet cotton in Egyptian ointment on top of them. then treat with the ointment diafinicon until it is healed.
And if the ulcer is malignant, discolored and foul-smelling, then you must apply cautery.
When you have copped it, and if the wound is on the shaft of the penis, with part inside and part outside, then you must first remove the albata that is inside. And when it is sutured, treat the part that is outside.
Because when you treat it all at once, the skin of the penis is not secured so that it does not pierce, and blackness and corruption come to it in its shaft and scrotum.
It is necessary to cut away all that is black and corrupted, then lay on the plaster made of honey and flour from pomegranate peels and nuts, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
And if there is bleeding, apply the lunar cautery as follows:
Cauteries have two uses together: l’un est pour eschauffer le membre et delivre li sang et la that is to say, with the flow of blood, and corruption;
and if the head of the penis is damaged and withdrawn, then you should insert a tube into the penis and the patient should urinate through it.
and when the foreskin is torn at the head of the penis, which happens to those who have not been circumcised, whether due to a wound or an abscess, then you must cut it with instruments until all the skin is removed and the head of the penis is relieved of all parts;
and if it is difficult to discuss this, then you should cut it with some sharp instrument at the tip of the penis and under the foreskin;
then separate them gently, and place a thin damp linen cloth in the water until it is cold, so that it does not tear again.
Circumcision is not a dislocation of continuity like other wounds. Nevertheless, when we do this work of our own free will, and properly to children, it is necessary that we do the best and lightest work for their salvation.
I say that the ancients did not speak of the circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have no more than what we have acquired by experience.
For I have seen most of the masters and surgeons who made circumcision all around, and on adults, and on everyone, a new knife.
It was the cure because there were two membranes, and by chance one above and the other below. Now they heal it, covering it, and there is twice as much pain, and in the purification which is due to the wound of the member is not assured its tip.And the member does not look like what it should be, and the wound has a foul smell.
And in the purification of the nail, perhaps the iron escapes and spoils the work, and many times they grow without needing purification, and I have seen this happen.
Of the cleaning that is done to the foreskin all over the thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut justly above as below.Or li fuit li doler qui tailla l’ungle, si doit il le tailler par fin et non pas par costé, car par fin il ne se peult mander; si doit il estre tailli par costé, et il faut qu’il soit tailli tant qu’il eschieve la chair.
For when you press your hand, you cut equally throughout its entire length. but the thread must be well-tied around the skin;
and the method of the first operation is such that you cause the child to think, if he understands, that you are only tying the thread around his penis, and then let him urinate in every way that he can;
then hold it upright between your hands, and tie the threads tightly between your hands or under your feet so that neither the child nor any of the instruments can see them;
then put your hand over the penis and breathe or blow on it, and pull it upwards until the head of the penis is drawn out; then cleanse it well of the dirt that has gathered there, then tie the wound with a double thread, and then tie it underneath again with another thread;
then cleanse it well of the dirt that has gathered there, then tie the wound with a double thread, and then tie it underneath again with another thread; and hold it with the second finger in the pouch and the index finger on top, then press between the two fingers, then lift the heart upward violently and pull the head of the penis; then let the blood flow a little at a time, for that is the cure; then put powder on top of the powder a layer of cooked egg white tempered with rose water, confited in good and fresh rosemary oil, and leave it on until the next day, then cure it with another cure until it is healed.
The form of the force for purification is as follows:
the two shoulders should be thin and sharp, and the shoulders as wide as the arm equally:
the error of purification is when the heart inside moves during the incision;
therefore you must stretch it with your nail so that the skin makes an abscess;
and the scalp likewise, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, hold it with tweezers, and then cut it.
And if they persist for three days, and what is under the foreskin is swollen, let it be until the abscess has drained and the skin has healed slightly;
and cut it as you can, and beware of the part of the foreskin, it will not harm him at all.
Therefore, cure the place of the sore with powder, as we have said in the treatise on powders, and if they cut the foreskin excessively, and it goes above, it will not harm;et se li apostemes se part a deux ou a III, et sont en la verge, si le laisse tant qu’il soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement, et cure le lieu.
and if the abscess splits into two or three, and they are on the foreskin, let it be until it is drained and the skin has healed slightly, and cure the place. Cure it therefore as we
from the retention of urine:
The retention of urine is due to a stone, or frozen blood, or a tumor, or a birth mark, or similar things that we have mentioned in the classification.
And if the urine is not released, and you see that it is retained by a stone which is in the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be bent over at the knees: And have his feet placed on his back, and extend his belly from above his back, and the patient should hold his breath as hard as he can; And thus the neck of the bladder is pressed from above to push out the stone, and so the urine flows;
And if it does not come out as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must perform an extraction using an instrument called a "syringe", which is made thus:
and have fine, light silver threads, like a bird's feathers; and the needle should be about a palm and a half long, with a thin point.
And the method for urinary problems is to take a doubled thread, tie some wool or cotton at its tip, and insert the tip of the thread into the syringe;
and twist the excess wool, then fill the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and have the patient sit on a seat, and anoint the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and warm water;
then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the body;
then fill the syringe until the bladder, and feel the patient come to the empty place, and it is not done according to this order because the person who guides where she goes is wrong.
then they stretch the thread all along the wool little by little, and the urine follows the wool, then pull it out, and let the urine flow.
and use the syringe again until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is relieved.
When scabs or blood comes into the bladder, or pus is accumulated there, and you see it distilling with water and medicine, then do all the instrument that is called "clepsydra", and that is its form:
It is closed, and has three openings: Two on one side, and one on the other, as you can see;
and the hair-like channels through which the medicinal cort should pass so that it blocks the penis without addition, and one can draw out moisture and push in when necessary;
and when you see your medicines enter the bladder, put the tip of the syringe into the moisture, and draw while pushing the plunger in.
if you will draw out the moisture from the chest, and then strongly bind it up again; if the moisture enters into him, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it;
and this is the form of the subtle enema with which one enemas the bladder:
And it is made of silver or copper, and the head is higher;
and below has the breast or the intestines;
then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture in it which you want to use for the enema, then tie it between the two breasts shaped like a ball, and heat the pouch over the fire;
then insert the head of the enema into the penis, then squeeze your hand on the bladder gently until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder;
and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make a circle out of it, and pierce it all around evenly; then thread a strong wire through these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a jug, and put inside whatever you wish of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument;
and do as you did with the bladder, pressing by hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of stone
We have already said in the division of the stones, and their extraction together with remedies;
and I have said the difference between a stone lodged in the urethra, and all the signs, and in what kind of stone one should operate with cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis;
and I will tell you plainly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder occurs more often in children, and it is a sign that the water jumps from the bladder like water in its subtlety;
and it opens the urethra, and hurts the patient's penis, and he pees many times, and then it blocks up; and in many of these cases the foundations (kidneys?) are affected;
and the cure is easy for children until they are four years old, but it is severe in the elderly, and it falls in between youth and old age;
and the cure is easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with an enema to draw out all the feces that is in the intestines. Because it sometimes clogs up when seeking the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, lift him up and shake him from side to side, so that the stone descends into the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it comes out from above;
then have him sit between your hands, his hands beneath his thighs so that his bladder is completely slanting downward;
then feel and touch it inside;
if you feel the stone in the space, then hurry to cut into the stone.
And if it does not come out with just the touch, then moisten your index finger of your left hand with oil, if the patient is an adult, or your middle finger if the patient is young; and insert it into his anus, and feel for the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, push it towards the neck of the bladder;
then press on your finger, and push the stone to where you want to cut.
And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and to extend the testicles upwards with his right hand, and with his left hand to pull back the skin beneath the testicles in the area where the incision is made;
then he cuts the wart, and the spatomyle [i.e., spatulum] cuts it, from which this is the shape: and they cut between what is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side of the navel;
and it is straight on the stone, and both are on the anus, and the incision is diagonal so that it is wide at the top and narrow at the bottom, according to the size of the stone, not too large;
by chance the pressure on the anus, the two testicles jump out without effort;
and know that there is such a stone with angles and edges; if it grinds to come out;
and if there is one underneath, similar to a grape, and round, from which the passage is easy.
To these therefore where there are angles and edges, make the incision larger;
and if it does not come out, then you must grip it with tongs which are like a file at the tip, to extract the stone so that it does not slip away; or you might push under the instrument a thin, curved hook;
and if you cannot catch it in that way, then widen the hole and if the blood is oozing, stanch it with vitriol;
and if there is more than one stone, then push the largest first into the neck of the bladder, then press upwards, and draw it out, and the smaller ones after, if there are several.
And if it is very large, then it must be sutured, and a larger wound made. For two things can happen to the patient: either he dies or the urine comes out again through the hole where the skin cannot heal;
but nevertheless try to draw it out with tweezers, until you have pulled it out piece by piece.
And when you have finished your work, then apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it tightly, and put on top a damp cloth wet in oil and wine, or in oil and rosewater and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess. Then reseat the dislocation on his neck, and don't loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you loosen it, wash the site well with oil and water, then treat the wound with thin ointment and thick ointment until it heals.
And if hot abscesses and scorched wounds come in the wound, and congealed blood in the bladder, and the urine is retained because of this, known to be in such a way that it comes out with the urine: then pour boiling water into the wound, and draw out this blood, for if it remains, then the bladder will be damaged and burst.
then raise the wound with vinegar, garlic and salt, and aid him in every way you know until he is healed.
And it is necessary that during all the hours you treat him, you bind his two thighs together and apply remedies to the affected area.
If the stone is small, and it is lodged in the ureter, and pierced through, and the urine cannot pass through; if after performing what I have described, you cut him many times, then you are excused from cutting any further by this treatment. I have already proven this.
Take a piece of iron according to this shape and let it be pointed at three angles and fixed in a brand:
Then take a thread and tie it around the penis under the stone so that it cannot move back into the bladder;
then push the rod gently into the penis until it reaches the stone; and twist the rod in your hand inside the stone a little at a time until you pierce the stone from another side;
then immediately the urine will come; press your hand against what is retained of the stone that is within the penis. If it is broken at once and flies out with the urine, then the patient is healed.
And if you cannot do this for any reason that divides it, then tie a string under the stone and another above it, then make an incision in the penis between the two strings, then pull it out, and untie the string, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound; and treat it until it is healed.
of women's stone
Sometimes stones can get lodged in women's urethras, and if this happens, the treatment is difficult due to three factors:First, it is difficult to find the stone because of the narrowness of the passage; second, it is hard to extract without breaking it; and third, it is challenging to cure the resulting wound.Or qu’il n’i aie pas de sang con
one possibility is that the woman is a virgin;
and the second is that one cannot find a well-known woman who reveals herself to suitors, especially when she is chaste.
And the third possibility is that one cannot find a well-known woman skilled in this art of handiwork;
And the fourth possibility is that the woman's stone is deeper than the man's, so one must make a deeper incision, and there is great danger in it. And if necessity demands it, you should take a skilled midwife, and with difficulty she will find out about it, and if you cannot find such a midwife, do not desire a chaste one;
and present her with a wise old woman who is experienced in the lives of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and instruct her to do what you instruct her about the examination of the stone; and look very carefully to see if the woman is a virgin;
and look very carefully to see if the woman is a virgin; then he must push his finger into her vagina and feel for the stone;
and if she finds it, then she should hold it under her finger, and he instructs her to push her finger into the wound and press her left hand firmly against her bladder.
If she finds it, then she must move the stone from the entrance of the bladder all the way down to the root of the thigh;
then she should push on the stone in the root of the thigh towards the middle of the vagina, where it is most sensitive; and feel for the stone in that area. and not move her finger above or below the stone, but let the incision be small at first;
and not move her finger above or below the stone, but let the incision be small at first; then widen the incision if you feel the stone is sharp, cutting the wound so that the stone can come out; and know that there are many types of stones:
this is to say, small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and which have hairs.
if you know their appearances in order to understand where they come from.
And if the blood flows, put powdered vitriol in place, and hold it for an hour until the bleeding stops.
Then return to your task, until the stone is out, and have ready the instruments I told you about for extracting stones, with men to assist you in your work.
And if the blood flows and it is an artery that is cut, put powder on the spot and hold it with bandages and dressings, and do not release it again, but leave the stone and do not try to pull it out, or the patient may die. Then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the pulse has returned to normal, return to your work until the stone is out.
Red water is nothing other than an assemblage of moisture or white albumen, which is found under the shell of eggs.
and is called "syfac", and sometimes it is properly in the web of the egg, if one thinks that it is another egg; and this is the skin of the scrotum between the white sac that we have described;
and this does not happen often. And the cause of this disease is weakness which comes to the testicles, and that matter is spread.
And sometimes it comes from a blow to the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: or it is a declining yellow color, or it is red, or black, or watery white, and there are more variations;
and these are the signs to recognize this condition; for if it is in the white sac that we have described, then it is a reasonable abscess, a long poultice as large as an egg, and it does not open the scrotum, for there is moisture all around it.
And if it has moisture in the web itself, then it is an abscess with a part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks that it is another egg;
and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white sac, he feels good;
therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, test all over the area, because the shape is in front. According to this, then, what comes after the intrusion, judge what is within.
And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healed according to his strength and the fullness of his body;
then lie on his back on something slightly raised and put a lot of blankets under him;
then sit on his left, and instruct the assistant to sit on his right, and extend the testicle to one of the two sides of the heart;
then take the lit spatulum and cut the skin of the testicles between them from the long end to the scrotum, and make the incision straight while cutting the skin of the testicles up to the white sac, and carefully remove the skin according to your strength;
then pierce the abscess with a sharp knife to a large opening, and draw out all the pus, then put your fingers in, and press the abscess upwards.
and do not touch the core of the bones, but only the abscess. cut it all around or in parts very carefully, and make sure to cut deeply, for if you do not cut deeply, the pus will return.
and if the egg white comes out during your work, then reset it in its place once you have finished working on the abscess.
then bring together the two lips of the bone with one stitch, then treat it as you would any other wound until it is healed.
And if you find that the egg is rotten due to another disease, then you should ligature the veins that are suspended, fearing a flow of blood.
Then cut off the testicle at its attachment, and remove the testicle itself, and treat it as we have described.
And if the fluid has gathered into two parts together, know that these are two hernia; then cut off the other part in the same way as you did the first, then wash away the blood, and put soft lamb's wool soaked in rose oil into the wound.
then cut off the other part in the same way as you did the first, then wash away the blood, and put soft lamb's wool soaked in rose oil into the wound. and put another piece of lamb's wool soaked in wine and oil over the testicles, then place double linen over it, and tie it up with the string following this pattern.
Then take two pieces of linen and stuff them with lamb's wool following this pattern, and sew them together at the crotch of the breeches, so that one piece goes over the buttock to the back, and the other over the groin.
and the other two chiefs above the two angles, and the entire restraint must be gathered in the loop of the bandage.
and sometimes this ramice of cautery is medicated in place of the iron knife; and you must grip the subtle cautery knife, and cut the skin of the testicles, and it should be heated as we have said so that the white pus contained in the water is revealed.
if one takes the cautery according to this form and pierces that testicle with it, and scorches it with this subtle hot cautery;
And scrape it in every way you can, until you draw it all out.
and beware that the fire does not touch the testicle;
and know that this work is safer; and while being mindful of bloodletting, and changes in the testicles;
and if nothing makes it worse, such as an abscess, or bloodletting, or anything else, then treat what makes it worse, according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is fearful and unwilling to undergo this procedure due to its horrifying nature, then perform incision as I have told you, and when you are certain from the signs we have discussed that the water has been expelled, have the patient sit up on a high seat. Then pierce the abscess at its base all the way to the underlying tissue, and place the incision at the longest part of the body.et adonques remens li cors a son leu; et s’il s’estrange ou se retuit, si tuit li corps en sa guize, ou
And then return the body to its proper alignment; and if it becomes dislocated or twisted, then adjust the entire body in its natural position, and broaden the incisions so that
then place cotton over the wound, dress it, and leave it to drain the remaining fluid, then treat the wound until it is healed.et si la mort vienne dedenz, il ne te doit moudre, por ce qu’il a paor et doute de la mort;
and if the white membrane does not let water out of the mouth of the wound, then you should apply a tube or instrument to draw out the water as with dropsical patients, whose form is described above;
and dilate the wound, and know that the water will return, and is collected after six months or so around it, and when it is collected as before, then the disease will run its course.
Know that in the cutting of this vein there is fear in many dispositions, because of which I think it better to leave it alone;
and I will tell you the treatment and the appearance of the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come from the body, especially in the groin; and this is by far the most common case.
This is known to be caused by excessive bitterness and bile, which is spread to the groin, or from a blow;
and the color of the abscess follows the color of the body; and does not hurt, and is a serious abscess;
and sometimes an abscess is grey and purulent, with a pus-like appearance, and at other times it comes from a vein, or inflammation of a vein.
When it is from a vein, it is recognized by the warm feeling of the abscess when pressed with your fingers; and you must not touch it.
That which comes from inflammation of a vein is recognized by its appearance when pressed with the fingers, and one can safely lance it according to these signs, and in the same way for the others; and it is necessary to cut the top of the egg-white, then the yolk will come out on its own, and the membrane will be released from all parts of the egg.
If the eye is sore from these new ointments, then you should wash the eye, and the lid.
And if there is an ulcer in the eyelid, or on what is inside the eyelids, then you should free all that tissue and wash it thoroughly.
And if the yolk is at the back end, then you must open it all and remove the yolk as we have said.
And when your work is finished, then dress the wound with soft lambs' wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapper similar to the bud of a branch, with the softening of the testicles, and it causes great pain when the patient urinates.
And the treatment for this disease is just as fearful as that one above, and yet we shall tell you about it according to how the ancients did it.
You should make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then squeeze the testicles with your fingers towards your body at the part where they are attached to the root of the penis, and tie them tightly, pulling them upwards.
then cut the skin with a sharp knife across the vessels, so that they are uncovered, and then scorch on each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples;
then he inserts a needle with a doubled thread, and ties it at the first place where the vis came out, and ties it directly to the other end; then he cuts them in the middle, following the length of the body, and draws out the corrupted moisture;
then he treats the wound as in the others, so that no blood vessel that nourishes one of the testicles is cut;
because no harm comes from it, and if blood comes from all the vessels, then one must draw out the testicles from all the vessels; so that the vein does not lose its nourishment because of the incision of the vessels, and dry up and cannot be helped.
The cause of this disease is due to the incision that comes from the syphilitic sore, or the swelling on the abdomen in the region of the intestines, causing them to descend from this passage to one of the orifices.
and this passage is either from the syphilitic sore or from the swelling; and these two types arise from many causes:
either from a blow, or jumping, or screaming, or lifting a heavy object, and from similar activities;
and the signs that it is from the swelling of the syphilitic sore are that it happens little by little over a long period of time and does not come suddenly; and the abscesses are even throughout, towards the depth, because the syphilitic sore presses on the intestines.
And the signs of dislocation of the shoulder blade are that it causes sudden pain at the beginning, and there are various abscesses under the skin near the surface, which is due to the exit of the intestines and the body being displaced by the shoulder blade.
And sometimes the nerves are displaced with the intestines, and it is retained inside, causing great pain to the patient, especially when it is pressed.
And in these iron treatments, one should fear, for which it is necessary to avoid them.
And the way to treat it is to instruct the patient to pull the intestine back into the wound with his hand if he can reach it; then rub his neck between your hands and lift his hips;
then they cut the hair on top, and shave all the hair from the long neck; then cut the skin around the navel with knives according to what you need to open the wound, and it should be such that the intestines can come out;
then scrape off the skin under the hair on the scrotum, until the white scrotum is exposed all around;
then insert your index finger into that which is under the scrotum, in that which is between the white scrotum and under the skin of the testicle, and between the second scrotum, and separate that which is behind the testicle, and between the second scrotum;
then move your right hand to the scrotum, and hold the white scrotum up in your left hand, and lift the testicle with all its skin towards the navel; and instruct the assistant to extend the arm upwards, and loosen what is tight behind the elbow;
and feel with your fingers if there is any tough, white membrane or intestine wrapped around it, and if you find anything, push it back into the belly below;
then take a needle with a thick thread made of six threads, and insert it into the back part of the sac, which is behind the skin of the testicles; after the needle has passed through the sac, then grasp the head of the needle with your fingers so that there are four threads hanging; then tie the threads one above the other in the shape of a cross, and bind the sac, which we said is under the skin of the testicles, with a strong knot made of two parts; then wrap the head of the needle and threads, and tie it firmly with two parts so that none of the vessels that supply blood to it can enter, lest an abscess forms there; and apply the cautery according to the first long line of two lines from that, and after these two lines, leave the syphilis which is under the heart of the testicles, the larger one of the two; and then all the other according to the roundness that the egg carries;
then cut into the part which is under the skin of the testicles, until the blood runs, and the bowels, as we have said before;
then apply moistened wool in oil, and place it on the wounds, and then apply the cautery that we have described. And sometimes the white syphilis that we have mentioned is cauterized after the incision, out of fear of bleeding. For this happens many times, and leave the cautery until it cuts through it;
and if it is slow to cut, then use hot water, and apply what we have described until it cuts through;et s’il ne se peut checier per lui, si covient il remestre la piere de selonc la dislocation que nos avons dit.
then cure the wound with another cure, until it is perfectly healed.
of carnous hernia
In this chapter I have never seen anyone dare to perform the treatment with iron.
And the ancients said that it is done like the thread that is together with the thread, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after the incision above, slightly under.
Then cut it halfway, and cure the abscess of what opens, until the vessels drain;
and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.Et s’ele ne veut chier, tu l’endures par guaiace et par baume, si com
And if it does not drain, you endure it with a poultice and ointment, as we have said, and the abscess breaks open, as we have said, and the pus drains out;
and none of the intestines come out, and if any do come out, it is a little, and they heal every hour;Et s’el est si grande qu’ele soit a grant dolur, tu la fendes en deux ou en trois partz, si que li sang ne deffuit point, et l’endures tant que li
and yet if it remains too long in this condition, the wound or fistula will increase in size as the intestines descend.
and this happens due to the extension of the fistula, which is in the anus, as we have said, because it extends and then becomes soft and swollen and open;
and the treatment for this is through cauterization, as we have previously stated;
and sometimes it is cured by iron in the following manner: and let the patient lie on his back between your hands, then press down on the area around the wound, according to its size, a palm's width at a time;
then pull out the fistula which is under the skin, then take the reed and place it on the visible area of the fistula;
and press it deeply into the belly, then cut the two visible ends of the fistula on top of the reed, cutting them one after the other;
then pull out the head of the rope, and do not cover it with anything or stretch the ureter or anything else, as I have made you aware in the treatment of the ramus of the intestines; then treat it according to the treatment for wounds.
then treat it according to the treatment for wounds. And when you cut the threads, cleanse and treat the wound until it is healed.
The syphilis is hidden, and has no appearance in the mouth; and the cautery is effective in this place, and is closer to a cure.
from the softening of the skin of the testicles
Often the skin of the testicles becomes soft in some men due to the organs within becoming soft, and it is visible;
and when one wants to treat it, they must make the patient lie on his back, and cut the skin that is soft on top of the skin of the scrotum;
then bring together the two lips with one stitch, and if you see it, sew the excess of the soft skin firmly with three or four stitches;
then cut between the stitches, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed, and remove the thread.
from chastity
Know that castration is prohibited by our law, and for this reason I would prefer not to discuss it in this book.
and is only necessary for two reasons:
the first is so that the doctors know how to respond when asked, and know how to treat it;
and the other is because we often need castration of certain animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and pigs and other animals.
Therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by吸引or by cutting.
For the one that we do by吸引, we make the animal sit in warm water until the testicles are soft and hanging; then grab them with your hand and hold on until they come off and you no longer feel anything.Et li autr’est selonc la fente que nos faisons sur la chair a la fine de la verge, dont suit l’evacuation de
Of the castigation of the waist: you must tie the beast, and press the hide of its testicles in your left hand, then slap the suspender, and hit each testicle once, when you have well-scorch them;
and leave some pus of the scrotum and the subtle scrotum which is under the testicles;
and this type of castigation is better than that which is done by pulling, because with pulling, something might remain in the testicles, causing the beast to desire lust;
then cure the wound until it heals.
Of hermaphrodites
There are two types of hermaphrodites in men: one is where between the two testicles appears what looks like a woman's vagina, with hair, and sometimes it urinates in this position.
And the other manner is in women, and has on the little finger as well as a rod and two scrotums.
And the treatment of both man and woman is that you cut off the swollen testicles, and treat them like any other wound;
in the second manner, men from whom the urine jumps through the skin of the testicles, there is no cure.
Tentigene is a scar formed on the natural part, so much so that it is too ugly to look at; and some women have them as large as a hand, and that is the cure.
You should dye the excess of the tentigene with your hand or fingernails, and then scratch it gently;
and do not go too deep, lest bleeding occurs, then the cure of one cure until it is healed;
and at another wound that occurs at the mouth of the wound, and use it, and perhaps it will jump out, and is according to the appearance of a cow, and for this reason they called it "cow disease. If you must cope with it, as we have said about the tendon, and treat it until it is healed.
Irregularity occurs when the nature of a woman is not understood, or the opening is small. It can be natural from birth, or it can be an accident caused by illness that arises in it.
It can be natural from birth, or it can be an accident caused by illness that arises in it. Or it is due to a stricture, or a thin or thick membrane, and it is made deep inside the stomach, or on the sides, or underneath, or wherever it may be.
And it affects conception, childbirth, and potentially flowering.
And the understanding of this is through observing the dance.
If the stumps are visible nearby, you can pick them with your fingers or with a stick.
If it is due to a thin membrane and it is close to the lips, then you should be quick about it, and they will heal thusly:
Place your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread out.
Then press the lips together until the thin membrane is punctured and the swelling goes down.
then take wool, moisten it in oil, and place it on the area; have the woman lie still each day so that it may not heal.
And if the sty is hard and thick, you must cut it with a spatula like a myrtle leaf.
If the wound is from a new birth, then suspend it at the umbilical cord and the navel;
and have stanching medicines, such as aconite, dragon's blood, incense, and egg white;
then administer a wide-mouthed jar, so that the wound may not heal;
and in this way for a long time, and then administer a tent made of dry linen;Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’
If the wound is from a new birth, then suspend it at the umbilical cord and the navel; and then perform other treatments until it is healed.
And when there is flesh damage, it should be cut according to this manner, unless it is an ingrown abscess. For in an ingrown abscess that is in the joint, one must not cut.
of hemorrhoids Hemorrhoids are openings in the veins which usually happen without cause, and when they are old they become thrombosed;
and we have already discussed in the division the similarities of ears, and the signs, and I will now describe those which are curable.
I say that hemorrhoids and thrombosed piles, when they are deeply embedded in the rectum, and do not appear to the touch, are not cured by the application of a hot iron.
Those that are at the mouth of the rectum, which one can feel, can be cured.
Therefore, you should put the woman in a cold room, then pull out the hair with tweezers, and apply powder to the roots made from blood-restraining medicines, such as aconite and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things;
then bind her feet to the wall for an hour, then place her in cold water;
and if there is bleeding, then have her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peel and galls, and similar things, and then take barley flour, and boil it with honey and garlic, and make a plaster from it to apply to her back.
And if it is staunched, that is good. If not, then have leeches applied to her back and breasts without bleeding;
then take lamb's wool, soak it in plantain juice or dogwood juice mixed with old wine, and apply it to the area.
And when the abscess has drained, treat the area with ointment until it is healed.
And that which is called "albathir" is red and resembles rough ash; it should be covered as I have said before. Then treat it until it is healed.
Many types of abscesses occur in the body, such as ulcers and pus-filled sores, herpes, cysts, and hemorrhoids, as well as hot abscesses, and several other ailments which I have mentioned in the classification.
Therefore, I shall discuss in this treatise the hot abscess that occurs in the bowels, which is not among those that occur in the body:
and if you want to know about the treatment of iron, then observe whether the abscess is hard at the beginning of its appearance, and filled with heat and fever, and whether it turns red if you can see it. Then do not hurry to pierce it, but let it heal as long as the pain is relieved;
and then have the patient sit on a chair, and have two small chairs on which to lean, and support his back and gather his feet towards the affected leg;
and let his thighs be spread out, and he should place his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good rope;
then open the wound towards the right side, and administer the instrument to open the mouth of the wound, from which the form comes afterwards;
and it is necessary that when you see the instrument administered, you push it in slightly at first to determine the depth of the wound, so that what goes into the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and it does not harm the patient; and if the instruments are larger, then they must cover the depth of the wound with cloth so that the instrument does not harm them;
and one should place the tip of the instrument on top and grip it tightly.
And when the abscess has been opened and they have done so by hand, then they must cover it with a bandage around the head or shoulder.
and when the bowels are emptied, then one must put into the wound wet tenting soaked in rose oil or in dry green oil;
and place the tenting over the wound at the bottom of the wound, and put another bandage over the wound and over the clean finger wet with water or with mallows that have been cooked;
then the wound will be cured after two days of ointment, as long as it is healthy;
and sometimes we raise it and cure the wound with a clyster of water and honey, and then of water in which roots of iris and aristolochia have been boiled for a long time; then return to the ointment.
And if the wound is depressed into the injury, then you should be careful not to cook with iron, but heal it as we have said in the division.
of childbirth It is necessary for the midwife to first know the natural shape of childbirth and the signs; when you see the woman push downward and desire to smell the air:
then the child will hurry to come out; then you know that this childbirth is according to nature, and the birth canal is under his head, and the afterbirth with him;
and when you see these signs, then you should gently press her belly so that the child comes out quickly;
for when he descends upon his head, the afterbirth comes with him, and the birth canal is cleansed of its excesses by good cleaning;
and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
For it sometimes comes on its feet and comes out of the body or the shoulder, and the hands, or it comes over his stomach, or under, and is accidentally turned around his neck, and in other evil shapes;
It is necessary for the doctor to be wise and subtle in these matters, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the shapes and how one should help them.
If the child comes out on top of his head through a natural opening, and the mother gives birth painfully, and her strength is weak, then make her sit on a saddle, or have women hold her;
and put the doctor's small spatula, of which I will now describe the form, between her lips: and split the membrane, and scrape with his nail until the fluid that is within runs out;
and press the woman's abdomen so that the fetus descends, and if it does not descend, then the woman should be given a clyster of fennel with oil of sesamum.
Then make her press and sneeze with this condiment, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour. Now if the child is born immediately.
And if both hands come out, you must then gently push them back in a little bit at a time. And if they cannot go back in, place the woman on a seat, and elevate her feet. Then lift the seat off the ground, and tighten it around the woman so that she does not slip while standing up.et si le corps ne puet aler par le col, si covient le clysterier de fenugrec et oile de sisament;
And if the body cannot go through the neck, then she should be given a clyster of fennel and oil of sesamum. And if the hands cannot go in and the child is dead, cut off the fingers at the knuckles as mentioned earlier, extract the child, and reset in the same way.Et si li enfes ne puet aler par le col tant qu’il soit en la mort, et tu n’i poues faire que
of the birth of the child on its feet When the child comes out feet first, it must be turned upwards. And then turn it bit by bit until it is straight;
Then grasp one of the feet and stretch it out bit by bit.
If it jumps up to the crotch, instruct it to grab hold and make it sneeze from that position; if it jumps out, God willing.
And if it doesn't jump out as we have said, then slowly turn it back to its natural position. For then it is easy.
And if it does not come out as we desire, take myrrh, tall oil, gum mastic, and grind them all together in a mortar; and apply this ointment to the woman's private parts and make her sit in warm water up to her ribs;
and when she is softened underneath, place the myrrh collar underneath her and leave it for an hour; then have her sit on a stool, then make her sneeze and constrict her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, for the child will jump now.
the child will emerge onto its knees When the child comes in this way, he puts his hands on it little by little; then he is put to rest on his neck, and his feet hang down, and he lies on the bed; and bends his arms little by little, and then he presses his hands on her belly, and takes the cushions from under her, so that she is straightened out below; and if the child does not jump, he takes his feet and moves them about, then he moves her belly upwards, then he puts his hands in; and makes the baby jump little by little; and instructs the woman to press until the child emerges.
of the emergence of the child who comes out with one hand hanging down I must devise a way to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, then have the woman rise and walk;
if she cannot walk, then have her lie on the bed and lift her legs straight;
then bring the mouse trap that I have described;
and if she does not give birth, then have her sit on a chair, and then try to bring back the hand; and hold the child according to its natural position, and make her sneeze, and command that she grasps it until it comes out.
from the child's exit above its neck, and spread her hands, and turn her face towards her mother's back Let the assistant grab her hand, then slowly turn it back and forth, and wiggle it gently;
and when it is even, place the mouse trap of alatris and oil, as we have said, then command that she moves it slowly back and forth;
and when you have done this, have her sit on a chair, and instruct her to hold herself steady. and make her sneeze. in the same way for all the afterbirth
in the same way for all the afterbirth When all the mucus has come out in this way, catch it with your finger so that the moisture is expelled;
and if phlegm rises to her face and throat, catch it with your hand so that it is not retained and the infant dies;
then put the infant back inside, ensuring that he is placed correctly, and instruct the woman to hold herself steady several times:
of the hernia You should know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four are born at once; and this is not a strange occurrence, it happens often. Twins are strange, and they do not live long if they do;
Twins are strange, and they do not live long if they do; I know them, that they are multiplied, and are separated by the styptic that divides them, which is bound to the wound.
and sometimes they emerge as naturally as a tail, just as we said.
And if they emerge quickly, then the cure is as we have said, and the surgeon must be skilled, and do quickly and lightly what he does; and act in such a way that it benefits their health. of many children
Sometimes they are formed in the womb one, or two, or three, or four, or five, or six, or seven, or more up to fifteen, and are all formed in the shape of a child according to the measure of the glorious sage, and the surgeon must know all this because sometimes similar things happen; and he must act accordingly.
of a dead child
When you are curing a woman of a dead child or abdomen, as I said in the division, and no pus comes out, and you are compelled to use your hands; if you must know whether the woman is of sound mind and has no incident where she fears death;
the woman should be laid on her back, with her head inclined downward and her legs raised;
and the midwife should apply the herbal remedy to the perineum, or if necessary, the woman should be tied to the bed to prevent her from giving birth;
then rub the mouth of the mother with moist oils infused with marshmallow root and fenugreek and flax seed, then anoint the midwife's hands with these oils and herbs;
then press gently on the mother's stomach, then push upward where she feels the urge to push, and take care that the child does not descend head-first;
if the child's fingers are stuck in her own orifices or mouth or throat or under the chin or near the ears or on either side of her head, and if the descent is toward the feet, then push or pinch where you feel resistance;
and he must hold the needle with his right hand, and place the thread between his left fingers, and wind it around his whole hand lightly, and insert the needle in one of the places we have described, so that it comes to the empty spot;
then insert another needle, or a third if you need it, so that the extractions are equal;
and then they are moved equally from one side to another, so that they exit; and the needles are bitten down to hold them in place, as shown in this image:
And if some remains, he should smear oil on one of his fingers and insert it into that part, and pull out the other part;
And if none remains, he should put that needle or another higher up, and do this until it all comes out firmly.
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be returned by stretching, then you must wrap it in a cloth, so that it hangs completely. Then place the cautery on the joint of the palm or the wrist, and you must do the same for the other hand and also the feet.
And if the head of the child is large and it is stretched out in delivery, or if it has an acute head gathered there, you must push the spatulum between your fingers, press the head, and extract the fluid. Or you can use the instrument called "almidach", from which the shape comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one.
And likewise, do the same if the child has a large head naturally;
And then pull out the bones with pincers, and if the head pops out and is dislocated by force, it will be split as long as the fluids inside the head exit;
and if it cannot come out, then cut it off piece by piece as you can.
and if he is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you must pierce him so that the moisture runs out.
And if the swelling is on his feet, the pull is light, and the movement towards the mouth of the wound is easy.
And if he is constipated in the belly or anus, then you must stretch him with a cloth wrapped around his hand; and open the belly or anus so that the moisture runs out;
and if the other members are swollen and the urine does not flow, then he should hold his hand over the wound and pull it up to the mouth of the wound; then he puts in his finger or two and pulls it out;
and if the mouth of the wound is narrowed by a hot abscess that has formed there, one should not work on it, but rather apply moist and greasy substances; and the minister applies poultices, and soaks it in warm water that softens and moistens.
And if the hernia is on his side, and you can make it even, then administer what we have said about the living child:
and if one has no power over it, then treat it bit by bit and leave nothing of the afterbirth.
And when you have done this, administer what we have said about hot abscesses that come in the belly;
and if blood-letting comes about, then it should be put into restraining water and other remedies administered.
And I saw a woman in whose belly some fetus had been dead, then another was sewn over it, and the other died as well. After a long time, an abscess came in her armpit, and swelled so much that it opened, and began to discharge profusely.
I was called to the priest, and I thought for a long time, and could not heal the wound.
I applied a strong attractive plaster, and an bone came out, and after a few days another one did too. I was very surprised because the belly has no bones.
I thought they were the bones of a dead child.
I probed the wound, and in so doing pricked some bones until the woman was in a better state;Et si li fuert l’os traiet, si le tuit sanz quebrure, et la plaie curat. And if the bone was pricked, then it should all be done without breaking and the wound healed.And so the woman lived a long time like this, and sometimes she felt a bit of pain in that spot;Et si li fuert l’os traiet
and I have recorded this chapter only because when the masters find a strange thing, they know to apply a remedy.
Here follows the form of the press, which is described in books:
and has two turns around the two shoulders. Nevertheless, the horns of the restrictor should be more subtle, made of ebony or boxwood;
and the mouth of the tube should be two digits wide and the rim of the trees one and a half palms long; and in between the two limbs there should be two ajustments of this same wood, which are firmly attached to both, half a palm long or a little more;
and these two adjustments are fitted into the mouth of the tube in order to open it when one turns the two horns.
Another form, which is more subtle and lighter, should be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of tongs: and has two heads, as you can see, one palm long, and two fingers wide;
and when you see the woman open to all instruments, make her lie on her back with her feet hanging and her legs open, then insert the two instruments together into the wound, and hold the head of the instrument between her thighs; then work your hand on the instrument, just as you did with the tongs equally, according to the amount that you see open the mouth of the wound, until the midwife does what she wants.
These instruments are all tipped and have many variations in their appearances; and when the midwife has prepared them, then the work is swifter and higher in men due to their quantity.
Do not be discouraged by the instrument until you have prepared it, for their needs are not preventable.
When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold in her breath and then make her sneeze from time to time, and squeeze her hands around her mouth and nose; and if she jumps through the air, all is well.
If not, take the pot and make a cover for it, placing herbs inside that can open the mouth of the wound, such as comfrey, fennel, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury; All these herbs, or any of them, should be cooked in the pot over fire;
then place one end of a rod or stick into the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the wound, and hold it there until the vapors enter the wound;
then make her sneeze, as we have said. Then the secondine suddenly.
And if she still remains after this treatment and does not recover, instruct the midwife to wet her left hand in oil of wormwood or in a poultice of alder buds, then insert it into the birth canal and extract the placenta; and when she has found it, she should grab and extend it little by little straight, so that the bone does not break upon extraction.
but it must be moved slightly to the right and left, and then pulled. it will come out easily.
And if the mouth of the wound is tight, we have discussed the cure for sneezing, and the fumigation of herbs;
and if it does not improve with what we have said, then you must be careful when pulling;
but it is necessary that whoever is at the mouth of the wound, should tie it to the thigh of the woman, then cleanse with the four-part ointment; it will come out and return;
but nevertheless, when it comes out there may be a foul odor in the stomach and head, and it will harm the patient. Then smoking is necessary for this:
one of the ancients has experimented with fumigation of watercress and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument with which one smokes out the woman for the retention of flowers and afterbirth, if it is this:
And it is made of glass resembling a cane, and the thin end is placed in nature, and the broad ends above the fire;
and the fumigation is on the coals, and the lice until they are destroyed, and then start another.
Many children are born who do not have the foreskin pierced, but the skin is closed with a subtle slit: then one should at the circumcision pierce that slit with her nail, and not cut it with a sharp blade, and guard against touching the foreskin.
Then put on wet milk with wine and oil, then the ointment cure until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will heal, then put a splint of wood through the wound, and leave it for several days, and remove it when the child wants to walk.
And sometimes this clotting comes from a wound or abscess suddenly; Then one must suddenly cover this. if it is to be cured, as we have said about the vein of the penis.
Fistulas that come from under the buttocks are nodular and grow from beneath the anus, or in the space between the two halves of the anus, and may be single or multiple.
And when this nodule is old, it opens, and usually there is moisture that causes white pus or thin fluid, and sometimes these fistulas are persistent.si est en la fesse ou deuz la cosse si a grant dolor sus les testiculos et les cosses, si covient elever celui membre tant com il puet, et si le covient adoucer, si doit adou
And they are caused by what comes out through the anus or through flatulence when the patient passes gas, and sometimes a worm may come out.si la fistule est desouz la fesse et non pas sur le costé de la cosse, si covient elever celui membre tant qu’il puet, et adoucer la partie qu’il ne
And if there are sores that pierce all the way to the bladder, and halfway down the penis; and reach all the way to the hip joint, and to the bottom of the groin.
And thus one knows a fistula piercing in the anus, and not piercing at all: and you push your index finger into the anus, and push a thin bronze or iron needle into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if it has twisting, then you insert a flexible wire, or horsehair, as far as you can feel the wire or hair with your finger;
and if you do not feel it, and it does not cause any evacuation, wind, or pus, as we have said: then you know it is not piercing through; if you wish to cure it.
And when the fistula extends to the bladder or the urethra, and the urine leaks out, and cannot be stopped by medicine.
If it is pierced to the hip joint, then the tented vein will reach that spot. if there is no tortuousness and the pain is not relieved by it, then it will not be helped by medicine or ointment.s'il n'y a pas de tortuosité et que la douleur ne soit pas soulagée par elle, alors elle ne sera pas aidée par la médecine ou l'onction ;
and in these persisting fistulas there is no cure despite effort and the vain attempts of foolish doctors who interfere.
In those that are not persisting and are not old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back;
and he should raise his legs up to his hips, and have his hips tilted towards his stomach; then push in a tent of bronze or lead if there is tortuousness, as far as you know the vein goes.puis boute une tente darain ou de plonc si il y a tortuosité  ;
If the pain is felt around the anus, then you must insert your finger, provided that the skin has not been pierced.
and it should be uncovered where you feel between your finger and the flesh, then you will know that it is perforated; if it cannot be reached, then it cannot be healed.
They say nonetheless that some can be healed, but that happens rarely;
and the aid that is done, one burns the cautery subtly according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before; and pour it all hot into the fistula, until it comes out through the anus; and do this two or three times, until you know that those charred flesh pieces are burned, which resemble an owl feather;
And then the cauterization with moist tents until that swelling goes down, then the application of ointment to bind and heal.
If it is thus healed, that is good.
If this is not done, they cannot be healed otherwise.
And if the tent pierces and does not reach the bone which is in the foundation, and there is between your finger and the tent a thick covering of pus or of syrup, and you see the fistula below the covering of the flesh; If you cut off the beginning of the fistula and fill it up before the tent, and then cauterize it afterward, until it reaches the top of the tent; And the tent will be delivered, and it will fall out;
Then cut off those false growths that look like a bird's feather, and nothing will remain.
And if the pus runs out, and flows between you and the wound, then cauterize it with fire or with medicine.
For the fire cautery joins two things: Here is the translation: This includes scorching of these swollen cars, and oozing of blood and drying of moisture;
then the treatment of moist tents with butter or crushed substance, until the swelling goes down and the burned cars heal;
then treat the wound of sudden, painful, hard growths on the body, and the remedies are dry.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if a fistula comes all the way from the anus, and is separated from the body, put your finger in it or plug it up, and ask for help.
If you sense a tent, and within it is a thread or string, or the growth, or it is about to pierce through, then there must be no fear or despair, but rather hope and expectation, through the administration of one of three remedies:
either you cauterize it as we have said, or cut it down to the bottom, or if you can, put in tents and treat it as before;
and do not go too deep that you do not cut the lining that holds the foundation, and let the discharge come out through there naturally; then treat, as we have said;
then treat, as we have said; by chance if it is healed, or you remove that covering and clean it once it has been cut away from the foundation, or with a tent or another pointed instrument; then pierce the infected bone in the wound as much as you can; then work to heal the wound and to stop the fistula from draining into the abdomen:
then work to heal the wound and to stop the fistula from draining into the abdomen: if it is more convenient for the patient.
And sometimes fistulas are like this: and when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is on the side next to the abdomen, take a pointed tent shaped like this: And thread .ii. threads through it, and push the tent all the way through the fistula until it reaches the top.
If it is deep in the margin of the abdomen, then pull out the thread from that hole, so that you can push your finger into the abdomen;
and draw the head with thread, and bring the two heads together, and tighten them against each other, and leave it for one or two days;
and hold it sometimes, until the threads cut through the flesh between them, and they separate.
then cure the wound so that it heals and scabs over.
If the fistula does not burst, then have it burst in every way you can, if it is not too deep. Because it is not appropriate to bandage too tightly and then to treat, as we have said, until it has healed.
The form of the spiny spatulum used for making a fistula is very sharp on one side, and pointed; and on the other side it is not, so that one does not cut what one should not cut, as you see here:
There are two types of hemorrhoids: or they are inside the anus, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and they ooze blood, and there is one or more of them, and they are found inside and at the top of the anus;
but those which are out of joint have little moisture, and still a little water or a little yellow water or a little blood, and they have the color of the body;
and the treatment for those who have them in the anus is that you instruct the patient to defecate so that the anus opens and the threads appear. Take it with tweezers or hold it with your fingernail, then pull it out at its roots;
and if the tweezers cannot hold it because of the moisture, take it with a piece of cloth, or cotton, or a piece of chamois leather; pull them out with your fingers, then cut them, and powder them with some hot powder that is in the place of cautery; or you can cauterize it as mentioned in the chapter on cautery, after treating them with other remedies until they are healed;
and if the fundament cannot emerge, then enema the patient with a sharp and asperous enema to wash away what is in the fundament so that it can emerge openly. then the patient should strain, and if the thread comes out from the fundament, then the cure is easy;
then the patient should strain, and if the thread comes out from the fundament, then the cure is easy; and you should grab them with your nail or tongs and cut them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed and the incision closed with iron. You must administer the suturing in the following manner:Prens li fil de l’asne ou del mazuret, ou del garse, qu’il soit fort et leg
You must administer the suturing in the following manner:Prens li fil de l’asne ou del mazuret, ou del garse, qu’il soit fort et leg Take a strong and thin thread of donkey, mare, or horse hair, twist it tightly, thread it into a needle, then pull the two ends of the thread through the eye of the needle from one side and back out the other, leaving a loop. The thread should be twice as long as the wound is wide;
and tighten the thread tightly, then tie the thread, and pull out the needle, and do likewise with all the others, and leave one to stop the flow of blood;
then place a wet cloth soaked in rosemary oil or cerate over the wound, and apply pressure to the wound, and instruct the patient to rest.
and then let him go until he defecates, and when he has finished, treat the wound with ointments and other remedies until it heals.
from dryness of the vagina or anus Many times there is dryness of the bowels in the intestines, and due to the constraints of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine does not help. If necessary, cut off the nail at the quick, or use a spatulum to remove the loose piece of nail, being careful not to damage the nailbed. Then treat the wound as needed until it is clean and healed.
If it cannot heal, then re-cut the nail more aggressively than before, until it heals and is smooth. then treat until healed.
where it trembles A wart is a small growth on the body, which moves deep inside;
and sometimes the wart chills, and one feels it as numb, and it comes all over the body, but more on the hands than anywhere else.
And its treatment is to take a feather from a goose or a strong owl, and place that feather on the numbness until the purple circle around the numbness disappears all around. Then turn your hand over the entire feather until you cover all around the numbness, and push it deeply, and pull out the numbness from its roots.
And if you see, make it with a cane of bronze or iron according to this form, and let it be thin underneath and drawn out on top. Do not pierce it, lest it remain in the body, and press hard.
And if you want to cauterize the numbness, as it is done before in the chapter on cautery.
One makes a clyster from silver or gold, or from melted and hammered copper;
and sometimes they are made small or large according to those who receive them. Those that are administered to children, the weak and sick, should be small.
Those that are administered to children, the weak and sick, should be small. The shape of the enema, whether it is small or large, depends on the width of the rectum, according to this method:
And one makes an incision on the abdomen, as you see, and the intestines are pierced inside;
and there is one hole on each side;
and the abdomen where the medicine is placed is made from a beast's bladder or parchment, and it is pierced all around with small holes, and there should be one finger width between each hole, then insert into these holes a strong thread twisted in an X shape or spiral around, and assemble the abdomen as if it were a goat; and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread in front, then clysterize;
And its shape is circular:
And the medicine should not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the tip of the syringe with oil or egg white, or similar, then insert it gently; Then the assistant squeezes the bulb with both hands simultaneously until it is empty, then withdraws the syringe and lets the patient straighten his legs, and if the medicine wants to come out, let him strain as much as he can; And if he sleeps for a night afterwards, it is of greater help.
And if you use the syringe for the sickness of a flowing stomach, and the medicine rushes out, he should repeat it until he is cured.
And if the hemorrhoids are internal or an abscess, then the syringe should be as thin as for a child;
And its shape is slender where the skin is stretched:
We have already said in the section on wound treatment:
And you shall tell of the cures of hands and of medicine, according to what is accomplished.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the place where the wounds are made, and what makes them.
The things by which wounds are made are by splitting of stone, and cutting with sword and knife, or spear or staff or arrow, or similar objects;
or according to the locations in the body, such as a wound that falls upon the neck, or head, or thigh, or belly, or liver, and similar organs;
and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds in the head, for the memory will come to me as I go.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, then take care whether it is from splitting of stone or similar objects, and the skin is still broken and the wound is large, and you fear quickly an abscess of heat: if he immediately bleeding from the cephalic vein if it comes little blood from the wound, and let the bleeding be in the opposite direction of the damaged part;
and prevent the patient from eating wine and heavy foods.
And if he does not want to bleed, let his food be diminished, and do not drink wine or eat meat;
and put cotton moistened only in rose oil or wine on the wound if hot abscesses come out;
and if there is no hot abscess, put on the wound, which must be fresh with all its blood, and not moved by air, powder, which I will describe a little later;
and if the air has moved it, put some ointments on it until it is healed.
And if the wound is large, like that of a sword, and the lips cannot be brought together by sutures, then bring them together by stitches, as I will describe for wounds in the abdomen, in the rib cage.
If the wound is exposed to the bone, and can be sewn up, and it holds except for a little bit, then sew it up; then heal the wound with medicine, and restore firm flesh in place of the skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as testicles and cooked wheat, as well as poultry, and similar things.
And if you find pus in the skin, and it does not reach the bone, then scrape off all of the pus, and pour it out, then heal it.
and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which causes bleeding, and it cannot be stopped by medicine, then tie off the artery, and if you find it dislocated, then bind it with a thread; and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is easy: and you should put on this powder that heals as soon as the fire has moved.
And the way of making the powder is as follows: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; fine chalk three parts, and powdered very finely, and apply the powder to the wound, and hold it firmly, until it clings well and draws out all the blood;
then bind it up tightly, and leave it loose if it swells; for one does not remove the medicine until the wound is healed.
And sometimes cautery is done with a hot iron only, when one does not have incense or dragon's blood; but the wound must be moved by the cautery.
And if the burn has moved the wound, do the same, but don't apply any of this powder;
but rather apply some digestive ointments, or barley flour made with water and honey, until the swelling goes down; then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And if there is a broken bone with the wound, and it is small, then hold it with fine pins;
and I will tell you about fractures of the head afterward.
of a wound on the neck
If the wound is in the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or artery is cut.
If it's a nerve, there should be nothing done but to leave the wound alone and not put anything constricting on it, because it hurts the nerves and makes them withdraw. And nothing cold should be placed on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member.
But the medicine should be warm, like chamomile washed in warm water and mixed with rose oil, and cooked wash also in warm water, and other herbs of similar nature, and moist poultices.
And if the wound is large, cut it and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and she has a hernia and is full of bowels, then cut her open higher up or lower down.
And if an artery is cut and bleeding results, then ligate it, and let it be cut out, and cauterized if necessary.
and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the windpipe, and the airway is kept clear so that the meat can pass through, then press on the windpipe above the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape; and then gently tighten it, and leave it for a few days, then treat it with cleansing ointments until it is healed;
and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then fill it; and if there are bone fragments, then remove them all as much as you can, and those that you cannot reach, leave them until the wound heals, and the bloodletting is complete;
and if the wound is fresh, then powder it with the powder I have described. And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as I have described in its chapter.
If it is a spear or knife wound, and the wound is deep, then examine if from the wound any bad air escapes: Know then that the wound is mortal;
and if it is not deep and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put any powder on it in the first hour, nor tie it for the blood to stop pouring out, but let it return to the body and heal the patient. but apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day;
and if you do not have an ointment, put old cotton in the wound to draw out moisture and let the patient sleep on the wound for three days or four or more. and if no spasms come, nor trembling of the heart, nor pain in the joints; and when you see these good signs, know that the wound is saved. Heal it then with poultices and other remedies until it is healed;
and if it cannot heal and work, then you know there is a fistula.
treat the wound as one should. And if the wound is from a cut by a sword or knife, and it is simple, on the front or back, then treat it as follows: if it is large, stitch it up.
and if it is small, treat it with powder, and if it has cut into the bone, and broken off pieces, then clean the wound, and draw out the foreign bodies if they are lodged in there. And if they are not lodged, let the wound fester so that it will expel the foreign bodies.
For other wounds on other limbs, the treatment is as we have already said.
rupture of the belly
There are many types of stomach ruptures: large, medium and small.Li grans est quan li corps del veine est rompu, ou quan li membre est desveu de
of a great wound except sometimes the intestines, or the nerves of the intestines, through which the entrance of air;
and the stitching is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the large one, because one returns the intestines to it more often with pins, if one does not return them little by little from warm to cold;
because the intestines swell as soon as they feel cold, so they return more often with pins, and that is why the smaller wound is better, because one resets the intestine to its place earlier than the others Ch.
And you should know that there are IV ways of rupture in the abdomen:
the two common stitches occur in the stomach stitch, and the stitch of other wounds in the body; and two other own stitches are common to other wounds.
and nonetheless they are more appropriate with the stomach stitch, and I will say one of them and declare.
I say that when the wound is small, and something of the intestine has come out, and a tough thing is difficult to remove, it is by one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in such a way: moisten a sponge or a soft cloth in lukewarm water only, or cook it in water with squill, cypress, and spike lavender, and warm the intestine until the swelling is gone;
and sometimes make a restraining wine, and apply it alone to deflate.
And when you see the swelling leaving, moisten the intestine with water or altus and mallows that have been cooked, for through this the entrance is constricted by a little.
and if it cannot enter, then make a small incision with the instrument used to cut hemorrhoids;
and the first treatment is cauterization rather than cutting unless there is a great need for it;
and this is the instrument used to split it:
it should be cut inside the curve and not through, and here is the shape: And when the wound is enlarged and the intestines jump out, he puts them back according to their natural shape in their proper place, if you have the power, because it is better that way.
When the wound is wide, and it is on the lower part of the abdomen, then you should make the patient lie on his back, and put his legs higher than his head; and if it is on the lower part of the abdomen, then put the head and feet higher than the lower parts, and also if the wound is in one of the sides, then tilt the patient so that the wounded side is higher;
and thus one must treat both large and small wounds.
For small wounds, take what is appropriate, then hold in your hand the instrument that burns all around the wound, and bring together the edges;
and this is the common way of sewing it up, and you must pierce an needle or several, depending on the width of the wound, then leave a gap at the head of the wound, about the thickness of two fingers, and insert an needle there with a strong thread; and pierce the two sides of the skin with the two ends of the sinew, which is under the skin inside, so that you make it pierce from that part, and bring together the two ends of the sinew tightly;
then draw a double thread through the needle from both sides, then bring together the two sides of the wound neatly, and then leave another gap, and insert another needle;
then make the wound wet with the thread as you did for the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to what you need of needles, until the entire wound is bound.
and let the needles be medium-sized, between fine and thick, for the fine needles cut through all the flesh, and the very thick ones cannot enter well. because they should be medium-sized.
and one must not push the needles too deep into the flesh and skin, so that they do not cut and open the wound before it is healed.
then cover the heads of the needles with thread, so that they do not hurt the patient when sleeping, and put tents or rags over the needle-heads to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed.
and this way of sewing with needles is best for small wounds, because it requires only one or two needles.
The second stitch is common, and is where you sew together the two ends of the skin and the two ends of the syringe together with a strong, thin needle;
and once you have pierced all four ends together, bring the needle back to where you started, in the manner that one sews sheets;
and leave a space between each stitch equal to the thickness of a thumb;
This stitch healed a man, and I sewed up a wound that a man had on his stomach, which was cut with a knife, and the wound was more than a palm wide, and the intestines protruded over two palms wide, and the wound was in the belly.
I returned his intestines after they had been out for 24 hours, and the wound was sutured for 15 days, and I healed it, and he recovered.
And they had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
and I did not treat him with ointment, for I was in a place where one could not find any medicine or treatment; And put cotton on the wound twice a day, and wash it with honey water until it heals.
I will tell you two proper methods of stitching:
take the needle and pierce it through the outside just up to the inside;
when it has pierced the skin directly, then lay hold of the thread where you put the needle in, and make it pierce through on the other side from inside to out;
and the understanding of this stitching is that you sew just as the furriers do with furs, and that you leave the thread once on one side and grab it on the other, so that the stitching is all completed.
The second method of stitching, which Galen describes properly, is as follows: they assemble the two parts naturally and apply one end of the thread to the other, in such a way:
stick a needle or sharp tool close to the edge, and pierce that spot only, and leave the two sides of the ulcer; then turn the needle, and have it pierce from outside to inside, through both sides of the ulcer;
then pierce one and then the other from outside to inside, in two more spots on the edge that are opposite each other;
and this is the most common method of stitching.
Galen says this, and some testify to it: one should stitch the belly with two needles, with thread on both.
and one should push one needle in from one side and the other from the other, like those who sew wounds;
and know that when the wound is in the middle of the belly, the stitching is more difficult than other places on the belly.
The judgment of the wound is like the judgment of other wounds:
and it is such that when you probe the fresh wound to its full depth, so that the fire has moved it, then the intestines and the lining are put back into place;
then apply a powder with ointment on top of it while the wound is still open; and sew up the wound, and close up the edges, and the maw; then treat the wound as you would any other, until it is healed;
and if you have no medication, then apply old cotton and move it twice a day until it is healed.
For in most cases where the wounds are simple, you don't need any other medication;
and if you doubt that the wound may affect the principal members, then you should wet a light cloth in warm oil, or rose oil, and place it around the armpits and under the armpits;
and if he feels pain or swelling in the bowels, which often happens, then he should be enema with warm black wine, especially if the swelling reaches the intestines;
and it should be inserted into them, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine, which is called 'young', cannot heal when it is raw, and this is due to the thinness of the veins that it has, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and its proximity in nature to the nerves.
And if the hernia protrudes from the wound, put it back inside along with the intestine while it is fresh;
and if it is old and has become black or green, you should tie off the area that is black so that blood does not flow into it, for there are veins and arteries there;
Then cut away the tissue between the ligature and place the two ends of the intestine hanging down below the wound until it is easy to extract when the hernia slips out, and close the wound tightly.
of the road of the boil
When the intestines are ruptured and the wound is small, it can sometimes be cured in some men, for I saw a man who was pierced through the belly with a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became a fistula, and from it came both excrement and wind;
I applied treatment according to what I knew, and did not cease to apply poultices until he was healed and the wound scars closed over.
And when I saw that it was healing, I feared that the patient still had discomfort in his belly; and he experienced no ill effects but rather improved in his appetite and digestion;
and some experiencers say that when there is a small wound in the intestines, it should be bound in such a way: take a large testicle, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the testicle has opened its mouth, place it upon both lips so that it holds them closed;
and then cut off his head, and this will be held so that he cannot untie it, then put another noose after in the same way as before, until the wound is completely captured; and cauterize the wound.
If these worms enter the intestines and cause no harm to the patient, and one can tie off the intestines with a fine thread cut from an animal's intestine in such a way:
take the end of this intestine thread that is very charred, and then tie to the end of this thread a fine linen thread wound tightly, then insert the thread into the needle, and cauterize the intestine, and tie it up in the wound;
and this manner of sewing up with threads is not foreign to the path of faith and hope;
and if the wound is great and wide, especially when it is in one of the small intestines, there is no healing other than through subtlety.
of fistula wherever it may be Know that any wound or abscess, when it wakes up, is universally called a "fistula", and especially when it is swollen and becomes pus-filled.
And a fistula is according to the green nodulation of a hardened and white pustule, where one does not feel pain, and it is as smooth as the feather of a bird;
and sometimes it erupts in a clear burst, and sometimes it is thick; sometimes it is small, and sometimes larger;
and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed and there is no scar, it is only due to one of the IX causes: that is to say, by the weakness of blood or body; or because of wickedness; or because there is a hard scar within, and on the lips, that does not allow a scar to form; or there is too much pus; or the wound is rotten, and the matter is of poor quality; or medicine does no good in its treatment; or because the corruption is of a pestilential nature; or because the disposition in the region is tardy in digestion, and late in health, and swollen by nature; or there are veins or bones;
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments of medicine in the division.
Now I will tell you about the treatment for a fistula that is done by hand.
Know that a fistula occurs in all parts of the body; for it comes from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, to the face, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to any of the sides, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and if it occurs in the disposition of the principal member, and in similar ways.
And all fistulas that are of this manner are of grievous healing, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance.
and if there is any fistula that does not come to the place I have said, and you have faith in the cure, and you see it, then take a tent of bronze or iron, if the fistula is straight, so take it.
and if the fistula is crooked, then look for a subtle tent of lead, because lead bends around the crookedness.
and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot well probe it with tents, then cleanse it by enema through one of the openings, because moisture cuts from one opening to another.
Then probe it with your strength to know if there is bone or nerve, and if the fistula goes deep. Ask the patient about his pain when you press with your hand, and where he feels the pain.
and when you know truly the location where it is, and whether it is far from joint, nerve, artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have instructed you, and remove the fault and corrupted flesh within.
and then treat the wound until it is healed, and if the fistula is deep in a straight place, you should cut it deeply as you can, then put wet bandages soaked in medicine water, and apply them to the head of the fistula so that the medicine corrodes the excess matter remaining at the bottom;
and then put healing ointments on healthy flesh until it is healed;
and if it is not healed by this method, then cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it.
If the vein or nerve does not trouble the principal limbs, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness, then king's touch as much as the corruption is removed, then the cure of things in infection until it is healed;
and if not healed, and flexed back as before, know that you have not gone to the source:
if uncovered and want to go to the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the place;
and if it is thus healed, that is good. If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach; if there is no other way except through cutting;
and if there is a small corrupt bone, and you can pull it out with tweezers, then remove it with the appropriate instrument for that, and if there are many bones, pull them all out and leave none behind;
and if moisture makes it go against you, and there is no error or fear, then combat the moisture with fire and charcoal, and free the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then put something to promote pus on the wound, and let it be around the bones until they become porous, and then they will have the bones more easily;
and if it is a large bone, like that of the leg or thigh, then treat only the putrefaction until all blackness is removed, and then dress the wound;
and if there is a large amount of it in the body, and it reaches the bone's marrow; then it should be cut off and covered all the way to the putrefaction, and then the wound should be treated until it is healed;
and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you can take example and aid from it in your work.
There was a young man of about 30 years who had pain in his leg caused by an internal issue, so that the matter came out into the leg, and it became swollen with a large abscess, and there was no way to release it by opening it;
but the doctors, in their folly, worked on it so much that the abscesses opened and discharged a great deal of matter, and became a fistula, and many openings appeared that discharged pus and moisture from the body;
and many doctors treated him for 2 years, and there was no improvement in his condition, so that I was called to see him, and I examined his leg and the remedies with which he was being treated, and saw what was flowing from the openings into his body; and the young man's body became red, and had a yellow color.
I set up a tent in one of the openings, and then I searched all the openings, and found that some came face to face with others throughout the leg.
I quickly examined one of the openings and discovered part of the bone, which was rotten and perforated, and the corruption was spreading to the bone inside;
I saw what appeared to be a rotted bone, and I thought there was no other corruption than that which I removed.
And I began to treat the wound with dry remedies for a long time, but it would not heal.
And then I began again and exposed the bone as before, and found the corruption continued in the bone, which I removed, and then I tried to heal the wound. But I could not until I cut around a palm's width of bone, and removed it to the root, then I restored it with remedies. And it healed quickly, and there was no need to redo the operation except for the weakness of the patient who could not endure it, and because of the fear of death that I had for him. For often the blood evacuated, but it was entirely healed, and in place of the bone a hard lump grew, and it was of good disposition and did not cause any harm or discomfort going or coming.
And if a bone is broken in any part of the body, then one must treat it in this way: Take hold of it, and stretch it to the head of the bone that is exposed, and instruct someone to lift it upward. And place another thicker piece of linen under the first piece, and tie it onto the flesh above the bone, and stretch the head, so that you draw up the corrupted flesh from below, and uncover the flesh above where you see it is, so that the thread does not cut into the flesh.
And place a hot brand or a flat object under the bone to cover up the corrupted flesh;
And one must sew as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and sew again another time.
And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, then uncover all the flesh;
Then place a hot brand underneath, and sew from one part of the corruption to the other, with the thread close to the edge of the corruption as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, it corrupts the joint, and on the other side, the bone that contains it;
and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, there is no other remedy but to cut it off;
and if the corruption is in the knuckle of the hand or the foot, it is a very serious matter, but nevertheless you must examine the corrosion and see how it appears to you; and cleanse it in every way you can, but be careful that the vein or nerve do not cause any harm;et si tu ne peus pas mondre celle corrosion sans nuire a la veine ne al’artere, mais covient que tu la mundifies par feu ou par caut
and if you cannot cleanse the corrosion without harming the vein or artery, then you must cleanse it with fire or with cautery. And know that there are many different ways to cut and expose these bones, depending on their placement, appearance, thickness, smoothness, size, and hardness;et si li corruptions est en la veine ou en l’artere, et que li membre soit mort, si doit tu mondre celle veine oultre la corrosion, et le corps mort, selonc la grandece de la veine ou de l’artere, mais non pas plus longement que la veine ou l and therefore one must prepare for each type of procedure with their instrument.
and know that the work will show you the instrument you need, according to your knowledge of this art and the testimony of the ways of illnesses; then guess at the instrument you need based on what it needs.
Shoulders dislocate either due to internal causes or external causes;
and when you have treated that corrosion with medicine and it does not help, then you must cover the affected limb up to where the corrosion is, so that the patient escapes either death or the greater evil of losing the use of the limb;
and if there are signs that the limb is turning black and it seems like it has been burned by fire, and after the blackness appears, then the corrosion spreads from limb to limb and affects the whole body;
If you are bitten, cover the wound immediately, and if it is from the sting of a venomous creature such as a scorpion or serpent, and the bite is on the head or face, then cut off the affected limb and do not give the creature any time to reach your hand.
And if it reaches the hand, cut at the joint so that the venom does not travel up the arm.
And if it reaches the arm, cut at the elbow;
And if it passes the elbow, that is death, and there is no antidote to counter its power save according to its quantity.
And thus you must act when the sting comes to the foot: If it comes to the first joint, cut after the next joint;
And if it reaches the foot, cut off the entire foot; and if it rises up the leg, it will stop at the knee joint.
and if it comes above the knee, there is no cure but to let the patient die.
and the method of treating it is to tie the limb above and below, and extend one servant's arm below and another servant's arm above, and you cut the flesh between the two ties with a broad spatula, as far as the bone is exposed.
then you stop the bleeding and put a linen cloth on each side so that the wound does not touch the healthy area, and cause him no further injury or abscess.
And if bleeding occurs when you open it, then cauterize the wound quickly, or put some restraining powders on it.et se li sang ne veult ceurrer, si quieras tu le lames a I piece pour le faire ceurrer, et que li sang vienne en la plaie, si met sus aucune poudres qui s’en
then return to your medicine until it is complete, then tie the wounded member with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed.
and I will tell you what happened to a man in his sleep;
he had a blackness that looked like a burn, and this corrosion came first on his big toe, so much so that it affected the whole foot;
and when the man saw the corrosion, he immediately covered his foot, and it was healed;
and long after, the corrosion returned on his finger, and he came to me, and I applied poultices after cleaning the body, and he could not stop the corrosion;
and he wanted me to cut off his hand, but I refused, as I had hope of repulsing the matter; and I feared that if I cut off his hand, he would die, for the man's strength was weak;
and he became completely discouraged, returned home, and healed his hand;
and I have not included the stories about what happens if someone else does it, because I don't think we need them.
Sometimes an abscess forms in a fleshy part, and remains so long that it causes great swelling; then they rupture and drain, and the swelling goes down, and the place where they were is left hollow, like vessels; and the skin above is as delicate as split silk, and it doesn't adhere to the bone or nerve; such a condition is called "healthy," not a "fistula.
but if it becomes so long that it reaches the bone deeply, it is called a  "fistula.
and the skin such that you cup it all around, especially when it is delicate, just as a napkin. and do not tear it for fear of damaging it.
And if you have faith that the skin will heal, and the damage is not complete, and the flesh is thick, then treat it thusly:
examine if the breasts are swollen, and the belly has a foul odor, then cleanse with an Egyptian medicine made thusly: take asafoetida, and oil, and litharge, in equal amounts, and mix the ingredients into a vessel over fire, until the medicine turns red and as thick as honey;
then take some according to your need, and dissolve it in water and honey, and cleanse the breast with it, and constrict the nipple; and let the medicine stay on for two hours, then remove it by squeezing.
Do this many times until the breast is deflated and the pain is gone;
and sometimes they are cauterized with water of ashes when this medicine is not present, and it is done by taking ashes from vine wood, pouring water over them, then straining the liquid and using it as a cautery on the breast until you know that the breast is deflated.
And if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or water of ashes, then use a cautery of water and honey with a pinch of powdered litarge. Or you can cauterize with honey and sweet wine, which has the property of cleaning and washing, and the wine makes the wound burn.
And when you have done this and are certain that the breast is clean, then cauterize with something that makes a crust on it; take a diafinite ointment and mix it with rose oil and wine.
or you cleanse it with some medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken in the section on ointments.
And if the nipple is small and the cannula of the syringe cannot enter, then enlarge it with a knife a little, and insert a tent made of the Egyptian ointment, or the ointment called basilicon, until it is enlarged.
And if the wound is too large, then cut it and leave only the place where the syringe can enter, and if the opening that urinates is above, then cut below it, or higher up, whichever it is.
And if you cannot cut the breast as you wish, then arrange it in such a way that the bowels move to the lowest place they can reach; for when the bowels are perverse, they do not digest food properly. And if you cannot cut the breast as you wish, then arrange it in some other way: that the bowels move easily downward, and leave nothing of the bowels behind;
that the bowels move easily downward, and leave nothing of the bowels behind; and take consolative medicines to put over the wound, and they are on the linen cloth that covers all the wound; then cut the opening of the breast more widely than before, then put ointment on the other cloth according to the quantity of the opening, and put it on the wound to loosen the bowels, and do not remove the large cloth but after several days once;
and the one who is on the opening of the breast, remove often to remove the bowels, and know what comes from the bowels, whether it is poison or a little or enough, or digestion, or indigestion;
and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been applied in such a way and you see the nature that rises on the wound, then you know that the breast has healed, and the health approaches;
and then loosen it in the morning, or at noon, and when you loosen the wound, change the other bandage and renew the ointment.
And if subtle poisons run long after a time, do not despair of health, for health approaches.
For there are people whose wounds heal slowly, and others that heal quickly;
and if milk does not flow from the breast after many days, know that the breast will not produce milk;
and if the breast is delayed in producing milk and is distant, then apply dry medicines that are moist in substance but dry in virtue, such as an ointment of vitriol, for it is the best medicine;
take an ointment of vitriol, and make it with rose oil, and rose water equal in substance;
then cook it and use it;
and with the same one makes honey cooked thickened, when ointments of vitriol are not available, or take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind them, and sprinkle the powder on the honey when it is over the fire;
and then they are bandaged with glue, and the poultice is applied to the chest, and sometimes an aristolongue root, and roots of celestial lilies, which is like flour made from herbs and centaury; and they use simple medicines or compounds: They grind them into powder and mix with the honey I mentioned, and use it;
and if the wound is long and not healed by this treatment, then know that the corruption is in depth, and it makes an impression on the bone, or on the hard limbs, or on the tissues; if the wound of the fistula, as we have said before.
A panaris is an abscess that arises under the fingernail of the hand or foot, or perhaps it arises in other places;
and when it becomes infected and one takes no notice, then the abscess grows, and they grow and burst until they reach the root of the nail, and perhaps they burst all the way;
and comes the corrosion to the bone, so that it causes a stinking pain, and the head of the shoulder is swollen with two lumps, and the colour is green-blue.
When you treat it as we have described in the previous section, and the treatment is not effective, then you should cut away all the excess tissue that has accumulated beneath the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterwards. Cautery is a great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy;
and if the nail presses into the flesh, and starts to grow in, you should cut the nail underneath so that it lifts up from the flesh, and carefully and gently peel off the dead skin, then put on potent and corrosive medications to remove all of it; then treat the wound until it heals.
And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut it out and treat the wound, because as long as the corrupt bone remains, it cannot heal;
and if you see the joint become corrupted, cut it out in an L-shape as described before, then treat the wound until it heals;
and if it is wild, and biting, and it feels great pain, then you must heal it first.
then cut the fingernail of the spasm with a diagonal cut, being careful that the cutter does not go all the way to the flesh underneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain.
and if it happens, place something on it which soothes.
The two toenails that sometimes grow on the hands of some people by chance are all fleshy, and sometimes they have bones in them, and sometimes they have nails, and some grow from the root of the joint where the nail grows from one of the toes.
Those nails that grow from the nailbed do not move, but those that grow from the joint of the toe sometimes do.
The cutting of the fleshy one is thus: Cut it at its root with a broad knife.
Those that grow from the root of the joint are painful to treat: if you hold it still.
For one who is born with a hernia in the navel at the back, you should first scrape away the flesh roundly up to the bone, then scrape the bone to an appropriate size for that, then heal it until it is well.
The joints that come together come by birth, or by wound, or by burn, or by similar things.
You must cut the nail, so that the toe can heal according to its natural shape; then place between two tents or wet cloths in rose oil, so that they do not adhere; or you place between two pieces of thin felt, until the skin is healed, as it should be.
If a person with a sore palm comes to you, then treat that wound as it should be treated.
Veins are large tubes wrapped in membrane filled with melancholic superfluities that come from various parts of the body;
and more often happens to those who walk on foot and work and carry loads, than to others.
Therefore, you should administer to him an emetic, and then the basil drink.
There are two methods of using the fire cautery: one is to scorch them, and draw out the black blood; and the other method is that you open a vein, and draw it all out.
The incision is done in this way:tu traies un petit coup, et puis li traies le sang noir qui y ad you make a small cut, and then draw out the black blood that rises up from it. First warm the leg with very hot water until the veins become subtle, then straighten the leg from above the thigh to the joint below the knee;
then cut the vein in one, two or three places, with a large incision, then press and draw out the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, as much blood as the patient can endure;
and then the scabs, and he is commanded to dye himself with meats mixed with black soot;
and recommences the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are full, which is harmful to the patient.
The remedies for him are as follows: He raises the leg of the patient, if there is much hair on it, then he puts it in a bath and pours hot water over the leg until it turns red and opens the veins;
and if you do not have a bath, then heat it over the fire, and then press down on the vein from above at the knee, or in the part below at the ankle;
then open the skin at the toenail, and scrape the vein from each side, until it appears when you feel it;
and you will see it red and black, and when it enters into the skin it seems like a white string;
then pour the water beneath it, until it is raised from the skin, and then gently at the edge, then cut in another place above it three times.
then scorch the skin above the vein until it appears, then lift it with a tweezers, as you did before, and cut at another edge, as you did before.
then cut another slit, or several if you need to, then lift it and cut at the toe of the foot, then pull and lift up to the second slit.
then pull it out from slit to slit until it is completely extracted, then cut it.
and if you cannot pull and lift it, then insert a strong doubled thread with a needle, tie it, pull it out, and pour water beneath the vein, turning your hand from side to side until it comes out. and be sure it does not burst, for if it bursts, one cannot milk or lift it, and the patient suffers harm.
and when you have milked it completely, then place on the site of the wound wool moistened with wine and rose oil; and treat it until it heals.
And if the vein is constricted and twisted and enveloped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it twisting, but do not burst it; and milk it as we have previously said.Et se li vis est rompiez ou fends en quere de
And if the vein is broken or split in the process of removing the iron, the shape of the iron should be curved, and it should not burst the vein;
and it should be thick, for if it were slender, it would burst the vein; but it should be thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
This vein is found in the legs, in hot areas where no herbs or trees grow, and in dry land where there is no moisture.
And sometimes it occurs elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens from the pustules that emerge under the skin, just as snakes and worms emerge inside the body, between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this wound are that a great inflammation comes in the leg, then the color changes, and the wound begins to come out, as well as the root of a plant.
When the head is exposed, you must wrap it around with a piece of linen three and a half to four fingers wide, and tie it, leaving the linen hanging down the leg. And every time it dislocates, wrap it again around the linen and the wound.
And if it is too long, cut off a part of it and wrap around what remains, but do not cover the root until it is all dislocated. Because if you cover it, it will go back into the flesh and cause an abscess and pustules at that spot, and great illness.
that thing must be treated little by little until the end, and nothing remains in the body;
and sometimes this vein, when it is treated, reaches from the palm of the hand to the elbow, or from the palm to the armpit, and once a man came to me whose vein reached from the palm to the armpit; and when you cut it, insert the needle or probe, and pierce it to the bottom, so that everything comes out.
and empty the matter inside, and apply healing medications for several days, then treat it as you would an abscess.
And sometimes this vein has branches, especially when it opens at the joint of the foot, or in the foot, and there is a lot of bleeding, and from it rain falls.
Treat it therefore as we have said before.Et li chiés de l’ajutoire est issue et retentue li
of worms that grow between skin and flesh This disease is called "cow disease" in our land because it often affects cows, and it is a small worm that grows between the skin and flesh, traveling throughout the body, ascending and descending, and one feels it as it moves from member to member until it breaks through the skin where it goes, and exits.
and is caused by an excess of humors, like worms and snakes and roundworms and tapeworms in the belly;
and one doubts its maliciousness because when it travels through the body and ascends to the head, if it reaches the eye, it can enter and destroy the eye; and that happens many times.
When you see it traveling through the body, one cannot stop it until it leaves:
so you must tie the area above and below with a strong string tightly, then cut it out and if the worm is deep in the flesh, and you cannot extract it, then cauterize it with fire until it dies;
and the greatest harm it does is that it runs in the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming near the eye, grab the eyelash firmly underneath and pull it out.
and one should use the patient's body purification with medicinal solutions to draw out the bad humors, and wash with meats that cause swelling.
of the pain which comes from windiness This disease is called 'visceritis' in our land, and it is a pain that comes in one member, and then moves from member to member;
and I have seen what I tell you. I was called to a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling on the vein of her elbow;
and soon after, I saw it rising up her shoulder like a worm, quickly and brightly like silver when it moves from one place to another;
the pain leaves that area and settles in the shoulder, and then a little later it runs through the whole body until it reaches the other arm;
then it started twisting around the body, just as I saw it.
I was very surprised how she moved from limb to limb like that, because I had never seen this illness behave in that way before. Nevertheless, I have seen many whose pain moved from one place to another, but I did not see it in the woman;
and I thought that it was because a woman's body is dry and their veins are exposed, and because this windiness is forced out;
and they did not experience it according to this reason in those who were sick, who had moist bodies and relaxed veins.
And when you see this disease being treated, and the patient feels the pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then apply pressure above and below, and then press gently until that forced windiness leaves the area; and cauterize the area;
and if you do not see it yourself, then the doctor who treats wind-related ailments, as with foul-smelling pills, and serapium pills, and similar remedies.
Arrows are diverse, depending on their appearance and the place in the body where they land.
The diversity of their appearance is that some have large points, some small, some have heads, and some are bald; Some have two angles, some have tongues, and some have pieces;
And those that break in a limb break in two ways: Or in a principal member it breaks, like the brain, heart, liver, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar members. Or it breaks in a subsidiary member, like the limbs: When it therefore breaks in any of these members, and the signs of death that I will tell you about appear: Then you should beware of extracting this arrow, for death comes after in many cases; And when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not entirely out, then pull it out and treat the wound.
And the sign of a trepanation wound is when the arrow hits and pierces the bone, and the syphilis breaks through the skull, and there is scotomata and pain and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of the mind, and vomiting of blood: and perhaps it comes out through the nose or ears; and perhaps they lose their speech and voice; and from the wound comes white moisture resembling pus, and also like blood-clots;
and if this sign appears to you, then stop the treatment and pull out the arrow if it is still inside.
The signs of a wound to the heart are that it is near the left breast, and it feels as if it were pierced into a hard object, not bleeding;Et quant li saiettes chiet entre le col et li poitrins, et s’il est enflammiez et gonfliez, si est grant dolor. and perhaps the patient becomes mute like the fowl, and turns pale, and there is dark blood, and coldness and cold sweat, and syncope: then you will know without doubt that death has occurred.
And the sign of an arrow wound that never leaves the body is foam without pain, emerging from the wound, and a swollen throat, and the patient's colour changing, and gasping for breath and seeking the cold air.
And if the arrow pierces the scrotum, it is near the testicles; and there is great pain and sighing; and all the limbs move from the shoulders.
And if an arrow pierces the heart or stomach, by chance something indigestible may come out of the wound.
And if an arrow pierces the belly and nothing comes out through the intestines but feces, there is no hope for a cure nor for extracting the arrow.
And if the arrow pierces the bladder, and the urine flows out in a jet and there is bleeding, and the patient feels great pain: then you will know that the wound is fatal.
The other members, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulder, armpit, spine of the back, buttock, thigh, and leg, and similar members, are safe according to various dispositions. When the arrow is in a nerve or artery and is not poisonous, as I will tell you so that you may do likewise.
It happened to a man that an arrow hit him in the jaw, in the root of the teeth: I probed it, and drew it out from under the ear, and he was healed without any numbness.
And take an arrow and shoot it into the fat of the eye below the eyelid, and the arrow was wrapped around, and one could only touch its point towards the shaft, and the arrow was as big as a Turkish bow, all of iron, without ears.
the games were healthy, and no bad accidents happened.
And take an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears:
I shaved the beards, and subtly shot it so that I hit him, and the Christian was healed.
And take an arrow from a man who has it in his head or belly, and think that he will die;
and after thirty days, his condition did not improve; I cut into the arrow, and pushed it out, and he had no bad accident.Et ot un oileier qu’ot une saiette en la cuisse, si com il li traioit la saiette;
And if you see a person whom an arrow has hit in the back, and the wound is closed over;
and the arrow remains inside him, and his natural functions are undisturbed and he experiences no discomfort in any of his natural processes.
And you see another man whom an arrow has hit in the face, and the wound is closed over; and he remains thus without suffering great pain;
and many other similar cases.
And treat an arrow that has hit the king's son in the head, and is lodged in his brain, and he is slightly nghiêng to the right; and the arrow is fully embedded.
I was called to treat him after three days had passed. I found the wound very tight.
I examined him thoroughly, and I did not feel anything;Et si vis I home cui il chut un saiette en la paume de sa main dreite, et ne demora li and he felt pricking and pain beneath his right ear.
I thought it was from the tip of the arrowhead. I placed a soothing and digestive poultice on the area, so that the ears would not swell; and I saw the head of the arrow.
and I saw the head of the arrow. I applied the poultice for several days, and the wound healed quickly, and the patient felt the arrow inside his nose for a long time;
and he told me about it. I applied corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it healed, and I tested it, and felt the tip of the arrow which was protruding out;
then, I adjusted the opening of the wound using that corrosive medicine until the head of the arrow became visible to me;
and let him transgress the terms for 4 months, and then tear open the wound that I clamped with tweezers, and pull from one side and the other, and it cannot come out;
therefore I did not cease to use instruments and invent ways, until one day I took the tweezers well-made, according to what his form will be in the end of this chapter, as I drew it out and restored the wound.
And let them judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it therefore, and the wound was closed, and the patient was completely healed.And in a similar case, I found an arrow in the shoulder of a man who had been struck by an arrow through the neck, which had entered below the ear, and gone out at the shoulder
Now I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you put your care upon what I do not say, for the book cannot encompass everything;
but the wise masters consider well very little, and what is present and lacking to them, they devise new work, and new instruments, in the descent of strange things which come about in this art.
I say that arrows grow in the limbs where they are stuck in two ways: either through the place where they enter, or through another part;
and that which goes out through the place where it entered is an arrow entering into the flesh, and sometimes goes out immediately.
And if it does not go out immediately, leave it until the flesh around it becomes rotted away, and loosen the exit;
and if it is stuck in the bone, and cannot go out, then leave it for several days, and move it every day;
and then it will come out, and if not, then pierce around it with a very thin instrument until the flesh around it is widened, and then pull it out.
And if the arrow is lodged in the body so that it cannot be seen, then it must be sought throughout the body; and if you feel it, pull it out with an appropriate instrument;si ne le puet demorer en li cors, si la laisse tant qu’elle soit igals, et met
and if you cannot due to the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, then open it as much as the wound is large;
and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has barbs that hold it in place, then cut away the flesh where it is stuck on both sides as much as you can, and then bend or twist the barbs of the arrow until you can pull it out;
and be careful not to break the arrow, so that you can pull it out more easily.
And if you cannot extract it in one go, then leave it until the surrounding area becomes swollen; then pull it out, for extraction will be easier. And if the bleeding is too profuse, then follow what we have said about stopping the bleed in its chapter;
and beware of cutting into a nerve or vein, and use any means you can to pull out the arrow safely, quickly or slowly, gently or forcefully;
and place the patient in the position he was in when the arrow struck him, for that is the greatest aid you can provide; and if you cannot, then place him according to the signs that the stars show you.
Arrows that come from another direction, or where some of it protrudes, or the skin is swollen in that spot, either visibly or felt by touch:
cut above it, as high as the tweezers can reach, and then extract it: if it is a through-and-through wound.
And if it is stuck in the bone, rotate your hand rapidly, so that it goes into the bone and widens the opening, then pull it out.
And if it cannot be extracted, then leave it for now and try again later to extract it;
and if there is an arrowhead in it, push it all the way through;
and if the shaft is short, and you intend to administer a tourniquet, then place the arrowhead into the hole of the instrument;
and then pushed out, and if the arrow is lodged in the head, he pushes the instrument in point first to ease extraction.
If the arrow has touched, you must cut away all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, and then cure the wound as it should be done.
And if the arrow hits the leg or foot or belly or bladder or side, and it is close to the surface, and you can cover it with your hand, then cup it;
and be careful not to cover the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and then cut the wound if necessary; and treat the wound until it heals.
The shape of the tongs used to treat arrows are similar to a bird's beak, and here is the shape:
There are many ways to do this: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
The shape of the feathered end is also like the feathers on an arrow, to catch and stick to the tip of the arrow, as shown in the illustration.
There are 31 types of veins from which one can bleed, and in the head there are 16 of them, namely: Two veins located behind the ears, called the "two hares"; and the two arteries which are in the two temples visible; and the veins that are in the lids of the eyes, which are called "aspirers"; and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the two windpipes which are in the neck; and the two veins that are above the lips at the mouth, and they are the veins that are called "augerich"; and the two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins which are commonly used for bleeding are five in each arm:La premiere qui est apeleee  «Veine de la Main» qui se prend ad le coté del coeur
The first which is called the "Vein of the Hand" which is taken from the side of the heart, one is the cephalic, and it is from the left side, and people call it the "vein of the head";La seconde qui est appellee  «Veine de l’avant-bras» and the means is called "fasting", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic, and the common people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side, and the common people call it  "vein of the belly", and it is above the sacrum, and it is the one that opens clearly above the scrotum.
And  the salvator is the vein between the little finger and ring finger, and has two branches:
and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is under the crook of the scrotum on the left side, and the second is at the ankle on the right side;and the third is: and the vein that is called "thigh", which is at the ankle of the other side;and all these three veins come together and form a single vein, which goes up along the inside of the leg:
and in the other leg there are three veins below them.
The bleeding of the veins that are behind the ears helps with old cataracts and with migraines;
and the quality of the bleeding is as I told you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then press on the neck of the patient with your thumb, until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places under the head; hold them there and where you feel the pulse below your finger, press inwards;
then take the lance and pierce below the vein right to the bone, then lift your hand up along the vein, and press and pierce through the skin and the vein for two fingers length, and let the blood out until you see enough;
then strain and bind it, until it is healed
and I have already spoken of incision and cautery in the first book.
The bleeding of the two arteries that are in the temples is useful for old migraines, and sore eyes, and constant tearing, and for the eyes of those with ague;
and the qualities of the bleeder are as I have said: and the patient should stretch his neck so that the two veins can be seen clearly; feel for the pulse in your groin, and then sign with a cross;
then lightly cut the vein at the top of your index finger, and insert the lance underneath, and open the vein at the top, and let the blood flow according to your need;
then loosen the bandage, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then place cotton on it; and then form a blister, and leave it until it is healed;
and we have spoken of them and their treatment and extraction in the beginning of the book.
The bleeding from the vein on the forehead is just as good for ancient diseases of the face, and for migraine, and redness.
And its quality is such that the patient turns his neck until the vein appears; Then take the instrument which is called "digging", of which here is the form:
And put the point on the vein, and press with your hand, or something else, and let the blood issue according to the amount you want; Then tie off the vein, and let it heal and sometimes use a wide flame.Et s’il est necessaire qu’on le remette a leu, tu resaisies la voinne;
Nevertheless, the flames should not be too fierce; and the blood flows sideways, for the bone is close by, and the flame may break it when it is thin.
The bloodletting of the two veins that are in the two temples helps with headaches, and eye problems, and facial diseases;
and the nature of their bloodletting is such that the patient turns his neck by twisting it with a bandage, as described earlier;
then bloodlet, and let the cut be deep, but the flame not too wide, for there is no bone there. And if the flame is thin, it may break;
then let the blood flow, as much as you need, and then bind it up tightly with a thread.
The bleeding of the vein in the nose is good for nosebleeds and sudden fainting spells, and for facial illnesses such as the migration of redness and bumps that appear on the face, especially when they are chronic.
And the quality of this bleeding is that you should squeeze your patient's neck, then pinch his nose with your left hand, and take a long, thin flame and insert it into the lip space between the two nostrils because the vein does not open well, and the blood will now begin to flow.
And do not go in too deeply, just let the blood flow according to your need, then ligature it for one night, because it is quickly restored.
Bleeding the two veins helps with throat constrictions, and with many illnesses, and with swelling, and with scurvy, and with herpes and ulcers.
and the qualities of the healing are such that the patient stretches his neck below one and then the other, as we have said;
and the master stands above the patient's head, and the patient lies on a bed, then the long vein is cut widely, then the blood is bled moderately, or as much as is necessary;
then do the same to the other vein, then loosen the bandage, and gently squeeze the veins, so that the patient is not strangled; and leave it until the morning, so that the wound heals.
of bleeding from the lips Bleeding from the veins of the lips above helps with cold in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and splitting of the lips, and toothache and pain in the jaw.
And the qualities of the healing are such that the patient sits in front of you, and stretches his neck as I have said;Et tu sieces sus li chief, et li malaides sus I siege ou la lit, puis saine la voinne dou lonc un poc largement, et trai dou sang tempreement ou tant com mestier est. Then do the same to the other vein, then loosen the bandage, and gently squeeze the veins, so that the patient is not strangled;And let it be until the morning, so that the wound heals.And the qualities of the healing are such that the patient sits in front of you, and stretches his neck as I have said;You stand above the head, and the patient sits or lies on the bed, then cut the long vein widely, and bleed the blood moderately, or as much as is necessary.Then turn around, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left,
Take therefore one of each, and if you do not know them and are in doubt, take the largest of each, and do likewise to the two veins above and below, for it is the same manner.
And the qualities of bleeding under the tongue: have the patient stick out his tongue and grip it from below with your left hand; then take a sharp knife and cut both sides of the frenulum, and cut straight through until you reach the muscle, and then pull the tongue down so that it hangs down. Then hold the tongue steady with your left hand and grasp the frenulum with your right hand, pulling it up towards the nose as far as you can, while cutting with a knife under the root of the tongue; when you have finished cutting, let go with your left hand and with your right pull it up towards the nose until it comes away. Then take a piece of wool and put it over the wound to stop the bleeding, and let him spit out the blood that has collected in his mouth. The bleeding of the veins below the tongue aids after the bleeding of the cephalic vein, and it is for the narrowing of the throat, and for diseases of the gullet, and for diseases of the mouth.
And the qualities of the bleeder are such that he should cut between his fingers in front of the sun, and raise his tongue, and look under each side for a black vein:
Bleed therefore one and then the other, and do not go too deep, for beneath are the arteries.
The veins of the neck, from which one bleeds commonly, are bled in two ways:
where it pricks at their base, hold them steady so they do not move until they grow. and are wide and narrow according to the width and tightness of the veins. The shape of the flame martin is very renowned, and it is broad as you can see.
And it is necessary to open flat veins filled with thick, visible blood, and that contain thick, troubled blood; and this is the shape of the flame olive:
and is more pointed and is for bleeding subtle veins, where there is subtle yellow blood.The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
The basilic vein, which is one of these veins, helps diseases that are below the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the belly;
and the surgeon must bleed it, and he must be careful of the artery that is underneath. And if it pierces the artery, and blood flows out, then it must be staunched, as I have said; and the flame should not be pierced, but cut like an onion.
And if the basil doesn't open clearly, then you must strain it and change to another. or you want a vein from him, or you heal in his place the vein in the arm: it opens clearly; and the cup to the flame extinguishes, as we have said.
And if you want to find the place of bleeding, then you must stretch out the arm, and touch the place until you feel the pulse; then mark the place with ink, and then tie up the arm, and cup the vein with the flame extinguished; and be careful not to pierce an artery when you see the place puffed up, for it is an artery: avoid it therefore.Et si li poulz ne poigne en la sain
And if the pulse does not beat in the bleeding, and you see it rise up as high as urine from a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is arterial blood: So you quickly, and put your finger over the wound for a long time, then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, which often happens. bind the arm and leave it like that, and don't move it, so that the patient does not feel any pain;
and be careful not to move it until the bleeding stops.
And if the wound won't stop bleeding and you don't have any medicine, cut open the artery where it is bleeding from the most, because that's where the blood is coming out from. Then stop the bleeding.
Take a piece of bark from an oak tree, split it in half, and use one half to bind the wound tightly until the next day.
If the bleeding stops, that's good;si li sans ne s’estainchie pas, adonques lie li bras, et If it doesn't stop, then bind the arm tightly, and if that doesn't work either, then use one of the powders that stops bleeding, as we said before.Et s’il adonques li sans ne vait point, et ne lie
and the bandages are not wrapped in various positions due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
The bleeding of the vein in the middle helps that it draws blood from the head above and the body below, because it is composed of basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said;
and the surgeon must be careful not to pierce too deeply and to find the nerve below, and if he pierces it too much the nerve will inflame and the wound will become infected and may not heal;
and this nerve often opens up, and if it does not open in some people due to its subtlety, you must treat it with the anaesthetic tool;et li nerf de la mainne apert a la coze de la piere, et si covient qu’on le saine del sainement de l’estrument, et s’il ne poait gueres estre sans estainche, il convient qu’il fie and avoid the nerve at your own risk.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, they cut it from the long one.
The surgery on the cephalic vein helps, drawing blood from the head, and helping the eyes.
And it is best to lance with an olive-wood or myrtle-wood point, for it is the safest of all veins, for there are no nerves or arteries beneath it. Nevertheless, one must seek the lightest vein, and not hurt anything if one misses the first time, and try again; and by chance, some people's veins swell up when they miss the first time, but it doesn't hurt them.Si est raide ou dur, si covient sainier as deux flasques, car li dur corps demere plus qu’on ne fait la voinne
The quality of the bloodletting depends on your thoughts.
The first thing you should know about lancing is that it is not done to cure illness, but rather to prevent diseases from coming;et por ce covient sainier la venie qui est plus pres li malaides, car par celle venie que le sang s’en va, il revient a la santeit.
and the bleeding should be done in one of the three veins that are in the neck: that is to say, cephalic, fast, and basilic; and one should bleed in the beginning of spring, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of repletion are apparent;
and one should bleed on the first day or third day, after two hours or three of the day.
The bleeding administered for illnesses has no set time, but whenever the need arises, day or night, at all times and in all seasons;
and one should not bleed children until they are 14 years old, nor women carrying a child before the fourth month up to the seventh month.Quant la maladie est en la teste et en la fumee de la teste; Nor should the very old be bled who have passed 60 years.
And when one wishes to be bled in any manner, one should first cleanse the bowels with a mild clyster if they are holding back much feces so that the veins do not draw harmful excesses from the intestines into the principal limbs;Car la fiens retentée, par son poids et sa pesance, attire li sang de les membres en bas vers la fumee de la teste:
He who is too fat from eating meat, or who is drunk, as much as he may be, nor a person with dropsy will not heal.
and if one is made better after colic, vomiting, diarrhea, and frequent intercourse with a woman, and from exertion, staying up late, and fasting, and that which comes from the use of weapons or from the body;
then subtly alter the humors, if they are thick, through food and drink and medicine, if you have the power to do so;
then enter the bath, if nothing else weakens him, to alter the blood, and heal from the vein around the third, as we have said;
and beware of exertion, piercing, and luxury, and similar things that day;
and be calm and cheerful, and let the healer stand higher than the one being healed, and rub the arm 2 or 3 times, then tighten the bandage above the wound, for if it is too loose or too tight, it will not work;
and then rub the area with your hands, until the veins swell, and you can feel them;
then moisten the cautery with a little old oil, then put your finger from your left hand onto that vein underneath where you want to cauterize, so that the vein does not burst and split when you touch it.
Because there are veins that flow like cords when cauterized, and some are filled with wind, so that when you touch them with the cautery, the cautery draws back and cannot open the vein, and thus it is with some. And if he opens the vein, but the wound is too narrow for that, then the cauterizer must be skilled in such matters.
And if the vein opens the first time, that is good;and if not, then you must touch it with a hot stone, as will now be said.Et si il ne fu if not, then begin again a little lower than the place where there is swelling.
And if the arm is swollen and the patient is in doubt, then leave it for a day or two, and do not bind the arm. by chance there will be pus-filled abscesses.
do not enter the bath, then begin the bleeding again if she wishes;
and if the vein is small, open it carefully and gently in that same vein directly;
and work on it gently, until the arm swells. for this often happens when the vein is small.
If you see the vein swollen, do not begin bleeding again, but put a little linseed oil on it, for it lightens the body of blood, and in this place the oil is medicine.
and thus administer the oil mixture to each wound that you treat veins with, to stop the flow of blood;
and this same mixture makes a poultice and bandage for them when one puts it on the spot; if subtly the blood escapes and is split when it is too thick.
And if there comes great abscesses, which often happen, especially when it is not treated before the opening of the vein is small, then hurry and put damp sponges in warm water on the spot and hold them for an hour;
and you must do this after the flow of blood from the vein, and if it remains on the spot for some days, there will be no harm; and if you see anything of aloe or myrrh mixed with juice of hellebore, or similar, put it on the spot.
And many times abscesses and appearances occur at the opening of the basilic vein:
put your hand over it, and if you find the place soft to the touch, then that appearance is bad. Therefore, avoid putting anything on it of what we have described, for perhaps it is close to an artery;
but make a dry poultice to harden the area, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
And treat each wound according to its quantity and the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it turns red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And for one who is full and bloated, and needs bloodletting, they should make a larger wound, and the flames should be wide;
and for the weak, do the opposite, and one must bleed them little by little often, and they should be bled by cutting diagonally, not by pricking;
and this bleeding method is safe from blood loss and nerve damage, and it is better than bleeding the long or the large vein.
And for those whose body needs bleeding, one should give them moist bread in pomegranate juice; If they are hot-tempered, let them eat moist bread with pomegranate juice three or four times before bleeding. And if of a cold temperament, let them eat moist bread with syrupy muzel, or with aromatic honey syrup and spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory, and perfumed syrup.
If he faints after losing a lot of blood, then he should drink warm broth and subtle scented syrup, and use the other remedies we mentioned in the chapter on syncope for opening a vein.
And if he wants to empty his arm and bleed again, then when he is weakened by a large bleeding, he should bleed a little at a time according to the amount of his continued strength.
And whoever wishes to open their arm after the first bleeding, and they have strong pulses, then heal for .vii. hours after the first bleeding, or after the new hour.
And whoever wishes to bleed from another part, then they should bleed on the second day or the third.
For they have a lot of blood inside their body which is hot and causes fever; if one must draw a great quantity, and widen the hole so that it is cut by the lance; then you must examine all the signs of healing, and place your hand over the pulse when it is healing, so that death does not come to the lance-wound, and this happens many times when the surgeon is negligent;
and it must not be, when you see the arm being released and blood emerging a second time, and the hole is closed, that you press directly on it; nor if it is crooked, that it extends the arm suddenly, for that would be bad;puis que li fies la cure a la fin, et demourra en leu de pameson, si li sainieres ne fu pas negl
then you must perform the treatment at the end, and let it remain in place until it heals a second time; but if the surgeon was negligent, or you may touch it with the tip of the flame, until the frozen blood at the wound's entrance melts, and place a little salt in water, and press gently on it.
And if the vein is swollen, leave it and don't constrict it until the abscess is drained.
And if it's necessary to let blood a second time, then bleed in the same vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Veins in the arm are bled in the area of the vein near the shoulder because it is closer to the heart.
And the manner of healing is for the patient to put his hand in hot water until the wart turns red;
then let it be cut slightly, so that the vein appears well, then heal it immediately from the inside, not from the wide nor the long;
and let the slit be wide, and let it be healed near the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot come out, then put the hand back in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough;
and if it is in summer, then do not put the hand back in hot water, for it is warmer in summer than in winter;
and the healing of this vein is safer than any other vein, that there is no artery or nerve.
The healing of the salvation of the right hand is for all diseases of the liver, and this is the way:
hold the hand, and pour hot water on it until the vein is swollen, if one can see it. and if it is cut across, and you bandage it firmly from all sides, then it will not be painful.
do not go too deep, because the nerves are completely stripped of flesh underneath; and then put the hand back in hot water if the blood has congealed in the wound, so that it can flow out.
And when you have treated the blood as necessary, put oil and silk on the vein to heal quickly, and do this for each vein.
The bleeding in the left hand is good for the disease of the mumps, and do everything just as I have told you about the right side.
The sauce of the sophia is good for all diseases that are under the body, such as diseases of the kidneys, and retention of fluids, and diseases of the intestines, and of the hips and old legs, and similar diseases.
And in terms of how to treat it, the patient should put his foot in hot water and rub the vein until it breaks, and tie something around the ankle joint; and if the vein is at the ankle, there will be many veins going up the foot.
So treat it in the widest vein, or at the ankle, whichever is easiest to access.Et si li voinne ne puet pere en aigue chaude, et se li sans est dedenz la plaie congele
And if you heal it on the foot, then beware of the nerves that are underneath, and heal it across as well as upwards by cutting.
and let the flames be extinguished.
And if the pus cannot come out, then put the foot into water, and let the vein drain well.
And if the healing fails the first time, then try again a second time on top of it, for the wound is salty;
do not doubt about nerve, as we have said, and thus do with the other foot similarly.
The site of the sciatic vein is at the ankle, and its remedy is for pain in the hip, when it is due to hot blood.
And the nature of its healing is that the patient goes into the bath, and twists above the ankle three times, for otherwise the vein does not open;
and if it opens, then heal it in all the ways that you can, and by cutting across; and it is better to cut than to burn, for the wound is safe, and it is very painful for many people.
and it is better to cut than to burn, for the wound is safe, and it is very painful for many people. And if you do not believe this, then test any vein that opens on the front or back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and be careful with the nerves.
And let blood flow until you see it, then untie the ligature and place cotton over it and compress it; it is now healed.
Cupping glasses are made from horns, or brass, or glass;
and cupping is performed according to two methods: either by cutting and drawing blood, or without cutting.
And this cupping without cutting is performed in two ways:ou par cautere, ou par foyre; either with fire, or without fire; it can be done with all fire, or without fire;
and cupping that is performed by cutting and drawing blood is done in 14 places on the body, of which one is entirely on the head; and the others are within the neck; and the others are on both sides of the neck; and the cupping glass under the chin; and the cupping glasses on the shoulders; and the cupping glass above the hips; and the cupping glasses within both arms; and the cupping glasses on both legs; and the cupping glasses on the ankles;
and bloodletting does not treat any vein, except for small veins that are scattered throughout the body, and because of this it does not weaken one in the slightest, as is done with phlebotomy; and it must not be administered, nor at any heat or fever, in any disease that comes from fullness, until the whole body is emptied.
And if, due to necessity or habit, bloodletting must be done, then we do it every hour at the beginning and end of the month, and throughout all times of the year.Et si li corps n’est vuidiez par ventose, on ne le doit mie ventoser en tel tens, si com qu’il soit vuidiez;
because there are those who, when they need to fart, feel great pressure.
and some experience congestion and redness in their face, head, and neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and some bleed from their mouth, have a swollen tongue, and taste blood; and some dream, and see through the night terrible things and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, especially if it is during the month, we command them to fast after 3 hours of the day.
The bleeding from the nose helps the headache ... that comes to the eyes, and it is not good for this to happen after the evacuation of the whole body;
and this venting is in the place of bleeding from the head, and it is not good for those who are of a cold complexion to do it, or who have a catarrh, because it does them great harm;et si convient qu’il soit aprés le sainie de la Cephalique;
and for this reason the elderly should not use it, nor those with serious illnesses.
And those who heal often become blind, and because of this, one must place the cupping glass a little lower down due to the fear of blindness.
Ventilation is in the neck, for the relief of headache and toothache, and for constriction of the chest, and for splitting of the channel of the stomach, and for all kinds of swelling and bloating.
and it should not be applied too strongly, as if it holds too tightly, it causes injury to the stomach and heart.
Ventilation at the second rib of the neck helps with headaches, and eye pain and inflammation, and constriction, and dental pain, and is in the place for relieving toothache.
and you must instruct the operator to express his hand while putting it on, so that he does not squeeze the artery and cause bleeding.
Windings underneath the chin help with mouth diseases, and gum decay, and similar illnesses that occur in the mouth; and cause suppuration between the two lips.
Ventilation of the armpits is good for diseases that come from heat and fullness.
Windings on the sides help as much as three veins in the arm, because they attract blood from those large veins;
and instruct the surgeon not to go too deep, because the area is bare of flesh and contains nerves and arteries underneath;
The cupping glass placed on the buttocks helps with hemorrhoids and diseases underneath, and it should be large, made of copper, and good at drawing; And if it were subtle, it would break; and it makes great wounds.
Cupping glasses on the legs heal very well, because they attract blood from the whole body, and help with long-standing pains in the kidneys, and the womb, and the bladder, and bring back period flow;
and are located in the two sockets, and in the two ankles, and nevertheless they weaken the body after long use, and cause paralysis in many ways.
The way to apply the cupping glass is that you first place it empty, and suck gently, and place it firmly, and move it evenly, and do not stop doing so until you see the area red and swollen, and the color of blood appears.
Then heat it, and put on the cupping glasses again, taking care to observe the condition of the body, as there are those with very thin skin and clear pores. It is necessary to pierce only once, and it is necessary to make wide wounds, and a little deep;and if the blood does not come well, heat again. and suck gently.If the blood does not come well, heat again.Et s
And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to pierce twice:first you make a wound wide and a little deep, and when the blood comes, you pier the first time to open the path of thick blood.
And if the blood is very thick, then it is necessary to pierce a third time;
and when we want to draw little by little, we only do it once. And if we want a lot of blood, we start over again often;
and if the blood is thick, we pierce deeply and the veins are pierced suddenly, and it is necessary for those who have thick and tough skin, and who have narrow pores, that you anoint the places where the leeches will be placed with an astringent oil and a dissolving oil: if it is in the head, use violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or squash seed oil;
and if it is in the liver, use watercress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or similar.
And if the swelling is large and cold, take oil of amaranth, or of balsamite, or aniseed oil, and similar oils.
And if those to whom one heals have soft flesh and wide pores, no oil should be put on them, but they should be washed after cupping with rosewater, or cold water, or mulberry water, or pumpkin water, or porcelain water, or similar.
And those who have a lot of moisture, if they rise from garlic, or myrrh water, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have large swollen areas rise from old wine, or from pure water, or from a decotion of anise or camomile, or other similar things;
and it is not appropriate to bleed by cupping before the bath or in the bath itself, but one or two hours after the bath.
and he should not sleep after cupping, and it is necessary for him to be careful, both when he is being cupped and when he has been cupped.
And beware if the person being bled is choleric, and if the blood is too thin and inflamed; then he should eat cool things like pomegranates, endives, lettuce with garlic, and similar things; and drink mead, and wine mixed with vinegar, and moist foods.
and drink mead, and wine mixed with vinegar, and moist foods. And those of a cold complexion should eat honey syrup, and moderate old wine, and drink mead, and drink mead, and eat small birds and pigeons;
and on the day he is bled, he must drink more than eat.
and it is necessary to give some men garlic or musk before or after bleeding to strengthen the main organs; and dilute the wine, but those who are hot-tempered should not drink it.
The ventouses that are used without burning are those that are placed over the liver, and the mumps, and the scurvy, and over the belly, the armpits, the thighs, and the groin, because these members cannot bear to be burned, and it is only done to draw blood from one member into another, as we put them on breasts when babies suckle.
to remove the viscosity that is in a member, just like we put ventouses over the belly and armpit to reduce the swelling of the member.
and removes the pain when there is a stone or tumor, and by its attractive power it removes the tumor or pushes the stone from its place.
and similarly, when placed on the liver and on the abdomen when there is retained wind, and these cupping glasses are administered empty in order to suck only slightly. and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water in which suitable herbs have been boiled; in such cases the water is used only once.
The shape of the cup to be administered with fire is as follows:
It is two fingers wide and half a palm deep, and on the side near the middle it has a small hole, just big enough to push through a needle; it should be made of brass, smooth in front so as not to hurt the patient when placed on the body.
In the middle it has a cross-bar of brass or iron, to hold a candle, and they come in various sizes according to the sickness and age of those who use them. They can be large or small.
Because children's bellows are different from adults', and thin people's from fat ones.
And one should thus place this bellows on the limb:
take the candle of wax or the linen, and place it inside the bellows through the tube which is inside the bellows, so that the flame is at the bottom of the bellows and does not burn the patient;
and then place it on the limb, and your fingers should be on the hole that we have mentioned, so that when one wishes, the vapor goes out, and then remove the bellows;
and use the linen just as before, and repeat it often if you need to.
The bellows which is used for pleurisy and all wounds has no tube or hole, but is placed on the limb only when it is full of water.
and this is how you do it:
Leeches are not applied except in parts where cups cannot be placed due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas; and on bare flesh, such as ears or nose, and other similar areas;
and the quality of their use is such that when you apply leeches that are in clean, still water without any odor, they will attach themselves;
and place them in fresh water for as long as they are accustomed to it and have nothing in their bellies; then cleanse the vein and apply cups, then rub the limb until it turns red, and place the leeches on top;
and when they are full and begin to bite, if it is a place where cups can be applied, then do so, for it is much better.
If not, then raise the area with ash, and then with water, very well, and then squeeze it out.
and if the bites are too close to the body of the snake, then soak a linen cloth in cold water and place it over the bite until the swelling goes down.
and if there are many bites, then apply ground vitriol, or gall, and similar things, until the swelling goes down.
or you can place half-peeled beans on the bite, and leave them until they turn green, this will stop the swelling immediately.
and if you need more of it, catch other snakes.
And if the snakes don't want to be caught, then rub the wound with fresh blood, or stab it with a needle until the venom comes out, and then place them over the bite. As soon as they smell the blood, they will start to lick it;
and when you see them defecating, powder some aloe and salt, or ashes, over a little, and they will stop immediately.
Here begins the book of fractures This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine and is for the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Know, dear son, that the fools mock this chapter, which they have never seen in any ancient book or letter.
And for this reason the science is strange in our land, for I never found anyone good at it;
and know nothing about it, except through the science of ancient books, and I have studied it so much that I have gained knowledge through it, and through experimentation, and through my own experience;
and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained in it, and have abbreviated it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, as I have done in the two chapters before.
Therefore, we should say in the prologue to this book that the subjects of the discussion and the chapters in which the sage places his understanding, and dwells upon the truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or bruising affects someone, you should hurry to treat the patient from one side and the other, if nothing holds them back, as with weakness of body, or pregnancy, or old age; or if the weather is very hot, or too cold;
and eat cool foods, that is to say, cold games, and pheasant and rabbit meat, and do not drink any wine, nor eat any fatty foods, and do not fill yourself too much with food that fills the veins with blood, until you have suspected a hot abscess or spreading of matter in the limb;
if the illness returns to its first state of governance which it has used.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, one must feed the patient foods that promote swelling and viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, testes, pigs' feet, pig's belly, offal, fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. Because with more swelling the break will be closed more quickly.
And know that broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot heal well or unite according to their nature due to the dryness of the members, nor those that are also too tender, like the bones of young children;
but it does not matter, reset over the broken bone the large tendons that stretch and join the limb together, as much as it enforced like it was before; and do not give up on his work, and for this reason one should nourish with large amounts of food, as we have said.
And know that fractures come in many forms and manners.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg; and I will tell you in this chapter about all types of fractures. For there is a fracture which goes to the bone, and another in puncturing, like the tip of a feather for writing.
For there is a fracture which goes to the bone, and another in puncturing, like the tip of a feather for writing. And if there is a break with a wound, and a break all over a small split.
And in every way it has its own method and tool for restoration according to the memory that comes to mind;
and the fracture of the bone is known by its twisting, and it appears well on the outside, and sounds hollow when pressed with the hand;
and when there is no twisting nor any sound when touched, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture.
but it can still have twisting, or splitting, or a small fracture.Et si li chiés est desaloiez, ou la cuisse, et ne puet demorer en son leu por cause You must not move it by hand, but apply the medicines that follow, and then hold it firmly but gently.
And know that the fracture that goes into the bone, and the two parts are separated, they must now be set evenly, so that abscesses do not form.
And if a hot abscess forms, he should leave it for one day, until the abscess is soothed.
Then he sets it even as quickly and gently as possible, and know that the restoration of this one is easier than the restoration of that one where there is a break.
Then he binds it, as appropriate, afterwards.
And if there is a break in the bone, if it is in two parts, whether it is the hand or foot, or the arm, or a small limb, with two strings, or one string and the hand;
And he sets the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the limb are set right, then with all his skill, he brings the additions back into their places as he can, and guards against causing the patient injury or pain through his work.
and adjust both heads of the bone according to the best shapes.
And feel it by hand if it doesn't seem right:
if you dress it nicely and don't pull or press too hard as those who bring about hot abscesses and constriction in the limb through their work, as we have seen many times.
And when the joint is healed, instruct the patient to not move it, not while waking, sleeping, turning, or in any other way; and be careful that the limb is secure so that he feels no pain.Si li membres sent douleur de lor chiés des os ou de lor costes et les poingनत, si leve tant com il For when he feels no pain, then it is not healed, and you should put it in such a position that he feels no pain;Si li membres est trop mal figurez ou trop desaloiez, si doit on le rimetre en tel ovraige qu’il soit bellement dreit et si covient le res
and be careful that the limb is secure so that he feels no pain.Si li membres sent douleur de lor chiés des os ou de lor costes et les poingनत, si leve tant com il For when he feels no pain, then it is not healed, and you should put it in such a position that he feels no pain;Si li membres est trop mal figurez ou trop desaloiez, si doit on le rimetre en tel ovraige qu’il soit bellement dreit et si covient le res and make sure it is put back straight so that no crookedness comes to it when it is restored.
and the qualities of the broken member are according to what I tell you.
You should know that broken members are diverse in smallness and size and shape.
For there are small members like arms and fingers and similar things: one must wrap them in soft and thin linen; and those that are large, like thigh and leg:
one must wrap them in a wide and firm bandage, for the wide bandages embrace the whole large member and constrict it evenly all around so that there is no swelling;
then tie light sponges around it, three or four times according to the member, and press your hand on all the bandage, then go above the dislocation and press less, so that the dislocation moves a little away from the dislocation;
and soften the ligament little by little, until you grip a large part of the healthy area, then take another ligament, and turn back around on the broken area;
then go to the part under the break, and grip it gently, not too hard or too softly, as we have said in the first hour above;
then put between the ligaments pieces of linen or rags, until they are all even, then tie it all above with the bandage, and then put your splints on well, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, put something hot that soothes the abscess on top, and let it be like that for several days;
then grip the splints and have them be of half a palm width made from a branch of a willow tree, or from a palm frond, and have them be in this shape:
but one must ensure that the star that is placed on the fracture is a little larger and wider than the others;
and as long as it is convenient for the limb, according to its smallness or بزرگی؛ then press on the stars as you did at the first time, then tie a thread over them, just like you did at the first time on the fracture; the tighter it is, the better; if it's too tight, then loosen it a little;si li membres ne se mue
the member must not move, and one should use a thin thread that is not too thick nor too thin, and it should be made of soft flax;
because if the threads are thick, as I have seen fools make their laces with twisted cords, and this is a great error, for the lace cannot be even if it is too thin, and there should not be less than two fingers of space between each star.
And if the patient is weak after the stretching in their healthy arms, then place beneath them a pad of linen or other soft cloth so that they do not hurt themselves.
When the wound is accompanied by a fracture and the bone is broken, I will describe the treatment for it later.
And know that one should not dislocate all the broken limbs on the first day. For when a member is swollen, you should not put a splint on it for more than five or seven days, or longer depending on the security of the hot abscess.
And here is the manner of ancient plasters to restore fractures, dislocations and twists:
And you should take flour that is kept on the walls of the mill, and cook it with plenty of egg, and apply this mixture, neither too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common manner of the plaster restoring fractures in various conditions, especially in women and small children, because it is not too hot or too cold.
Another method of plaster restoring fractures, dislocations and twists:Prend de l’huile d’olives clere et fine, et en faiz une pate avec farine dou molin, et que la Take clear and fine olive oil, and make a paste with flour from the mill, and take three barleycorns and ladani and inula and asafetida and gum arabic and mastic, each 10; myrrh and aloe, each 5 drams; aloe wood VIIII drams; grind them into powder and mix with egg yolk; if the person's complexion is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition and helps to set broken bones and heals many people.
Another way of making a plaster that helps with twisting injuries: Take mugwort and bee's wax, each 1/5 ounce; myrrh and aloe, each 3 drachms; acacia gum 2 drachms; armenian bole 1/5 ounce, and grind well, and simmer with water or egg white, and administer it.
Another recipe for an ointment for joints and bones displaced from their sockets, which relieves pain, shrinks the swelling, and promotes healing of broken bones:Pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; Take new lamb's wool, and boil it in vinegar and oil, and apply it to the affected area.
This plaster does not restore, but it is good for soothing hot abscesses and relieving pain.
Another recipe for an ointment which restores broken bones:Pren vismalve et mugat, ana X З.; Take bee's wax and mugwort, each 1/5 ounce; take dried fig leaves and ground ivy leaves, and grind them together to make an ointment.
Another way to make an ointment for the healing of broken bones and to reduce inflammation from an abscess: take equal parts honey, vinegar, and lard; boil them together and apply it to the affected area. Take equal parts of the root of viscum album, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, and wheat flour.
Grind the ingredients together and mix with wine. If the member is hot, mix with coriander water or water and apply it.
Another way of making a plaster stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb. Take equal parts of the roots of viscum album, flax seeds, borage, melilot, and sanicle, as well as violet and chamomile flowers.Grind them together and mix with wine. If the member is hot, mix with coriander water or water and apply it. Grind them together and mix with salt water, fresh water, or wine, depending on the temperature of the member and its condition. If the member is hot, mix with coriander water or water and apply it.Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’
Hypocras writes in his book that one should not put anything on a broken member to restore it other than a cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and that it should be between soft and too hard.
And it seems that Galen says one should put on the broken member, to restore, dry things a little warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the Take the beards and hair of humans, or bird feathers, and viscacha fur, all equally, and grind them up to make a poultice which you apply to it.
Then loosen it a little later, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain or move the bone out of place. if you don't loosen it by hand after a few days. And if pain comes to the area, or itching, with rest or swelling, hurry and loosen it, and remove the poultice immediately;
and take a light cloth, and a sponge from the sea, moistened in water, and apply it to the area until the itching stops and the pain is soothed; then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply lamb's wool dipped in water or rose oil, and lay it on a mat, until you are sure there is no hot abscess;
and relieve the inflammation of the member, and remove the pain, then restart the subtle ligature, and a little ointment, and do not constrict as strongly as before; and gently until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen, and you need ointment and binding, then restart it in the same way as before.Et se li maux sont jai osté dou tout, et li membra sont jai sane, si ne fitz mie ren de la lieure ne de l’emplaustre; mes s’il est encores dolor, et enfleure, et roujor, si fitz ren come tu a fait avant.
And if nothing comes of what we have said to the member, do not disentangle it until after 3 or 4 or 5 or 7 days. And sometimes leave it for 20 days, according to what one sees, until the fracture is healed and the flesh approaches;
then restrain it more than before, and increase its meat, as I said before.
And if you see the place drier than necessary, know that healing cannot come; Therefore rise it with warm water, every time you disentangle it, and every third day, and loosen the ligature a little;
through this work therefore shorten the limbs, and gently mend that which fools destroy, who restore the limb crookedly:
it is cruel, and those who work it are fearful, and I see nothing else but wearying oneself and doing it properly.
There are many kinds of fractures, and various shapes, and the causes are distinct;
for there are fractures that are made by the impact of a sword, and the collar bone is broken all the way to the hyoid bone which is below the collar bone, as a neck or a pole does; and because of this that kind of fracture is called "neck-fracture".
Or the sword strikes the bone from above without piercing it, and this kind of fracture is called  "complete";
and the wound of these two fractures are large or small.
And if there is a deep impact, or a split or blow from a stone, or falling on stone, or other similar occurrences.The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
And if it has a penetrating fracture which approaches the membrane that is below the bone, or it is above the bone, and this wound is large or small.
And if there is a wound that is lodged in the bone as subtly as a hair, and the split is small, and for this reason this fracture is called "capillary";
and if the wound is made by stone or by falling, or in a similar way, and it drives the piece of bone down, and the place is split like the way that blacksmiths split kettles when they forge them; if the stone goes inside.
And this happens more often to those who have moist bones at the top, like the head of a child;
and it happens with all these types of fractures that small pieces are dislocated like tiles; and I will speak about it in its place.
And we know all kinds of fractures by the distraction upon them and the examination at night, and by the foul smell that is upon it.
The hairline fracture is known by this: when one has exposed the bone and rubs it, the black crack appears.
In the treatment of fractures, take care of the accidents of illness, and if you see no evil accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of consciousness, and extension, and palpitations, and fever, and eyes popping out and turning red, and others similar in various dispositions, then it cannot heal without a doubt.
And if you do not see a miraculous event, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when the newborn comes to you first, and it is in winter, then you should remove the foreskin before the fourteenth day that you can.
And if it is in the spring, then you should hurry to remove the foreskin before the seventh day so that the tissue underneath the foreskin does not decay and cause the problems we have described.
And if the fracture of the bone reaches just up to the membrane that covers the brain, then you must split the fractured part thus:
and you must grab the head of the patient, and expose the bone in all ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound more gently than you can, and if bleeding occurs when exposing the bone, or a pus-filled abscess, treat it with what is appropriate, and you must fill the area with soft rags soaked in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the pus-filled abscess is soothed, and be sure that there is no more bleeding; then begin around the bone to remove it, and this can be done in two ways:
one way is to cut closely in front, and that is the shape:
And then put on another bandage larger than the first.
And the second way is to have many different cuts, some narrow and some wide, and they should be pointed, and made of steel;
and work gently so you do not injure the head.
And if the bone is thick and hard, you should pierce around it, so that you administer trepanning with borers, not so deep that it penetrates through to the brain case, and there should be a rim or ring on top of the tip, preventing the tip from penetrating beyond the bone;
and you should have several of these, so that each one comes into its place in the thickness of the bone, so that you have borers for all parts of the skull;
and these are the forms of the three types of borers:
The quality for piercing around a broken bone is that you place the borer on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced;
then move the borer elsewhere a little later, and do this all around. Then use chisels to cut away the space between the perforations, doing this most skillfully and gently, as we have said, until you can pull out the bone with your hand or with one of the tools you have, like tweezers;
and make sure you do not touch the brain or the sinus.
And when you have pierced the bone and made an incision, it is appropriate that you resect the membrane which is attached to the bone with some other tool resembling a scalpel, but it should be more delicate and thinner than the other scalpel;
and if it is sticking to any small bones or any scales, gently remove them with the instrument; then treat the wound as we have described earlier.
Another method of treatment which is safer, according to Galen, is as follows: and he praises it highly, and it is his word we are quoting. First, you must uncover a part of the bone, where the fracture is open and moving; then, when you have uncovered that part, place underneath it the head of this lens-shaped instrument, which has a curved shape.
And it does not cut from one side only but has a dual cutting edge, so that the blade is facing the bone;
then strike gently with a small hammer all around the bone, taking care not to hit the membrane underneath.
If it is attached to the bone, gently loosen it, because bones can be loosened without harm, and without fear.
And if the break in the bone does not go all the way through to the membrane, and the bone is only cut slightly on top, with small pieces, then you should re-examine that roughness, and remove the scales with a sharp rasp, of which you must have several quantities, to use in each place the most suitable one according to the work and the shape of the break.
First use the coarse rasps, then the finer ones, and do not stop until it is smooth.
For each of the other hairline fractures and subtle breaks, you should treat them according to their location;
and this is not something that can be learned by someone who has dedicated themselves to this craft.
And if the sinus is exposed, you should dampen a linen cloth according to the size of the wound, moisten it in rose oil, and place it over the wound; then take another cloth doubled over two or three times, moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth; and do this as gently as you can so that you do not burden the ulcer, then apply it above with another piece of linen and do not pull tighter than it holds the wound.
and leave it like that for a day or two until the abscesses are soothed, then remove it and apply remedies such as roots of lilies, and flour of beans, and incense powder, and aristology, and similar things;
and make a powder from these things and put it on the wound, then apply remedies from moon-worshippers without biting;
and watch that the wound is clean so that you do not leave any of the ointment or any dirt on it, for when dirt gathers on the brain's membrane and hardens, great harm comes to the patient.
for when one applies something biting to an ulcer, it bites from above. Take care then, if any bad accident comes to the patient, as we have said, without a doubt.
And if discoloration does not go away except through the medicine that one has put on it, because of its power, you must take a part of honey, and three parts rose oil, and apply it to the ulcer. Then heal it in the way that is appropriate, until it is healed.
Know that sometimes both sides of the jaw are broken, or just one side, because there are two bones. If both sides are broken, they can be reset with a splint so they heal straight and even; if only one is broken, it must be set by itself, as will now be described.
The lower part is cartilaginous and does not break unless forced or twisted, then it heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, you must put your little finger or a tool into the jaw, and place the break inside your index finger, and hold it steady with your thumb, until the jaw returns to its natural shape. This may take several days. and do this gently, and be sure that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the fracture is above the elbow and the bone cannot be put in place, then you should place it evenly at the top of a fairly thick rod.
And if there is a fracture in two parts, do the same, and be quick to restore the first day, if you can;
if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscesses are healed, then put on the top of the fracture tenting with linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you put the other one elsewhere, if there is a fracture there; and let the tents be so thick that they fill the holes of the bone.Et li chief dou neis est si conme une gie de fer, ou une piece d’armure, ou
And some restorers say that one must wet the bandages with butter, and change them every day. And the top of the bone is like a piece of iron or armor, or it does not seem to me that this is good, but it should be moistened with egg white and flour ground fine; then let the tent remain, until the bone is set, and the cartilage hardened.
And sometimes they put in goose feathers instead of tents, and around it a thin cloth, and the break is held, and the patient breathes through it; or do what you want.
And if there are abscesses on the nose while you are doing this, put cerotic ointment or cotton soaked in rose oil, or in a pouch of diaquilone.
And if a boil comes, put on a plaster made of flour of wheat bran, and incense powder, cooked with egg white, then put on light tow, but do not tie it tightly;
and if the fracture of the nose is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then extract it with appropriate instruments, then cut the wound, and treat it with warm things, healing, as with plasters and ointments appropriate to such;
and if there is no wound within the nose, then treat it with tents, and put in splints of lead, until it is healed.
When the jaw is fully dislocated and there is no external wound, and only the joint is dislocated, not broken in two where the corbel sits inside, then it is easily recognized.
If the fracture is on the right side, you must place your index finger into the mouth of the patient. And if the fracture is in the left jaw, then insert your index finger from your right hand and gently push into the fracture and ease it with the other hand, making sure it is even.
And if the joint of the jaw is displaced to one side, you should administer an extension of one part, until it is even.
And if there is movement of the teeth, or a fracture, then they should be restrained with a wire of gold or silver or silk, then place cerate on the broken jaw and over it a double drape. And place upon the drape a heavy, well-made stele or a piece of leather the same size, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it on as tightly as you can, and instruct the patient to rest and eat light foods.
And if you see that it is changing shape, then loosen it on the third day, and then reset it to its proper position.Et si tu dises que li membres sont trop tiens, si deslie la nuit, et le matien remise a point, et comande a malaide qu’il ne se mueze point tant qu’il soit and apply a poultice made of powdered eggs or flour mixed with water after removing the cerote.
and if the poultice doesn't help and the condition of the patient doesn't improve, leave it until the wound heals. often, it heals within three weeks.
And if hot abscesses come, then administer what we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, examine whether any piece of bone has been dislodged; and remove it with suitable instruments.
And if the wound is narrow, widen it with flames according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces, and there remains none, then close the wound, if it is wide, and place upon it suitable poultices to promote healing, until it is cured.
The fracture often occurs in front of the shoulder in three ways:
one where it is broken and dislocated in two places, with pieces, and is the easiest to heal;
or one where there is a break with an open wound.
And the procedure is when the fracture does not have an open wound: you need two assistants so that one can hold the shoulder where the fracture is; and the others stretch their necks towards the wound;
then even out the fracture with your fingers so that it is smooth and has no bumps or bumps.
And if you need to extend further, place a round piece of cloth or woolen cloth under the patient's shoulder, as thick as necessary; and gently pull on the collarbone, while pressing the round piece of cloth with your hand to smooth out the fracture, as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the shoulder out of joint because it is dislocated, then the patient should lie on his back, and place under the shoulder a small pillow, and the assistant should press the shoulder down, until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
Then gently feel the fracture with your fingers, and if you find it broken, you must split it open;
and gently pull out the pieces, and if the bone cannot be joined due to any protrusion, then cut it off at one of the incisions you made; but place this instrument under the collarbone to protect the windpipe:
and resembles a spoon, and is not sharp-edged, and is as wide as it should be, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work;
and it has two heads, as you can see, and one is wide and the other narrow, as is the opening of the wound that you made when you treated the bones;
and when you are sure of a hot abscess, cut the wound, and if the opening is small, or if you doubt about a hot abscess, dress the wound with bandages and poultices, according to its size.
And if a hot abscess comes out, moisten a bandage in rose oil and garlic and wine, and place it on top.
The dislocation of the bone, when there is no wound or incision, is to put on the bone the plaster made from mill-dust and egg white, and place light bandages over it, and put a pillow under the shoulder, if necessary; take a very large bandage, one palm wide, then place double draping over sponges, and anoint it; take a thin board three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage so that the end of the bandage hangs down; place the board over the break, and wrap the bandage around the neck, and under the healthy armpit, and under the sick armpit; and reset it from each side, and when you see that the limb holds the break correctly, and you see clearly that the board does not move over the broken bone, then release it every day, and when the ligature slackens, restrain it again;
and make the patient lie on his back, and when he sleeps, place a small pillow under the armpit to lift the shoulder up; if you ease the dislocation of the shoulder by aligning it, or tie his arm to his neck, and do not untie him if no evil accident happens until 20 days have passed;
then begin the poultice again if you see that he still needs it, and keep doing this until he is healed;
and she is healed within 28 days in some men.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
It can happen that the shoulder dislocates or breaks suddenly without any violence, and is not known until it is touched;
then you should set it according to the shape of the dislocation, and reset it in every way you can according to its natural form;
then place powder from the mill with egg white, and light bandages, and over this a double layer of cloth; then place a wide and thin pillow on top, slightly wider than the shoulder, and if there is a indentation beneath the pillow anywhere on the shoulder, fill that indentation with a wad of linen, so that the pillow lies flat.
then tightly bind it all with a large bandage, so that the pillow doesn't move from its place, and check the binding every day.
and whenever it softens, bind it tightly again and put the pillow back in its place if it has moved out of position, and let the patient lie on his side.
The shoulder is restored within 20 or 25 days.
And when this number of days is complete, then loosen it, and be sure, for it isn't an easy thing for the bone to move back into place.
And if a piece of the bone protrudes forward and not underneath the heart, pierce and open the bone, and do what we have said about the fracture of the collarbone to soothe the hot abscess.
of the fracture of the foot
The bone in the middle sometimes gets broken, but that happens rarely; but it often breaks apart during treatment.
When it is broken in the middle, it inclines downward, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks strength, and becomes dizzy, and sometimes vomits blood, and the hair falls out from the broken bone, and he feels much better.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, and he puts a pillow between his shoulders, then presses his shoulders, and brings together the sides of the two ribs with his hands, and carefully aligns them equally in all ways that he can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be;
then he applies poultices and compresses made of linen onto the broken bone, using a subtle amount of salt or other light material, and wraps it in a cloth, tying it onto the broken bone so that it does not move; then he turns the ligament around to the back, and tightens it gently, and checks every hour how loose it is, and if it softens, then he tightens it;
and if it needs to be loosened due to corrosion or itching that has come to the area, or pain or an abscess, then be quick and loosen it, remove the poultice, and address what has come about in ways of treatment;
then reset the dislocation and hold it until it heals.
about the breaking of ribs:
You should know that rib fractures only occur in the large ribs near the back, and in the front, and they only bend because they are slippery. and the patient feels pain in the area as you press.
And the treatment is that you reset the break as it should be. Then apply the ointment and bind it with a bandage, if necessary.
And if the rib fracture is inward-sloping, the patient feels great pain and a piercing sensation, as with pneumonia, because the bone punctures the lung. and it hurts when pressed, and the patient feels shortness of breath and vomits a great quantity of blood, which is a serious illness, and the ancients considered it dangerous.
And if there are those who say that one should administer foods that swell the belly, in order to push the fracture outward.
We do not agree that hot poultices should be applied if they have not already been used. And if it has come, then heal it.
And some say that one should apply cupping glasses to the area to suck out the bad blood, and that makes sense. However, there is a doubt that the cupping glass draws out the excess fluids due to the weakness of the body.Et si le ventouse ne peut etre, metes sor le leu un pons d’espeine, ou d’osier, qu’il fust fort et as pre
And some say that one must cover the affected area with moist woolen cloth soaked in warm oil, and place tenting between the ribs to apply pressure evenly all around, then it is treated with the treatment of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.Et autrui dit que l’on doit covrir li leu de lainne seche et de velle, et mettre oile chaut sus li leu; puis soit curez de la cure d’esguarison, et de medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot endure due to the bone pushing against the lining, and there is doubt about the patient, then one should split it open at the site of the broken rib, and one should place an instrument underneath to push out the pleural fluid.
Then one should cut the bone, and gently pull it out, and then sew up the two lips of the wound if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it is healed.
And if a hot abscess comes, one should place wet rags soaked in rose oil on top of the site, and
treat the area around where the abscess should be, and let the patient lie carefully on their side where it is, until it is healed.
and also at the spine of the back.
And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, take note if his hands become soft and swollen and numb, and he cannot move or straighten them, and when you prick him with a needle, he does not feel it.
Know that it is deadly in many cases, and if he becomes mute and can feel nothing when you dislocate and prick him, know that the joint of the bone is safe, and that the illness is cured if treatment is applied.
And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you want to know whether it is healthy or not, take note if the feet are swollen, and if the symptoms are in the limbs, and on the back, wind and defecation without intention;
and when he is lying on his stomach, there is defecation without intention.Si li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et s’il a dolour sus son ventre, et sotilité en ses piez, et sotil And when he is lying on his back and wants to sit up, he cannot. If the symptoms are in the limbs, and he has pain in his stomach, and weakness in his feet, and weakness if he does not labor in his healing.S’il sotile en ses piez et sotilité en son ventre
And if this does not happen to him, then the case is lighter.
And the treatment is that you should examine whether there is a hot abscess, and then put rosemary oil or chicken egg yolk on the spine until it is soothed;
then place upon it one of the comforting and drying plasters, and tie it on with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest. and not to sleep on the painful part until he is healed.
And if any bone protrudes, it must be covered with a bandage; and if there is an open wound, then the two lips of the wound must be sutured together with thread, and then treated with ointment on a bandage until it heals;
and if the shoulder of the bone is broken, which is called the 'shoulder blade', put your left hand's thumb into your mouth, and place it equally in your other hand to your power, then apply the plaster and bandage it up, if you need to;
then tighten it, and if there is a bone protruding, push it back in, take out the bone, and treat the wound until it is healed.
of the fracture of the hip bone
Then it happens that the bones of the hip are broken, and if it happens, then there is a little lessening in the head. and they go long, and decline to the sides, and bring pain to the patient at the site, and piercing, and swelling in what is broken.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand above it, as long as you are on the break; and know which is the break and its shape;
and if the break is only in the head, then put it equal to that break, so that it is in its natural shape.Et s’il brise en la costure et en la fente, si leve li chiés soulement, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil;
And if the break is long, or it declines inward, then let the patient lie on his belly, so that the restoration of that break may be prepared for him.Et se ele est dou lonc et decline au pardedens, si met ele a figure de croisse; et li restauration de cele brisure est que tu le tiens sus, et qu’ele ne se mueve pas. And when you have made it equal, then put on the plaster, then put on a staff or kerchief, and constrict the break so that it does not move;
and apply the cautery under the ribs, so that the hair grows evenly. Instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
And if an abscess comes out, do not touch it until the painful abscess is relieved, and put on what we have described before; then return to the restoration, and tighten it as it should be, if there is no bad event;
of the dislocation of the shoulder
The shoulder joint is what is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, and if it is dislocated, it should be restored according to one of two methods:Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
one of which is to take a thin staff, smooth and of middle thickness, according to this shape:Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’
And take two ropes and tie them together, and hang the patient from above, and seat him on a chair;
then let him swing his broken arm down to the floor, and have a beam of wood inserted in it, then hang him from some heavy object so that he is stretched downward;
then have the helpers adjust the break to be even with his hands together, so that the break is set correctly.
And the other way is that one pins the patient to his hat, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands two ministers, one of whom presses what is on top of the fracture with his hands, and the other pulls from underneath to the end of the bond, and each stretches his part.
And if you want the extraction to be more forceful, then compress beneath the fracture and above it, and extend each of the ministers to his part.
And if the break is near the head of the shoulder, then you should place one rope in front under the armpit, and the other towards the neck, under the break;
and likewise if the break is towards the neck, then one rope should be placed lightly and gently, without effort, so that the break is set straight and on its proper place;Et se il ne voulent li chief de l’espaule demourer en son leu, si mets I liien legierement a lor col, et le remescheve vers la terre;
then make the cut even, as it should be, and hold it steady, if no abscess forms there.
And if an abscess forms there, do not open it for seven days, but put soft lamb's wool soaked in arse and rose oil on it until the abscess is calm.
Then open it, and the way to do this is to put the plaster on the cut, then raise the arm above the shoulder and put your hand on the shoulder or breast;
and press hard on the shoulder and arm so that the arm is straight, unless something else moves it or the bone has moved.
And if you suspect the bone has moved, use splints and put a larger and stronger splint on the cut, with one inch of space between each splint, and make each splint large enough that it goes three inches beyond the cut on both sides.Et li esteles sont si fortes que elle ne se cassent mie;
then stretch them over the splints, as I said at the beginning of this chapter about fracture, harder and less by moving away.
And if you see the position of the splints and the stretching, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the hot abscess, then leave it bound until the seventh day, as we have said.
Then examine the binding every three days to ensure that itching or swelling does not occur in the area, and that the wound does not become too tight as it heals. If the wound, as we have said.
And if no such accidents occur, then loosen the binding after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back with his hands on his stomach;
and place under the shoulder a pillow of equal wool, and check every hour of the day or night that the figure of the broken member does not move or the binding become soft;
if it is treated with medicine, and given the food we have previously mentioned, in such a way that the food reaches the uppermost subtleties. And when he begins to regain strength, then let him eat something substantial.
It is usual for the shoulder and leg to take 40 days to heal completely; and then one must loosen and administer baths and ointment treatments to ease the pain.
And if the dislocation is severe and stuck, it will take longer to loosen, up to two months.
of the dislocation of the arm
The arm is made up of two bones, which are called the 'ulna', one of which is small and sits below the armpit.
The other bone is larger and sits beneath the larger bone.
Sometimes only the large bone is broken, sometimes only the small one, and sometimes both together.Si l’un est rompu et li autres entiers, li membres a devers la main doit estre tirrez et remuetz de son leu en tel maniere ke
When the small bones are broken, their restoration and healing is easy.
And when the large bones are broken, their healing is poor, and more difficult than when they are broken all at once.
If only the small bone is broken, then it should be put back into place gently and stretched slightly to align it. Se c’est li gros fosciles qui est brisié, si convient que tu le remes a son leu; et si il ne peut estre a son leu, si convient que tu le traies soulement en la guariçon, si com il est requerre.
If it's a large bone, you must pull harder;
and stretch him out on a pillow, and tie the hand pouch higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the other fingers, and have the patient cross his legs over himself, and the pillow in front of him higher so that the patient doesn't have to exert any effort;
Then extend one minister's arm under his hand, or under his armpit, and another minister above him.
And then the minister should apply pressure equally, according to the best form.
And if there are pieces in the fracture, put each one in its place, and if none of them fit that poke the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do as we said before, on the chest and the bone.
And if with the breaking there is a wound, I have spoken of it in a particular chapter; then take the cure.
And if, at the beginning of the restoration, suppurating ulcers appear, then apply a dressing of ceratum made from rose oil and white wax, neither too hard nor too soft. and leave the dressing in place gently, until the suppurating ulcers are soothed.
Then remove the ceratum, and apply an ointment made from flour with egg white, then put on the bandages, with the bandage for the fracture being a little stronger and a little larger than the others.
and know that there must be six bandages on the arm in various positions: whether the fracture is in one of the bones, or in two;
and tighten more over the fracture than elsewhere, and always less as time goes on, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and the bandages which are on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard or rough;
and the bandages which are on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard or rough; and the thread, with which it is bound, of flax, nor too coarse nor too fine, as we have said.
And then remove the bandages and examine the limb and the fracture after a few days. And if any bad accident happens to the member, such as itching coming to it, you must moisten the member with warm water until the itch is relieved;
and let the member not be too tight or rest.
And then begin the stretching again, and if the ligaments are relaxed and the bones displaced, and similarly, address it.
And if one takes a bandage and the swelling cannot come to the member because it is too tight, then one must soften it a little and leave it for several days until the swelling goes down and then tighten it again.
And if none of these things that we have said happen to the patient, then do not release him until 20 days.
Or either he turns on his side, then he can put his hands to his neck, and let his necks be even, and guard against movement and rolling about, and sleep on his back;
and know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 35, and perhaps in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexes of the virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
Know that in the back of the hand and on the knuckles there are few fractures, and only stretching occurs many times.
And when the palm of the hand is broken or folded, then the patient should sit cross-legged, and sit upright in front of him evenly;
then he should put his hand on the ground, and the minister should extend the broken bones, and make them equal so that they are well-joined;
and then put on the plaster and bandages, if no abscess comes, then he puts on a splint according to the quantity of the wound;et li minister li fait mettre sa main sus la toie estendue, et il tuit li met igalement. Et si li estele fu de grand leu, s’il mettret and the minister makes him put his hand on the ground, and they all make it equal. And if the splint is of a large wound,
And if the break is at the side of the palm around the belly, then make a ball of bandages, and instruct the patient to press it against his broken palm;et li ministers mette leu la spere et li estele en son leu, et li malaide l’estrainne tant qu’il soit bien igal. And then pull it with a long strap, and let the mark of the cautery be as big as the palm of your hand, and pull it, as it should be done.
And if the fracture is in the back of the hand, you must put a splint on top and another one underneath the palm so that the hand is open and straight, then tie it all around the hand, and stop the bleeding between the fingers.Et se li brisure est entre les dois, si covient que li malaide mette sa main croisie sus la brisure, et tu estaines lou liien entre les deux os brisiez, et lie tout entor la main; et se il y a grant flux de sang, si covient qu’il le frotte, si que li sang ne fluit.
And if the fracture is in one of our fingers, if it is the knuckle, set it straight, as it should be. And pull it with the palm, and if you see that a small, straight mark is placed to lift the fracture, and it does not move;
And if the fracture is in another finger, such as the index or another, set it straight and bind it to the healthy finger next to it; Or you can bind them all together in a clench, or put a mark on it, as in the knuckle;
And take care in the restoration and the preparation of a hot abscess, and treat what comes out, as I have said.
The bones of the thigh are often broken, and one can see this when it turns front and back.
and the healing is by binding above the fracture, and the other below. And the patient lies on his face, then each assistant extends their bandage to their side equally;
and this is when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
And if the fracture is near the root of the thigh, then one ligament should go towards the buttock and the other below the fracture.
And if it is near the knee, then the bandage should be above the knee, and the extension below;
then the surgeon sets the bone according to its natural shape with his two hands, and then applies the ointment and bandage, unless an abscess forms.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it calm down, then return to your work and treatment; the sling is made in this way.
You should wrap the break with a hard bandage folded in two or three layers to stop the bleeding. Then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the toe, and tie a long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, so that the end of the thread comes above.
Then turn the bandage around the leg and thigh, and place splints on the break, and put a splint on the shinbone of the leg.
Then use eight pieces of soft cloth between the leg and thigh to make it even, and then start binding firmly in three or four turns around the break. And as you go higher up from the break, loosen the binding.
Then cut two of the threads that you tied between the leg and thigh, and untie three splints that are above, then go back down to the end of the thread, so that you come under the foot.
and hold it, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, until no abscess, swelling or similar occurs. And if something happens to it, then loosen it, and address what is happening to it, as we have said many times:
and if there are pieces of bone piercing through, then they must be removed, if possible. And if it cannot be removed, then the area should be split and the bone pulled out. And treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
And sometimes the thighbone breaks in this way when they put on armor, just like in the shoulder and arm:
However, with this restoration, the malady is not relieved.Et si il ne se guérit, puis est grant douleur en li cuisse et en l’ajutoire, si
And you should know that the hip is restored in one day, or a little less or more, according to the different constitutions.
Know that in the knee joint there is little breaking, but it bends many times.
And if it breaks, it is only a split, or a perforation, and it happens with any wound, and without a wound, and this feels good to everyone.
And the restoration is to put straight what is bent in his fingers, so that when they are set straight he can move them.
then apply the plaster, and put a round bandage on it if necessary, and bind it as it should be, then follow all the instructions we have given for other fractures, such as hot abscess and similar conditions; applying to each injury what is suitable for it, until it is healed.
of the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is properly called the 'tibia', and the other is called the 'fibula'.
And it has all the same injuries as the arm, and its restoration is the same as that of the arm, and its treatment is also the same. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg becomes useless in every way.
And if only the smaller bones are broken, then it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it is seen clearly; and turns underneath.
Therefore, apply extension, and make it equal, and tie the bandages equally;
but if the break is ugly, and there are several pieces, then the extension should be less and gentler; and adjust it according to your skill.
And when you have finished your work, take two bundles of wooden splints that reach from one side of the leg to the other, and let them be as long as the leg from just below the knee to beneath the foot;
then wrap two bands around them above and below, and tie it in the middle as well, and at this time, the leg will not be able to decline to the right or left, and thus it is good;
and some administer the fire cautery on the long bone of the leg, and it is from the wood, and they put the leg forward to prevent movement, and properly they do this in the break where there is injury;
and move the leg each day, to see if there is any hot abscess or other accident; until it is healed.
of the break in the bones of the foot
At the ankle there is no break, but sometimes there is a break in the bones of the foot and also two wounds, and it happens with various injuries.
And if there is a broken bone in the foot, and you see the bones protruding on top of each other, then put the patient's foot down on the ground, as if he wanted to walk, and then put your own foot on his, where the bones are raised, and then press it until they return to their place;
Then put on the ointment and bandages, and under the sole of the foot place a small wooden board with two flat sides, then tighten it to the foot comfortably, then wrap cloth around it, and other things that you need.
And after three or four days have passed, loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones healed, whether broken or dislocated.
And if any of the fingers are broken, restore them, as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then put a splint on the broken finger according to its length, and let it be a little wider, then place under the foot that table which I have described, and adjust it properly.
and if there are two or three, or more, broken, then put on each finger a splint according to its size, wrapped in a linen cloth, and adjust the table under the foot. and let there be a stop under the head of the table pressing against the belly of the foot, so that it may hold well.
And you must not forget the other things I have said about other fractures, for which we have already spoken: and treat each accident as it should be treated.
of the fracture of the bone in the wrist
When the bones of nature are broken, let her sit upright, then lean towards the back, and be held from behind.
Then fill the hollow with cotton wool, and put in as much as it can hold.
Then raise the woman, and gently press her back little by little, and thus the cotton will go into the hollow, and the bones with it.
And when she needs to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has finished, put it back again. Do this for seven days. The fracture will then be healed, and if you wish, take a bladder of a ram, tie it at the neck with a string, and fill the bladder with the hollow. Then blow into the string until the bladder is inflated inside. nature will heal the fracture
then it should be filled with cotton, and left like that for several days, until it heals.
And when the bone of the man's or woman's shoulder is broken, we restore it in the same way as we have said about the hip bone;
and these breaks are not hidden from those who dedicate themselves to studying and understanding my book.
For the break reveals in many ways the correct path to restoration: listen therefore.
When a rod is broken, take a goose's throat and insert the rod into it; then wrap cloth around it, leave it for three days or tie it tightly, and it will heal quickly.
from breaking with wound
It is necessary for one who has a break with a wound, especially if it is large, such as in the thigh or shoulder bone or similar, to be treated immediately, as the remedies we have described attest.
And if the wound heals, and there is no infection from vitriol, if you have nothing else, then restart by resetting the dislocation in that same hour, or that day, if no abscesses arise.
And if a hot abscess comes, let recovery wait until the next day, so that the abscess may be quieted; and don't touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would bring about an evil accident.
And if the broken bone is appearing on the uncovered chest, one should gently put it back into place with slight extension.
And if the extension is not available to make your hands even, then use this instrument which is made of iron, seven or eight inches long, and its width according to the size of the wound; and therefore it is necessary for the surgeon to have three or four, depending on what he needs for each fracture treatment.
and it should be round and slightly large so that it does not bend when compressed on the limb while you work, and it should be pointed at the front, and thick in the middle towards the front, like this:
And it is called a "spit", so that the curved head should be placed on the prominent part of the bone; and the handle at another time, as much as it will go, and it should be even with each other. And if the dislocation is subtle, and the instrument cannot hold the bone well, then you must chip the head of the bone, so that the instrument can hold it.Et si li brisure est griez, et le chef de l’os est trove par la pelezure del chiés, si covient que tu ramones la dislocation premierement; car il n’est pas bon qu’il soit contusioné en pluxors lieux.
And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, then use an appropriate tool, such as an incision knife or needle, at your discretion;
then cut away what is left in the bone of asperities and fine splinters.
And when the bone is reset and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Do this until it is in its place, then moisten the cloth with black sticky wine, and properly if it is in a wound. and do not put cerotic ointment or anything else on the wound that would cause pus and corruption;
then dress the wound once you have set the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and bandage it all around according to the size of the wound, and take care that the wound is not constricted by the bandage;
and many times this has been done to fools, causing pain, or sometimes death or corrosion; and it is the most gentle and effective treatment for dislocation.
And if the wound is large or deep, and you doubt that a bad accident will occur as we have said, and you feel pain in the area, then you should not put anything on it; but wrap around, instead of pillows, hard, folded cloths, and tie them.
And when you see after one or two days that pus is coming from the wound, then remove what you have put on it and put on an ointment that heals wounds, such as tetrafarmaçon and similar ointments.
And when the bone is back in its natural place, it should be made comfortable and not restricted; and if there are great pains, anoint with healing oil or ointment by rubbing, such as oil of larkspur, or of laurier, or of garlic, or of onions, or of other healing oils.
And it is necessary for the limb to be prepared in such a way that the bowstring runs downstream easily.
And if they persist for many days and the bow cannot be set but keeps slipping back, know that there are tiny pieces of bone causing this, so you must probe the wound with a probe, and remove all these broken pieces that cause the pain.
And if a fistula or other form of corruption occurs, you should treat it according to what he said in the chapter above.
And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, as in the thigh or shoulder bone, and similar large bones, do not draw it out, but leave it be until it can be pulled out;
by chance it will fall out after 20 or 30 days, then clean the wound if you can;
and if you cannot, then leave it be.
Many times after the healing of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, it is an ugly sight to see the shape of the limb; and by chance the limb cannot do its natural works.
So be wary then if the nerve is affected: if the patient takes constipating medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and sarcocolla, aconite, and similar others, either by themselves or all together, and concocts them with dry wine, egg white, or garlic; and places them on the head as poultices, pressing firmly, and not loosening for several days.
and places them on the head as poultices, pressing firmly, and not loosening for several days. and then he loosens it, and begins another one, until the swelling is gone;
or you press on a well-made plaster; for the property of the plaster is that it removes all swellings from the limbs;
and if the swelling has turned into a hardness like stone, and it needs to be removed, cut away the top, and reveal the excess; or you have it removed by a shaver, until it is gone, and then dress the wound until it heals.
of the limb which is weakened after healing
When the broken bone is restored, and remains weak and slender after the limb, this happens for many reasons: one of which is that it was bound too tightly, and not as it should have been; or because there are too many ligaments, and the nourishment cannot reach the member; or for excess of moisture; or for too great movement, not in its hour; or because there is little blood in his body, and he is weak.
And the treatment is that you feed the patient and make the body tender, so that the blood increases within him; and give him baths, and give him joy and leisure;
then apply pitch to the limb so that it attracts great nourishment, and often bathe it in warm water, until the nourishment reaches the limb;Et li cure si est qu’il soit mene a la chause, et al buef, et a la vine, et a la lieure, et a la seliere, et au vin clers, et a l’ole, et a la migaie, et aux fraies, et au pain d’ And the treatment is that he be led to walk, and ride a horse, and go hunting, and play sports,
until the limb is straightened after health When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bones are visible, and the form of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function.
don't believe the fools who say that one must break the limb again from scratch, and many foolish people have done this in our land;
and these practices are blamed, and they cause great harm and sometimes death;
nevertheless, if the dislocations and the tortures are recent, then they should be soaked in hot water or herbs that soften, such as leaves of marsh-mallow, roots, and sweet rocket, and similar things;
and make a soothing ointment from diaquilon, and take the mucilage of marsh-mallow, and cook it with tallow or sesame oil, and apply it to the affected area;
or you take fat figs and grind them with horse manure, and similar medicines that soften quickly.
And sometimes the dislocation is caused by continuous and prolonged rubbing with moist hands. And bring about movement in the limb every hour.
And if the twist is awake and hardened like stone, and it needs to be removed with iron, then it must be cut close to the bone, with a thin, delicate incision. and put poultice and bandage in the treatment.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs in someone, one must immediately bring it back into alignment without delay.
For if it is delayed, the place will swell, and perhaps it will be reset in the wrong position;
Therefore, one should not move it when it is swollen: many times it brings spasms and other pains;li corps ne puet demorer en leus, ains doit il se mouevoir.
Nevertheless, when this happens, the patient should be bled, then left alone until the abscesses are soothed;et li dolors et les spames, et li moevemens, si conviennent qu’il demoure en leus.
then warm the limb with hot water and oil, then reset it gently, and treat each limb as the healing comes into its place.
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocation from the head to the feet.
It happens that jaws are dislocated downward, and dislocations of both are according to two manners: either they are slightly displaced from their places, and softened a little; or they are completely displaced and hang down; saliva flows from his mouth which he cannot hold, nor can he close his mouth or wrap his tongue around words.
When the dislocation is small, it returns by itself in several ways.
And if it is complete and accomplished, then you must reset it quickly and not delay at all;
and in such a way that the minister grabs the head of the patient, and pushes his fingers of one hand into the root of the jaw's joint inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides; and the other two fingers of the hand should be pressed down to straighten them;
and instruct the patient to soften his jaw, and move it all around. And the priest looks at her equally, until she returns to her place.
And if they are stuck together, especially if it is the two mandibles, pour hot water and oil over them, moving them gently;
do not force them, as we have said.
And when they are returned to their proper position and the mouth of the patient is closed properly without softening, then place wet cloths on it made from rose oil and wax, then tie it lightly with soft bindings;
and let the patient sleep on his back, and let his head be between two pillows so that he does not move it to the right or left, nor try to speak, but take light food, until the pain is gone, and the jaw joint is healed;
and then eat and drink what he wants easily, without opening his mouth to chew or drink, until the jaw is well healed and healthy.
And if the two mandibles cannot be reset within an hour and are not converted to their places, then fevers and usual sores come, and perhaps stomach issues, and perhaps vomiting pure bile.
And when you see this, then you will know it is destruction: and many times the person dies within seven days.
The forepaw cannot be dislocated from within the continued part of it and from the foot, and is dislocated sometimes by force, and it is felt well.
The cure is for the patient to lie flat on his back and extend his arms: and then press firmly on the spot with your palm, and it will return to its place;
then apply the ointment and bandage it tightly;
and the shoulder that is towards the neck cannot be dislocated; if not, and if it dislocates even once, then reset it to its place, as we have said;
then apply the ointment and bandage it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed;
and thus is the head of the shoulder brought back when it is dislocated from its place.
of shoulder dislocation
You should know that there are three ways in which the shoulder can be dislocated:
One way is for it to dislocate at the bottom part of the shoulder; And the second way is at the top of the foot; And by chance it dislocates from above, and that rarely happens;
It does not dislocate behind the shoulder, nor inside for the nerves;
And often it dislocates underneath towards the shoulder, especially in those who are very thin, because in them it comes out easily;
In those who are fat, it only comes out and goes back in with force.
And by chance it happens to some men that they receive a blow or bruise, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
Therefore you must test it to make sure;de coi si ele desalue par la partie dou pis, et ne se remue point, sache bien qu’ele est desaluee a li asselle, et sache qu’ and then begin the treatment.
And you will know of a dislocation when it is lower towards the armpit, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them a manifest difference; and you will find a pit at the top of the shoulder, and under the armpit the top of the shoulder as though it were an egg; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose, nor move in any way;
and also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you will find it clearly at the top;
and this type of dislocation is not difficult to fix when it is new, or if the child is sick.
And the method is for the assistant to lift the hand of the sick person up, then put your knees under the armpit and lift the joint with force upwards into place; and the minister lifts the hand, then extends it upward, before placing it back down. then come quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and the minister should apply softening and soothing poultices, such as infusions of alder, fenugreek, and cornflower in water, and it should be applied;
then the patient should be laid on his back, and a woolen cloth of equal thickness, neither too soft nor too hard, should be placed underneath him. Then the minister should place his heel on the sto, and lift the head of the shoulder gently, and draw the hand of the patient;
and another minister should hold the head of the patient, so that it does not move downward; that shoulder returns right away, and if you set it again according to this method:
and you should have a person present who is larger than the patient; and should stand straight toward the shoulder, and push his shoulder under the armpit of the patient, and lift the armpit upward, so that the patient hangs in the air; and another assistant pulls the hand of the patient downward toward the belly. And if the disease is too slight, one can place something heavy on it, and the dislocation will return immediately.
And it is reset in another way:Tu prends la main dou malaides, et mets li doigt sus li col, et
and you put your finger on his neck, and you push the long brand into the ground so that the shoulder is as high as the wrist, neither too thick nor too thin; then it is placed under the patient, but he should have a soft cloth over him, and the patient should be still from the waist up;
then let his hand be stretched out downwards on the other side, and the joint will return to its place gently;
and if it does not want to return despite all that we have said, then perform this cure: take a stick two arms long and four digits wide, with the tip bent backwards to fit into the joint beneath the dislocation, as follows:
then tie it with a cloth under the joint of the patient so that the stick does not hurt him, then put it underneath the dislocation:
and stretch out his arm over the long stick and tie the shoulder to the stick, and the arm to the tip of the hand, then put his arm on the edge of a board that is wider than it is long, and stretch out his hand downwards, and let the body hang down on the other side: the joint returns now.
And when it is back in place, however it is, you should put a sphere of wool under the shoulder blade, then apply the prepared ointment made from mill dust, with incense and egg white, over the entire shoulder and around it; then stretch it underneath the shoulder blade gently, and tie the string over the ointment, and embrace the hand to his chest, and let the arm remain like this.
And one must eat little, as long as the member is comfortable, for it will heal faster.
and then eat more after a few days or seven, and move it; and if it is stiff and not soft, then it is healed.
And if the joint has left its place due to moisture or for any other reason, you should administer cauteries to it at three openings, as described in the chapter on cauteries.
And if you do all this and it comes undone after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot lift his arm upstream, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched out or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation which is towards the foot, and of the breast, or behind, is made by thrusting, and stretching with the hands, and one administers to another;
and treat it until it is healed.
And if after healing there is pain in the limb, and with movement it becomes worse over time, then the patient should use the bath many times until the pain goes away and returns to its original nature.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the joint of the neck is dislocated at times, and returns to place.
and is dislocated in all parts, especially in front and behind; the dislocation is not reset, for it can be seen and felt. and it dislocates according to each shape. And when you join the sick neck with the healthy one, you can see it clearly. Because the joint is damaged and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder at all.
And you must reset it as you would an abscess, for if a deep abscess comes, it would be painful to reset.
and at times it cannot be fully reset, especially when it is in the back; it is worse than other dislocations and causes greater pain, and sometimes death ensues.
And when it can be reset, you must extend your arm with both hands; and his arms should be spread out, and the hands turned according to the neck, all around, and the joint pressed at its joints together, or at the root of the palm, until it returns to place.
And if the dislocation is at the front, then it returns when he bends his hand to his hand, and raises from the root of the palm the wrist which was dislocated.
And if it does not want to go back into place, then apply strong extension.
and one minister extends the arm, and the other tilts it, so that it does not move with the extension;
then turn the arm to each side after you have wrapped a long, wide cloth around it;
and when you see the joint of the hand, anoint it with oil to soften the joint, then push the joint firmly back into place;
and when it is back in place, apply a dry plaster with egg white, and hold it firmly, and wind the arm around the neck of the patient, and leave it for several days, then remove the plaster.
And if the joint is firm in its place, then loosen the binding, and leave it;
and if you see that the joint is not set well, then start over with the plaster and binding, and leave it for several days until it is firmly in place; then loosen it.
And if he feels pain after the joint is moved back into place, and it still moves, then bathe and rub it gently, and press until the pain subsides. Or you may place a fat sheep's testicle on the joint, then leave it for a day and night, then remove it, and have him enter the bath. And when he sweats, gently rub the joint, then put the testicle back on, and then back into the bath. And so do this repeatedly until the pain is gone. And do this two or three times, until he is healed.
And if you see that it is moist, put warm cow manure on it with butter and press it onto the joint;
and it will return to its natural state.
dislocations of the hand
A dislocated hand is healing, and the recovery is quicker than for other joints. Nevertheless, it is necessary to return it to its place gradually, at the same time that it was dislocated, so that the joint swells or a hot abscess forms there.
And the method of reduction is to place the patient's hand on a table, and extend the minister's hand, and look at it placed evenly so that he places his palm over the appearance of the joint, and push it until it returns.
Nevertheless, you should check that it is in the right place; then put the patient's back of his hand on a table, extended and reduced. If the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then put the patient's hand on a table with his palm facing upwards, and let the assistant put his hand on the affected joint.
If it returns now, that is good.S’ele ne veut revenir, mettes li la main sus une tauble, If not, then strain with soothing plasters hot abscesses, and leave it thus without re-encasing.Et s’il li traist au leu, si li mettiez une fons de vinas a la jointure et al oile de panon, et al oile d’olifre, ou
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after a few days, then the joint will remain crooked.
and does no harm to the patient as long as the hand is soft and can grasp nothing at all: then you know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries;
if there is nothing else to do except to cauterize the area, and perhaps nothing else will help.
And when the hand is in place, then apply the plaster that we have mentioned, then constrict it and leave it for 5 days, then loosen it and let it be thus.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is any swelling, then moisten it with warm water, and rub it until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on both sides, sometimes at the back of the palm or on the inside;
then reset the fingers, and pull them back into place until they are aligned, then hold the top of the finger, and turn it towards the affected part;
and let it be for two days, and then put it back in place that same day;
and do not eat at night as we have said, but during the day, make him move and then put him to bed.
and do this often, until he is healed, and also do the same if he is dislocated in his hand or arm, and act just as before, until he is healed.
and do the same for any other dislocation.
from the dislocation of the head and back
When the head or neck is dislocated, there is no cure, for death comes quickly with this ailment.
And the signs are that the bowels move without willing it, and he cannot hold it back, and often a member becomes paralyzed, either both legs or both arms or one.
And often the skin becomes black in four places:
the one that turns black on the back is called "gilbositez":
the treatment for this is to reward if the blackness comes from childhood. if there is no cure or healing, no matter what.
And that which comes from falling or from blows or similar things, the ancients spoke of many ways to cure with great words, but in all cases there was not much benefit;
but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and formed instruments in various ways.
I say that the hunchback that comes before the foot, neither medicine nor health heals;
and also that which comes directly on both sides, and cannot be healed except by that which comes properly in the back, as I said;
and it is that the disease be stretched out on his face in one place equally, and have a strap under him, so that he does not bend;
then insert the brand into the head on the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and tie a string under the armpits of the disease, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
and two servants know the bonds, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the twelve torches;
and let them be well bound, the torches as we have said, and let the nurse put her palms on the spine, until it straightens out.
And if it does not straighten out with this treatment, take a board three yards long, and lay it under the back, and let the patient lie on his side, and put the middle of the board under the spine; and let the nurse put her feet on the other end of the board, and press firmly, until it straightens out;
and if you see it, turn the wheel that turns to the hand. And it is that you fix two torches at the head of the patient's arm, and two others towards the feet, and have between each torch, above and below, a palm of space;
and have a hole in each stake where the cord runs through, and let the stakes be firmly driven into the ground so that they do not move.
and between each pair of stakes have a turning stake, around which the cords turn, and at each turning place have two small stakes about a palm long for the cord to turn around.
Then tie the cord that is between the stakes at the head to the turning stake towards the head, and the other cord towards the feet to the other turning stake, and each of the ministers turns their turning stake along all the cord, and the master puts the spine level as we have said.
And when it is level, then put on a drying plaster with an abundance of egg white, and then the bandages, and then the pillow of a tablet three digits long, so that it covers the hunchback area and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a cord as we have said, and use the patient's subtle numbing medicine until they are healed.
and if nothing comes of it for the health, then one must administer softening and soothing medicines, with the star that we mentioned earlier; and sometimes they administer a poultice, and sometimes the appearance comes in the lower spine of the back, and one thinks it is dislocation; and it is the bone that is exposed, therefore one must not be too presumptuous about it: for fear of causing death.
You should know that in the joints of the hip and the shoulder, there are no dislocations, only in the other joints; and there is no dislocation like those others;
and the joint of the hip is dislocated into four parts:d’une part li os qui est a la cote, et li os qui est a la cuisse, et li os qui est a one part is the bone that is at the ribcage, and the bone that is at the thigh, and the bone that is inside
and more inside, and little dislocated before and behind.
And the knowledge of its dislocation inside is that when one joins the affected leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the affected knee appears more open than the healthy one, and the affected person cannot bend their knee to the fire. and the area near it is swollen with a hot abscess due to the shoulder joint coming closer.
And the sign of him to whom it comes from without, is that this accident is contrary to those before.
And the signs of someone who has this in front are that their leg is well aligned according to its structure. However, they cannot bend their knee without pain, and if they want to walk, they cannot do so, and they retain their urine, and the ankle swells, and when they go to the toilet, they pass it over the heel.
And the signs of him to whom it happens behind, are that he cannot bend or double his knee, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the veins are softened, and the head of the thigh is at the place below the ribs.
The cause of this type of dislocation is that you first check if the dislocation is old and it remains in its position, then there will be no improvement. and he must not become presumptuous.
And for those with a fresh dislocation, which comes in three ways, you must hurry to return the joint to its place, and stretch it in and out, and move it to the right and left. Perhaps it will return on its own and not need further treatment.
And if it does not return in this way, you must strongly pull the limb, and hold the leg firmly with two hands, or with one hand tied to the knee; and another person stretches their hand over it in such a way that they push their hands under their armpits, then tightens a cord around the thigh; and another ties the head;
and they all pull up and down at the same time, until the patient is lifted off the ground once, and then hold him suspended.
This stretching method is common for four appearances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
If not, then treatment must be applied to its appearance.
When the dislocation is in the armpit, you must lead the patient to lie on his healthy side, then place the ligature at the root of the thigh, and at the spot below the armpit, then let the ligature ascend towards the armpit and the axilla;
then have another assistant grip his arms and squeeze and extend the affected thigh in a correct manner: and if it does not return to its place immediately;
and this type of dislocation is lighter than others.
And if you cannot bring it back in the manner we have described, then you must tie together both feet of the patient with a strong, soft ligature around the heels and knees, and have the affected leg extended two fingers more than the other;
then let him be hung from the top of a pole, and let him be two arms' length above the ground;
then instruct the assistant to hold the top of the thigh tightly, and another assistant hanging with the patient should hold the thigh firmly, for the joint will return quickly.
And when the dislocation is healed, then let the patient lie down, as we have said in the case of gout, and tightly bind the leg and foot that has been affected;
then put two torches on, one at the head and one at the foot, then place the torch between the legs of the patient in the dislocation; and have wet cloths laid all around so that the patient does not blush, then each assistant stretches him towards themself, and the examiner puts pressure with his hand on the dislocation.
If it returns, that is good.
Otherwise, place him on a table and press it as we have said in the case of dislocation, and lay the patient on his healthy side.
And when a dislocation is in front, then the leg of the patient must be extended gently, and according to what I have said; and places his weight upon the affected angle, then presses with the other hand, and stretches it downward towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is to the rear, then the patient should not be stretched out downward, nor lifted up off the ground, but he must be as though his hip were dislocated to the rear, just as we have said about lying on one's side with both hips; and it is on his face, and the bandage stretched as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table; and it will be in place when the patient stretches his legs, and they will be even; then adjust the thighs, and apply the ointment, and restrain it with a bandage so that the hip does not move; and rest for 3 or 4 days, then loosen it, and apply the ointment on top of it;
and if you see that they are even, then restrain them as before, and leave it for 3 days;
then loosen it, and make him walk comfortably until the limb is healed.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in 3 ways: that is, inside and outside, and behind;
and do not give up.
And the sign is that you command the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not straighten at the thigh, know that he is dislocated;
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back against his face, and put his foot on your feet;
then take his knee in your palms, and pull between your fingers, then bend both sides of the knee jointly; and another minister extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he straightens his leg at the thigh easily;
and put on the plaster, and straighten the leg at the thigh, and bind them together strongly for 3 or 4 days, then loosen it;
and do not move the patient until the limb is conforted.
And if the member is not at all, then administer strong stretching, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heels are sometimes dislocated, and sometimes fully relaxed, both inside and out.
And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and lean forward towards the part where it is dislocated:
the movements should be light, and one should gently extend the hand when it is only numbed.
And when it is dislocated all the way through, you should make the patient sit upright, and hold the limb firmly by the leg, above the ankle;
then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with the left twice, then extend it upwards, and flex it gently upwards;
and do this twice, as we have said, by bending and pulling the foot;
if it returns to place, that is good;
if not, then perform the action again, for it will return;
and if it cannot be reset in that way, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground and push the staff firmly into the ground between his buttocks, and tie a cloth around him so that he does not bend forward.
then the assistant pulls on the thigh, while another assistant stretches out the foot with his hands or with a rope tied around the ankle, holding it against the collar of the leg. then each assistant pulls equally, and the staff is placed between the buttocks of the patient to restrain him when they stretch.
then the assistants put their weight into their hands, and another assistant pulls on the healthy leg from below, and the dislocation will return with force.
And when it is back in place, then apply the plaster and bandages on top, and pull it firmly, and tie the foot to the leg, and be careful of the nerves that are on the ankle behind, so that the ligature is not too tight.
then let it stay for two or three days, and if the ligatures loosen, then tighten them again;
then untie it on the third or fourth day, and the patient can go about their business after four days; and if he goes before that time, it is not safe for him to do so, as he may relapse.
And if painful abscesses arise, then you must soothe them as we have said elsewhere, until they heal.
of the two When the arms are dislocated, one should stretch them gently without force, and this is a minor issue.
And if the dislocation is in any part of the back or foot, you should have the patient sit upright on a flat surface or table, then put your foot over the affected area and press down firmly until it pops back into place;
and when it is back in place and there is nothing protruding, put a two-footed board under the sole of the foot, then tighten it firmly, and leave it for three days, then untie it; and let him rest until he is healed.
of wounds and dislocations together
When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wishes to restore it, many times the patient dies.
if you are not presumptuous in the treatment, if you are wise in the art and have used it for a long time, and if you are pitying and merciful and slow to anger; then do not be bold.
and in the beginning, use things that soothe an abscess, and leave the patient in God's hand if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, then immediately reset the member to its place so that the hot abscesses heal.
and when the member is in its place, then minister soothing things for hot abscesses and treat the wound as it should be with drying ointments.
and if there is a fracture along with the dislocation and broken small bones, then set the bones, and do what we have said in simple diseases.
and beware of going astray out of fear, according to what I have said, for it is better for you according to your Creator, and for the safety of your weapons and your body.
