O you, very dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine along with its fulfillment, and I have made an end through its explanations and through its declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of the hand, namely surgery.
And because the work of the hand is very little treated in our region and is unknown everywhere, the knowledge of it has been lost and only small descriptions in books by the ancients remain, written from the hands themselves.Et si li fuers et la science de cest uvre ne demore pas en nostre region, il demore en l’autre parti de le monde, car il ne peut diez ne poer ne paitre que de ceus qui conssent li science de li corps et de li mebrues. And because the strength and science of this work do not remain in our region, they remain in the other parts of the world, for it cannot exist without those who possess the knowledge of the body and its functions.
I think I want to animate it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition, declaration, and abbreviation; and will come together with the forms of the instruments of cautery, and other tools of the work with the adjustment of its declaration and preparation as it is necessary.
And because no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected. And one who undertakes this must excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, as long as he knows the judgment of the members, and forms and conjunctions, and separations of bones, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and veins, and the number of ears, and the movement and of their blood vessels.
And because Hypocras says that the name with the name is much, and with the work is little; and especially in the art of hand.
We tell you at the entrance to this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things already said, be careful that he does not fall into error and that he does not harm people;
so I have many times more of those who interfere with this knowledge and abandon themselves without knowledge or experience.
For I saw a foolish physician who cupped the scrofula on a woman's neck, and cupped the arteries in her neck; where so much blood flows out that the woman dies in his arms.
And I saw another surgeon who was treating a stone in a man's testicles, and the stone was large; he took with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if they cut it out he would surely die.
And I saw another surgeon who was treating the Duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound;
and the ignorant surgeons bound the break above the wound with strong ligatures, and left the wound uncovered, and left it in that state;
and he commanded that he must not loosen it;
and it stayed like that until the leg became swollen and the foot, and it came to ruin.
I was called to come to him, and I hurried to loosen the leg; and when I dislocated it, he was relieved of pain and felt no discomfort.
However, the corruption had already settled in the limb and could not be healed;
and the corruption did not cease from spreading throughout the limb until the limb was completely dead.
And I saw another patient who had a wound, and then it became inflamed due to the wickedness of his lord.
For a ulcer, when it is clear of melancholy humor, one should not touch it with iron unless it is in such a place that one can completely remove all that is corrupted.
And for this reason, dear son, you must know that manual medicine is divided into two parts: that is, where there is danger in various conditions;
and I will demonstrate in each section of this book where there is doubt and fear.
Therefore, you must be cautious so that the foolish man cannot speak ill of you.Et je mostrerai les perils et les doubtes et les maux qui sont as savans et a ceux qui n’ont point de science en medicine, si com il
Take up your weapons with caution, and approach your illnesses gently and firmly, using the best methods, so that through the grace of God you may achieve salvation and be praised.
and let the terrible diseases of deep sorrow
remove your weapons from that which makes you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you may pass from this world to the other of glory.
Galen says in one of his warnings: Do not take on a difficult disease unless you are called a foolish doctor.
I have arranged this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cauteries and hot iron cauteries, and it is ordered from the head to the feet.
and of the forms of instruments, and of the use of cautery, and of all that is necessary in the craft.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and of leeches and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things;
and it includes the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things;
and it is ordered from the head to the feet, and includes the forms of instruments.
So that we may remember the work, I must describe the nature of each humor and its harmful qualities.
I say that the qualities of help, and harm, are the longest words and most subtle sciences, and the secret responses;
and on this point many of the sages spoke, and they agreed with him.
I need little of their words, for I fear lengthiness.
I say that cautery helps universally in every complexion where it has material, except in two complexions: that is to say, hot complexion without matter, and dry complexion without matter.Et l’un de ceus deux ne doit estre cauteriz, car la cauterie ne le peut supporter; ains li autres
In hot and dry complexion together with matter, some people said that cautery is of great help. But others said: and the others said the opposite: that cautery is of no use in illness that comes from heat and dryness.Et quant a complexion frieure et humure ensamble matiere, tous convienent qu’elle Because the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be cured with heat nor dryness;
and says one who says the opposite that cautery does great good for hot and dry diseases that come upon men's bodies. For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find the body to be cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found this to be true through experimentation.
And nevertheless, one should not meddle with it except those who have experienced it and who know through long usage the treatment of cauteries, and the diversity of men's complexions, and their dispositions and the causes of their diseases, and their outcomes and the season of the year;
we have no fear of other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the doctors agreed and concurred with the cautery treatment.
And know, my son, that cautery brings fire together with the secrets of healing, and is of greater goodness than burning cautery of medicine.
For fire is simple, and does not spread beyond the cooked member, nor harm any other part if only slightly applied.
Burning medicines pass from one member to another by moving away, and bring sickly diseases to the members; and perchance they kill the disease.
Fire does not do harm by its heat and for the goodness of its substance if there is no excess.
And this I have found by experiment and through the length of my service and study that I have devoted to the art, and been placed upon the truth of things;
and because of this I excuse the length of my speech, for it does not please me to take from you the secret that is contained in fire, and the quality of its work, how it cures the diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in his demonstration; receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed upon what time the cauteries should be performed, and chose a propitious moment.
And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the harmful humors are driven out by the help of cautery; and especially when the cautery is for necessary pains that are urgent and cannot wait until greater harm comes to the limb.
And never think, dear son, as fools do; for the disease that is cured by cautery does not return; and they say it like this:
and they say it like this: but it is not as they believe, because cautery is a medicine that moves the complexions and dries up the humors that are the cause of pain; and it is worth more than other medicines for its swiftness, its strength, and the virtue of its work and its lordship.
And it is possible that the disease comes sometimes according to the complexion of the illness and the place of the disease and its strength.
and the excesses are gathered in it due to the consumption of food and similar things, unless cauterization is administered in the place where there is little excess and moisture, as with tooth cauterization for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return. but this rarely happens.
And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine, and that is because:
but they do not believe that cauterization comes after medicine; their understanding is false, and cauterization is the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment in any disease and they are ineffective, then we turn to cauterization, and it works.
Therefore, it is clear that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the opinion of foolish people.
The ancients said that cauteries with instruments of gold are gentler than those of iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and its lofty essence.
and they said that the site of a cautery does not cause swelling, but this is not true because I have tried it and found that it is true in some people.
and cauteries with gold are better than those with iron, as they said. And yet, when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools quickly.
and if it's heated too much; if they are heated in the fire; and so there is enough hindrance.
Now I have arranged this chapter from the head to the feet, so that the road is easier to find.
This cautery is useful for moisture and coldness in the head, and there are two reasons for its use: one is because of a disease called "soda", and the other is due to many humors descending from the head to the eyes and ears, as well as for numerous ailments such as pain in the teeth and throat, and especially for diseases caused by coldness, such as paralysis, soda (a type of stroke), and similar conditions.
The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by a purifying medicine for three or four nights, depending on what the strength, age, and condition of the patient can endure. then have the patient's head examined.
Then have the patient sit cross-legged in your lap, and place his hands on his thighs;
After, place the palm of your hand between the roots of his nose, between his eyes; And there you will place two fingers, then it will bleed; then heat the cautery called 'olive', of which this is the shape: And place it on the spot marked with ink, and as you are lowering your hand gently, move it around in small circles; Then raise your hand gently, and examine the spot again to see if the bone is still protruding; And if you do not see it, then reapply the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you;
After, take a piece of silk and place some soft cotton inside it, then tie it around the spot and leave it for three days;
after soaking cotton in lard; and leave it until the scorch is removed; afterwards, treat the wound with ointment called 'tetrafarmaçon' until it heals.
And the elders say that the more the wound is left open, the more it drains; and so helps scabs to form.
And some say that one must let the cautery burn until part of the bone is scorched, and then one should scrape off what is burned from the bone, and it will be cured.
And some say that you should leave the cautery on for so long, and press down so hard that it breaks the bone as widely as the ring that women put in their navels to draw out humours;
and one must leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards, one should clean and stitch it up.
And I do not think that these two methods of cautery are good at all, except in some people where there is a fear;
and I think I should let it go;
because the head is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we testify in other members;
and the same when the head of the sick person is weakened by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more gentle and beneficial for me, and from this I perform the operation together with safety.
When a chronic headache comes and lasts a long time, one must use the herbs and pills that are called 'concoctions', as well as poultices, oils, and plasters for the head; and if one performs the cautery that we have previously mentioned, and it does not work. Take care if the head of the patient is of a strong nature, and it is not too cold; then cauterize him under that cautery, a little bit that we have mentioned above. After cauterizing each horn of the head to the bone, as we have said before, and making the cautery in the place called "vessel", and it is the places where one applies cupping glasses. And lighten your hand so that you do not go to the bone: The patient feels much more pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere;
And the cauteries on the horns must be more delicate than those with which one cauterizes the middle of the head, and this is the form:
of the cautery on the head When sudden pain comes in a part of the head and the illness extends to the eye, and the shoulder is purged with purifying medicines, and one has done the other remedies that I have said in the division of illnesses, and all this does not help: then you must perform cauterizations according to two methods, namely with hot iron and with fire.
The cautery with hot iron is done by taking a piece of alder wood, removing the bark and heating it until it smokes. Then you make the cauterization at the site of the pain in such a way that you can place the alder wood under the skin.
And when it is applied, tie it tightly and leave it for twelve hours. Then loosen it and treat it with garlic, leaving the wound open for two or three days. Then cover it with a linen cloth soaked in butter until the swelling goes down.
After the wound has healed, treat it with ointment until it is completely healed.
And if you wish, you can also use some burning medicines which I have written about in the twelfth treatment of burning medicines.
The cautery with iron is as follows. Heat the cautery, of which there is the shape.
And it is called "clos" because the head is formed in the shape of a cloak with a slight curve, and in the middle has a small appearance;
and he puts it over the painful area, and holds his hand and twists it slightly so that half of the thickness of the heart is burned;
and then release your hand so that the artery burns, which is hot, and an abundance of blood flows.
After, put cotton in the wound, and hold it there for three days; then he applies wet cotton soaked in butter, and then he treats the area with ointment until it heals;
and if you want to cauterize this hemorrhoid with the cautery called "cultellare", at the tip only, and be careful not to touch the artery in this hemorrhoid which is not old.
of veins
When you treat a headache as we have previously described in the divisions of illnesses, and it does not help, and you see that the cauteries before mentioned in medicine, neither with fire nor with iron, benefit him, then you must heat the cautery which is called 'cultellare' until it turns white.
And sign thus on the temple a line of half an inch long, and remove your hand once, and press it so that you do not touch the artery and go no deeper than the bone;
And beware of the mandible that mutates when one chews, and the nerve has no reaction, and that spasms do not come to illness, and beware of blood flow from the artery when it is cut, for this cutting brings great fear especially to those who are unaccustomed and inexperienced. and leaves the work halfway;
but I will tell you how to stanch blood when an artery is cut, and I will show you where it opens in this book.
And if you see that this cautery is not sufficient for the disease and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals.
And if you see, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter on the extraction of an artery, with the cautery that has two knives; and this cautery is better and more effective than the other one.
from pain in the ears due to cold
When pain in the ear persists despite treatment with solutive medicines and other remedies that we have described in the previous chapter, and the pain does not go away, then heat this cautery called «poins», which has the following shape:
Afterwards, prick all around the ear where the pain is located in both ears if it occurs in both, and move slightly upwards from the root of the ear after you have marked the place to be cauterized; and has X points around each ear;
then treat the area until it is healed.
of the mouth's torture
Wounds that should be treated with cautery are only those that cause bleeding, as we have said in the divisions of diseases;
and do not apply cautery to appearances that come from dryness and nerve pain.
When you treat this appearance of a wound that bleeds from fluids and discharges from the head and from gargling, and it does not improve, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another slightly further from the temple, and the third in the junction between the two lips;
and apply the cautery to the part that appears healthy, and cauterize above the tip of the ear at the horn of the head, and another one on the temple as long as a finger; and leave the cautery on until the middle of the heart is burned.
and this is the shape of the cautery:
And it has the appearance of the scalpel that we placed earlier, but it is a little more slender and the blade should be a little thicker.
Afterward, dress the wound as I have said before, until it is healed.
When the apoplexy is old and you treat it thus as we have said, but it does not help, and the patient has a fever, then make him three cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one at the place called 'vessel' as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach;
and dress them as we have said before.And if he has an old wound and you dress it thus as we have said,
of quicksilver
For this illness, give the patient large pills to cleanse the brain;
then completely shave the head of the sick person and place on the back of the neck the mustard plaster that is written about in the treatise on plasters;
and this is how to do the cautery: if he does it as I have said.
If he is cured in this way, that is good;s’il ne fuet, querre li un embaumeur ou un med if not, get an embalmer or a doctor[who will] cauterize the scalp from the top of the head down to the neck, and have two inches between each cautery;and if he is not cured, he should be given three cauteries on the scalp, going down from the top of the head to the neck, with two inches between each cautery;s’il ne fut sanz dolor et sanz saingne, querre li un embaumeur ou
if there is no pain and no bleeding, get an embalmer or a doctor[who will] cauterize it as the others, and if you see any hair coming out, and the patient is enduring it, do one cautery in the middle;et si tu vels ajouter encores plus de cauteres, querre li un embaumeur ou and if necessary, two others on the two horns, and treat it until it is healed.
and use the cautery called "olive tree", as I have already said.
The head must be cleansed of hair and of what we have already mentioned;
After shaving the head of the patient, then do cauterization all over the head and on each horn, and once behind and three times on the spine of the neck;
and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is strong, then do four cauterizations on the spine of the back; and let it be until the hottest part burns, then lift your hand; After healing, use the cautery called "olive tree" which we have mentioned earlier.
of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use cautery except for those who are phlegmatic; it is first necessary to cleanse the brain of hair and other things that we mentioned in the division when the illness is great and suffering, taking medicine.
And if it is a child who cannot bear it, make him a gargle and chew, purifying the brain often with good meat.
after the king the head in the middle, and make the cautery according to what we have said before, and the cautery on the vessel, and on each horn. and if the ailment is external and tolerable, make him cauteries as I have said for those who have paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cautery be olive according to the manner that I have described.
If the disease is in an infant, make to him 1 subtle cautery according to this manner:
When through the cause of melancholy there are corrupted humours and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with mild cauteries as we have said for one who has paralysis.
And if through the cause of melancholy there is the surplus declining to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him something to drink by which the brain is cleansed, according to what it says before in the division.
After the king the head of the ailment; After that, make a well-made linen bandage, as a circle, and put it around the head.
and the ailment tied up, and held firmly on all sides.
After that, present the linen, and apply the plasters of old beaver fur; and heat the fire gently so that he can bear it when you apply it to him. after emptying the circle within the head, and letting it cool.
and do this to the patient once every week with other good treatment until he is healed.
Or if you want to cauterize it all over by making multiple points on the whole cautery.
This cautery moistens the brain greatly;
and then put on cotton wetted in butter and grease of goose fat.
of their eyes When eye disease first appears in the eyes through the signs that I have described in the division, then begin and give the patient drink that cleanses the head, and guard it from all moisture, and make him sweat in the bath several times while fasting.
Afterwards he orders him to turn his head and cauterizes the scalp, doing 2 cauteries on the 2 temples if the headache is in both eyes together, or one if it is in one eye;
and cut all the veins and arteries that are beneath the head with the cautery, and make the cauteries long according to the width of the temples;
and guard against bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop it with as much power as you have.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision, the cautery how to stop it;
and sometimes a cautery or hot iron is placed beneath the two bones at the back.
and it is seen that this is from cold phlegmatic excesses, then he should do the cautery which I have mentioned earlier in the downward breath to the eyes: I cautery on the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries or hot irons beneath the two bones; and if more is needed, then he should cauterize bleeding above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
When you treat him according to what we have said in the previous section, and he does not improve, then give the patient three nights of drinking through a tube. After the king, take the head, and cauterize it with olive oil in the middle of the cautery. And make two cauteries with a cautery called 'clavicle' above the two joints, a little under the hairline;
and be careful of the artery that you do not pierce it.
And this is the form of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
When the paper of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery, which is called "olive". of which there is the shape:
And if you see, make two cauteries on the joints as long as the joints are;
and do not leave the hand except that the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner I have described.And if you see, make two cauteries on the joints as long as the joints are; and do not leave the hand except that the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner I have described.
the hair that points the eye Sometimes the hair of the eyelids turns towards the inside, and prick the eye, and they make cauteries according to two methods: it is known from fire, or burning medicine.
The patient should be instructed to let the hairs grow long and even by using a fire cautery; and if they prick at their base, hold them steady so they do not move until they grow out.
When they have grown and are even, then put the patient in a warm bath; afterwards, draw on paper a figure that is similar to the hollow of a myrtle berry, and let the beginning of the sign be among the hairs;
then place wet cotton soaked in egg white and musk of periwinkle over the eye, then heat the cautery so that it matches the shape;
Afterwards, cauterize little by little according to the figure you have drawn, so that the heat reaches the area;Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme,
and the sign of health is when you see the gums recede, and the hair stands up on the tip of the nose;
then release your hand, and leave it for three days, then apply wet cotton in butter until the blister is healed; after cleaning the wound until it is healed.
And if afterwards hair comes and the gums are soft then restart the cautery on the same spot, just as you did before;
and if the hair has fallen out, then cauterize until the gums are raised to their natural level, and are even, and do not prick the eye.
The hot cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hair grow long and even, then make a parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf;
then take French soap and live lye, of each one-third, and grind them well together; and make it quickly so that it does not cool down, then spread it on the mold that you have made like the myrtle leaf, and put them on paper. and if the illness is only in one eye, then it should be treated there, and if in both, then in both; and put underneath the eye cotton moistened with egg white;
and the head of the patient should be in a healthy position, and put your hand showing under the medicine, and press it gently and move it around every time the patient feels a stinging sensation from the medicine, for it stings as if it were fire.
When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your finger. And when the stinging has passed, lift up the eye, and check if you see the paper lifted as it was lifted by the constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is like that, then it is good.
If not, then apply more medicine to the area until the work is equalized and the eyes are set in their proper position.
Then place wet cotton wool on the wound until it heals, after cleaning the area of the ointment that is called "diafenes" and others, so that it is clean.
And if you need to take care of your work well with great care that it does not leak medicine into the eyes.
And if the skin becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then recommence the medicine on the area that has softened of the paper properly, just as you did before; After cleaning it until it is healed;and li poils soient lons, et li oculi ne se muevent en lor nass
and the hairs are long, and the eyes do not move in their growth: and this is the shape of the fire-shackle:se li fuelles
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size, and according to this is your constraint;et s’il adonsent les poils qui sont sur la fuellie, il se doit mettre le cautere en lor nassance et le tenir tant qu’il ardisse, si com tu as dit;
and is not returned to the right path by one who has studied this art.
on the treatment of fistulas by cautery
When you are treating a fistula as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments are not helping, then you should use cautery according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place his head in your lap; and have the assistant hold the patient's head between his hands in such a way that it does not move or nod;
then soak cotton in vinegar or pigeon droppings and place it over the eye;
next, heat the cautery iron to a medium temperature;
and hold it to the head in the shape of an arch over the eye;
if you see it pointing from one side to the other, and if you see, it is also like a tent;
but all the same, this is how it should be held for your work.
After opening the fistula, press and drain it, and then dry it; and if it is closed, she works on it and draws out the bowstring;
afterwards, put on the hot cautery quickly, and hold your hand on the cautery at the place under the eye, so that your hand does not make a mistake; and put the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of cautery as far as the bone, that would be good. If not, then repeat the cautery again once more, and another time if you need to, and leave it for three days;
afterwards, put on wet cotton in butter, and let it heal with the ointment until it is healed, and if 40 days pass and it is not healed, then put on corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and let the king do as he wishes in his kingdom.
And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula which some of the ancients spoke of. Understand about a fistula, and probe the area;si li fistule a III entres, si ne fuige pas le cautere, et after placing it in the split , apply a subtle chamois which has the form : and they make to the amount of an egg; and hold your hand on the chamois firmly so that the patient does not move at all, so that the molten lead does not run into his eye;
and it is necessary to place on the patient's eye wet cotton soaked in vinegar or in water:
the lead will heal the fistula, and the healthy eye will be miraculously healed.
And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization we have described, that is good. If not, then one must open the vein and draw the fistula back into the body of the vein according to what is appropriate in its own place.Et si li fistule sont en la main, ou en la pie, ou en autrui membrez del corps, si covient aministrer pertus au neif qui sont approchiez de li fistule:
cracks in the lips Many times cracks occur in the lips that are called "hair," especially in children's lips.
When you treat these cracks as we have described in the sections above, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small scalpel according to this shape:
And they place it in these holes until it reaches the bottom;
afterwards, clean the area of ointment until it is healed.
When an abscess forms at the root of the gum or in the eye, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, afterwards it becomes suppurant and rot, and is lanced and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in sections, and it does not help at all: therefore, you must have the cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the hot iron comes to the bottom of it, and at the back also;
and do this once or twice after treating it as we have said in treatments, until it is healed;
and if it is treated thus, that is good; and if not, then one must expose the area and remove the corrupted bone according to what you find in his shoulder joint.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it doesn't help, then put the head of the patient in your lap; After heating the cautery of which the form will come below in such a way that you put a cane on the tooth;
and put the hot cautery inside, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth;
then lift your hand and reapply the cautery according to your will;
then fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and let him gargle for an hour and spit it out.
And in this way, a tooth that was loose is made firm, and the gums are made soft and moist, and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
of toothache
When toothache comes from coldness, or there is coldness or whiteness, and the remedies of medicine do not work, then cautery is needed in two ways:Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’ and fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes
Butter cautery is such that you take butter from a cow, and put it on the end of a spoon made of iron or copper. Take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a skewer, then dip it in hot butter and apply it to the aching tooth until it cools.
And so do this often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth; and if you see moisture in wool and cotton, dip it in cold butter and apply to the aching tooth, and place hot iron on top until the fire reaches the gum of the tooth.
Fire cauteries are performed with an iron or copper rod that is thick enough that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth.
After you heat the cautery, in the shape that follows, apply it to the tooth and hold your hand there until the cautery cools.
do so often, because the pain will go away that day or the next.
And it is necessary for the patient to fill his mouth with good butter quickly before this cautery, and then he can bear the heat;
and this is the form of the cautery:
And make a cautery of whatever size you want, according to what you are able;
and this is the form of the tongs:
of scrofula When scrofula is caused by cold moisture and is unresponsive to medicine, then heat the cautery so that this form comes next, and it has two openings for the smoke to exit from the other side of the cautery;
and place the hot cautery on the abscess once, or as many times as necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess;
and if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it for three days. and apply wet cotton on the burn until the scorching is healed;
afterwards, treat the area with ointments and poultices until it is healed.
When moisture prevails upon the channels of the lungs, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient must first be purged by solubilizing remedies;
afterwards, apply the cautery to the root of the throat, and be careful not to go too far into the throat, and do not burn the heart but just a little.
Afterwards, apply another cautery at the junction of the neck and the head, at the top of the spine, and let the cautery be the one called 'clavicle', as we have described it earlier;
and treat the area as we have said before, until it is healed.
When all illnesses of the stomach are due to cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the illness is chronic, then perform fire cauterization on the navel in the affected areas. and another cautery between the breasts;
and the cautery that is called "key" according to the form that was described earlier.
And if you see it, perform a cauterization by piercing the entire cautery that is called "pin", according to the form described earlier for ear diseases;et si les poils sont lons et laies et ne se puet muevre li mal, fai cautere sus lor nassance de coi li cauteres qui est apelez «aguyl» selonc le
And if the hairs are long and laid back, and the patient cannot move, perform a cauterization at their base with the cautery that is called "needle", according to the following
After curing the wound according to what has been said before, let there be three cauteries according to this form:
And for this reason cauteries are gentler when you do them three times.
of the shoulder dislocation
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, have the patient lie on his back and on his side; then gently press his heart with the tip of your left hand;
and if it is dislocated inside, heat up the cautery which has the shape of the nerve's path;
and cauterize the heart until it pierces through to the side, and you will see the shape of the cautery in four places;
and for this reason, six cauteries are made with the cautery which has three nerves, so that the shape of the cauterizations are six cauteries;
and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the shape of the cautery which has three nerves;
And sometimes it is placed on this one nerve so there are eight cauteries.
Afterwards, put crushed vitriol on the cautery; Afterwards, have the patient rest, and do not move the limb for a long time until it is well healed.
And if it is dislocated above, not much happens, therefore make the cautery on the thick part of the cautery clave, or a lot of cauteries in puncturing.
Because the joint is closed and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
When there are chills and a lot of moisture in the stomach, drawing it out to his complexion, and many catharres multiply in him, and he is not helped by the usual methods of treatment, then the patient should be placed on his back, extending his legs and arms. Of this then after make three cauteries I under the collar bone by the quantity of a bean, at all cautery clave, and two cauteries apart on either side so that the figure of the cauteries is in three angles, and there is such space between them that they do not come together when they bend rot;
and be the cauteries so deep that they pustulate both parts of the heart, and be the figure of the cauteries according to this form without adjustment:
And if you wish to cauterize a large cautery within the stomach according to this form:
and whoever is afraid of this cautery, cauterize in pointing and sign upon the stomach I. point according to the quantity that you wish to eat; then cauterize it at all cautery which is called "points.
After the cure of the ulcer that we have discussed earlier, until it is healed.
When pain in the liver comes from cold and moisture and excessive windiness, as it is forced out of its natural disposition by excesses. and the patient is cured of this as we have said in the sections above, but if he does not benefit, then he should be bled over his liver. and perform three cauteries according to this form and figure and quantity over the liver, avoiding the hypogastric region, where the intestines of man are.
There should be the thickness of a thumb between each cautery. The cauteries should be held lightly on the body, and your hand should not press down too hard during the entire cautery process.
Only half of the cautery should be applied at a time, and the patient should be kept upright on his feet.
And if he cannot stand, then he should lie down and extend his legs and raise his arms.
And if you wish, you may cauterize with the sword, if you are skillful and wise in the art, and be careful not to burn the whole body; you would cause it to wither. and do not let it come to boiling, for the skin is very delicate in that place, and you can tell by looking.
When there is an abscess on the liver, and you wish to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, then the pain is not too severe;
and if it is in the membrane, then there is violent pain.
And when this treatment is being applied to the abscesses, the patient should be reclining on his back;
then press down on the spot where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which is like a rod, and this is how it is done: And cauterize with the cautery until the skin is burned, and goes as far as the nerve, until all the pus is gone.
after the wound has healed, according to the treatment of wounds, until it is healed;
and one must not use this cautery except by someone who has studied medicine for a long time, and by whom these diseases have been corrupted at times.
Therefore he can safely operate, and in any case it seems to me that it is better to leave it alone.
of the cautery for pleurisy
The ancients said that one should make cauteries for pleurisy from the roots of aristologist, and in such a way: take a root of aristologist that is long, dry, as thick and as long as your two fingers; and anoint it in oil, and heat it in embers, and cauterize the large cautery between the armpit and the neck, and two small cauteries a little lower down on the part that is under the beard;
and perform cauterization between the fifth and sixth ribs, inclining slightly backward. and one cautery in the groin, and one above the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two at either side of the groin below the cautery between the shoulders;
and do not press your hand, but do it plainly as in perfumery.
And some ancient ones said that one should use an iron cautery like a razor, heat it and place it between the ribs, until it reaches that abscess. and jump out of the pain, as we have said about the abscess in the liver.
But in this operation there is fear of death for the patient, or a fistula occurs which cannot be healed.
of the mouse
When you treat the disease of warts with what we have said about the divisions of treatment, and it does not help, then they resort to three methods of cauterization, all of which are good.
Of these, one method is that you make three or four cauteries, aligning them according to the length of the mouse, and according to the shape of the cautery of the liver which we have described before.
and do not press your hand to the entire cautery, and let the patient lie on his back;
and another way of cauterization is to heat the cautery which has the nerve, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
and lift the skin where the mouse is, or the wound comes from the left side, and let the elevation be according to the skin, according to the length of the body, and the cautery according to the width of the body.
Afterwards, push the heated cautery into the nerve until it pierces through to the other side, and then pull out the cautery, and in this way there will be four holes.
And if you see that it is necessary, then cauterize with the entire cautery at three nerves.
After the ulcer has healed for a long time, it is worth more than the other ulcers mentioned earlier.
A cautery is not suitable for an epidenitis, except in the manner that is called "asclytes.
When you treat it according to the methods we have described in divisions, and your treatment is not helping, then you must make four cauteries around the armpit, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the mouse, two behind the back on the spine, and one on the buttock; and the cautery should be applied close to the thick part of the heart.
Afterwards, let the cautery remain open for a long time, and do not stop treating the disease after the cautery; and healing will be hastened, and the two intentions with the help of God will come together.
The shape of the cautery for the belly should be like the key that we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is shown there.
When the feet are swollen in the case of dropsy, and they are full of yellow water, you should cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger; and move your hand with the cautery without turning it.
And do not go too deep, thus one will avoid the yellow awl, and let the cautery follow this form:
Afterwards, make two cauteries on each leg at the point of the tibia; and let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg;
and leave the cauteries for a long time without curing, until the evil comes out;
after the other cures that we have spoken of.
When a distension of the belly comes from cold and moisture, as long as the retentive and digestive power which is in the stomach and intestines is impaired, and cannot be cured by any means of curing; and you see the patient suffering greatly and very weak, then make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken of before about the cautery of the stomach, with a circulating cautery; and make 4 cauteries around the belly subtle and within each cautery a subtle cautery-needle, and 2 cauteries on the hips;
And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the shoulder, and one cautery on each elbow, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good support.
on the treatment of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are in the anus, one or more, and are old and consist of large amounts of cold and moist corrupted humors, and they are treated as we have said by division, and it does not help to make cauteries: III on the spine of the back, that which is all out of alignment below, tap and tap in a triangular shape, and I cauterize below the armpit II times;
and if you think his stomach is cold, and the meat is not digesting, and one sees the face swell, then on the face we make the great cautery on the stomach, as it was said before, and another on the liver, and another on the mouse with the whole cauterization of the clavicle; and let the cautery remain open a long time. After cleaning the wound until it heals.
When you cut the skin, heat the cauterizer which resembles a razor, and then place it all ablaze on the copped skin; and leave your hand so that the cautery comes to the origin of the vein, from which the blood flows.
Do this once or twice, and if there is much inflammation, then cauterize each one as we have said. After the treatment of the wounds with beneficial ointments until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the ulcer, it will have greater benefit.
When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will discuss in its place, such a disease comes that it cannot be healed except by cautery.
When there is a fistula, and it becomes suppurating and oozing corrupted moisture, then you must probe it with a thin rod, and be careful that you know how deep the rod goes into the tent.
After heating the cautery which seems right to the surgeon, insert it into the fistula according to the amount that the pus has entered, and repeat the cautery until the infected and rotten flesh is burnt, once, or twice or three times, according to the amount of its need.
And be careful not to burn any nerve that is there, and the large veins.
If the fistula goes into the bladder and intestine, then be careful of those places, and do not push too hard, and think that it is not a sensitive spot.
after curing the wound until it is healed, and if the wound is suppurating and the matter has been discharged for a long time, then once you see that the wound is completely healed;
and if the matter has not been discharged, know that the wound is infected and the bone at the bottom is rotten; and thus according to one of those we will say in their place.
When cold pain comes with heavy rains and strong winds, and does not take hold of a woman, then you should make a cautery on the breasts on both sides using the claw-shaped cautery instrument we described earlier;
and if we cauterize it in the middle, then there should be three cauteries in a line, and they will be of greater help.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak due to cold and moisture, and the patient retains urine, then make a cautery on the underside of the penis, where the hairs begin at the base, one on the right and one on the left, and each cautery should be as long as the tip of a finger;
and make a fire cautery on his back, or wherever you need it.
and the cautery should be made in the shape described above.
When the body is cold and moist, and fails to conceive, and the flowers are corrupt and their termini late; and when they come, there is great pain; therefore, one must make three cauteries around the womb, as we have said in the cautery for the bladder, and two fire cauteries on the back;
and the cautery should be made in the shape described above.
When viscous moistures descend into the box of the hip, and because of this, it dislocates from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when one measures them together;
and the place of the dislocation is found hollow, then one must cauterize the patient on the hip at one cautery similar to a circle, and mark around the hip in front of the location as it turns, so that the hip is within the circle;
and if it is such a cautery as that with which one cauterizes the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present, make three large olive-stone cauteries, and let the cauteries be as deep as all the ulcers.
and cure it until it is healed.
of hip pain When pain comes in the hip joint, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the disease is cured of what we have said in the section and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the disease of the gross humors with stinking pills, or other good-smelling pills like them. After that, make a cautery:
and the way of the cautery is according to two ways:Car il faut adonc prendre le fu de l’olivaire et li fai III cauteres That is to say, together with burning medicines, and fire cauteries.
Fire cautery can be performed in many ways, one of which is as follows:
that you cauterize on the hip joint in a triangular shape according to this pattern, and make each cautery deep and large, with the distance between each cautery the thickness of a thumb, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped.
sometimes cauterization is performed in the middle of the hip joint, with four cauteries according to this pattern:
And if you wish, cauterize it with a circular cautery as we have described before for dislocation of the hip.
But do it in such a way that the circle contains all of the hip, and all of the soft tissue is burned.
And that is the way they do it in sciatica when the pain is in the hip and does not reach the thigh or leg.
And if it extends to the thigh and leg, make two cauteries where the patient says the pain is, and one cautery above the ankle on both sides.
and let the cautery be with a hot iron, and burn the thickness of the skin;
and if the pain extends to the top of the foot or near there, cauterize where they feel the pain three points or four with the cautery that is called a "point. And if need be, do more.
And if it seems that the pain is beneath the knee toward the thigh, cauterize with the flat or circular cautery; and be careful in all your cauteries not to let the iron stay so long as to burn the nerves and large arteries, nor to cause greater harm and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who had cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it until the leg was completely swollen, and the foot as well, and it became pierced and all the feet were corrupted. After a stomach ache which caused his death.
And if the pain is in two places together, do cautery in one and then the other, according to this method.
And the wise men say about the cautery of the hip, from which this is the way: make such an iron and let it be as wide at the tip as a little finger, or a bit less, and let it be serrated on both edges with the space between each serration being the thickness of a finger joint;
and let the tongs be divided into two parts, and also be like noses, and let it have one handle of well-made iron;
and this is the form:
And let it be heated until it is all red and glowing, and then place it on the box of the diseased hip, and then turn it over to the healthy side;
and cauterize it once with the cautery and leave it for three days; and then make an ointment from suet, and let the wound remain open for a long time; after the treatment with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we use this cautery sparingly due to the fear of its appearance, and those who use it sparingly see little success;
Nevertheless, it is one of the good cauteries that can be endured by those who are able to tolerate it and in the places where it is effective.
The cautery of medicine burns if you make the instrument to interlace in such a way that the edge of the door descends, and it is made of bronze or iron with one side long, and in the thickness it has 2 nuts, and between each there is the quantity of the thickness of a finger. and they are open below and above, and join together according to this form:
Afterwards place the box of the hip on the patient lying on his healthy side, and then press your hand firmly on the box of the hip. Afterwards pour between the two circles of the hot awe which is heated in the fire for one hour, and let the patient endure the heat and scorching.
For he will find relief as from fire;
And when the burning is passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the hip gently, and leave it thus for three days, and put on butter until that which was scorched is healed. and let him for three days until the swelling goes down;
and this would be the last remedy after treating with ointments until it is healed.
And if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, then make the instrument that colors red according to how you made it in the hip dislocation;
and this is the manner of the hot color, and I have written it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Take alkali and quicklime, as much of each, and grind them together, and put them in a nine-pot. where there is a small hole so that the point of a needle can enter;
where there is a small hole so that the point of a needle can enter; and then put another pot well-plumbed on top of it, and place an alkali and heat and the red dye on top, until there is two fingers' worth of powder above the liquids, after you have mixed it well with your hand;
and let it be thus until dye water and pieces fall into the plumbed pot; then take all that dye, and pour it over heat and alkali as before.
And then there will be a fever, which is treated with various medical remedies and cauteries on other limbs.
Because it does the same harm as fire, and there are other remedies with which one can cauterize the hip just like this: theriac, and honey of aniseed, and chalk mixed with soap. All these things mixed together.
And Galen tells of a remedy by which a man was cured of sciatic pain and a vein in his hip, and he praises it highly, saying that nothing else was done to him, and that he was healed in one go after this treatment, and that he then bathed as instructed below.
And you should prepare it in this way: take litarge in powder, dry and green, and grind it a lot with a little grease, and apply it to the hip and thigh and leg where the pain is located, and leave it there;
and leave it for three hours until the patient no longer feels the burning sensation. Then, take off the litarge and wash the area with wine, and if the pain still remains, repeat the process again.
And then he enters the bath until his body is somewhat warmed, and he enters the bed, and the pain will go away completely and he will be healed.
And know that no one should use such medicine with cautery unless after the evacuation of the body's fluids.
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's dung, it helps a lot;
and the cautery must be done in such a way. Take lamb's wool and grease it with old oil, and place it in the hollow between the big toe of the foot and the one next to it, which is called the 'foscile'.
Take dry goat's hair, and take it to the fire until it is charcoal, and place it on the wool, and let it be until it turns ash;
And do this again, and do not stop doing this until you feel through sensation that it has reached the hip, and the pain has ceased;
and this method of cautery is called "goat's hair cautery".
of the pain in the back
When pain comes in the back, whether from falling or impact or from excessive evacuation, or from similar appearances of cold matter, none of these appearances are worth cauterizing for, except for that which comes from the diffusion of cold matter.
After this, the patient should be bled with foul pills or similar, applied to their back where the pain is located, drawing three lines across, and in each line making V cauteries or more depending on the strength and amount that the patient can endure;
and the cautery should be done according to the cautery called "points";
and if you see, make three cauteries or four with the clave cautery tool according to this form:
This disease often affects young children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a narrow throat when they wake up, and fear. You will find it in the spine at the back, and the appearance of the others that come above the spine.
When you see this and you cure it, then cauterize it with a silver cautery according to this form. So that the purple cautery evenly affects each part of the spine.
And if you see, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery 2 or 3 lines apart, and have the points close to each other.
Afterwards, heal the site until it is healthy according to what we have said, and be careful not to apply cautery to any area that is swollen with pus and is affecting a nerve.
of the pain of the joints
When joint pain is caused by moistors that are expanded in each part of the body, and when it comes from the feet, which they call "podagre" properly, and when it is from a cold cause and does not heal with medicines, then it is healed with cauteries in such a way:
Make the mouth of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if there is a need to prick on the sole of the foot, do so with the entire cautery that one calls «point». And if the pains come up to the knees and the other joints, and this happens many times, then do cautery on each knee with three cauteries or four of each part, all in the olive-shaped cautery;
And if you need more, then do more, but don't hold your hand against it any longer than the thick of your heart is burnt.
And if the pains descend to the knee and back, administer the cautery we have described in its chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands, then make points around the wrist two lines;
and if there remains no pain in the fingers, then make points on every joint and on the hair of the hand;
and if the pains come up to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize every part and make good government for the patient and take medicine.
For if you give him good treatment and purge the phlegm, he will be healed with God's help.
When a hernia comes in the groin and the intestines descend into the scrotum, and it is new, then when you want to cure it, let him not eat that day; and let him use things that loosen the belly so that the feces descends from his belly;
after making him lie on his back between your hands, instruct him to tense his abdomen so that the bowels are drawn up, and bring them towards your fingers, and sign from under the navel over the bone of the wrist, and throughout a sign that is similar to half a circle above the body;
then heat the cautery with which there is the shape:
until it is white and dripping blood. then bring the bowels back to their place; and the assistant holds his hand so that they do not return;
and open the thighs for the patient, and put a pillow under his hips and a servant on each thigh pressing down, and another on the feet holding his hands down;
then place the cautery on the sign all around your hand, and hold it straight and press until you reach the bone, and if you don't reach it the first time, do it again until you reach the bone; and be careful that the blister does not burst when you apply the cautery; that you do not burn yourself; and that the patient does not die, or suffer some other harm.
And know that when you do not come to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
And one must make the cauteries for children small according to their ears, and for large people also large according to their size;
after 3 days, clean the site of the cautery with butter until the scald is healed;
afterwards, apply other ointments until it is healed, and have the patient lie on his back for 40 days until the wound is well-healed;
and one must let the hair grow long enough that the blister does not burst when he is getting up and moving around.
And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, let him be given a well-made brace, and wear it for another 40 days;
and has good rest, works little and guards against too much eating and drinking and too much sexual activity;
and when he follows this instruction, he will be completely healed.
And I will say hereafter about the treatment of cutting in his shoulder.
When ulcers come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they are not growing anymore, then do the cautery with fire according to its quantity, and burn the third of the heart; after the cautery according to what we have said;
and some of the ancients say that one should cauterize it with a three-pointed cautery according to this form:
but first sign the site of entry and make a line along its width above the ulcer, and another across, and hold your hand still all over during the cautery.
But the first cauteries are lighter and milder.
of old pain in any limb When pain comes in a limb, either from falling or from injury, and that pain lasts a long time, and the treatment of medicine does not help, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called 'sharp', and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb, its smallness and weakness, and its torture and pain.
if he is healed by the first cautery, that is good;et s’il n’est pas sanez, tu le remets a son leu et tu le
and if he is not healed, you reset it to its place and you repeat the cautery on that one, for such is the custom that it should move to the member that is nearest to it, so you must do the cauteries until the patient is healed.et s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; et s’il n’est pas sanez, tu le remets a son leu et tu le recomences I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer
Some diseases are aided by cautery with great benefit, especially those that arise from putrefied humours and melancholy.
When you see it cauterized, be careful if the disease is in its early stages, and if it is healed according to what we have said in the division, neither decreasing nor lingering, and you doubt that corruption will spread throughout the disease, then do V cauteries on the head: and I emmi the head to the back of the neck, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hairline; and two on either side of the head, and one behind the neck;De la quare conme il est necesser que li cauteres soit fait sus li chef, adonques covient qu’
and leave your hand so that the cautery reaches the bone and comes to the surface so that the vapors of the gross humors can escape;Si tu veies qu’il ne se peut tros bien, adonques covient que li fai a la fine II cauteres sus les lombris de lor ciefs, et li enveie tant que ele vienne sus li chief,
and cauterize it on the mole according to its appearance.
And if the mange is spread everywhere; and she is losing her hair, then you must cauterize her with the cauteries that we have described earlier: one cautery on the head, two cauteries on the spine of the neck, six cauteries on the spine of the back, one large cautery on the groin, and one smaller one, two cauteries on both shoulders; two cauteries on the inside of the elbows, two cauteries on the tendons of the feet, one cautery on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the knuckles of the hands;
and be careful not to burn the nerves that are on the lower back;
sometimes you will make a cautery on the bone of the elbow, one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver.
And know that when you make more cauterizations, you help him more, and move him to profit.
and know that the patient feels no pain from the cautery as the healthy man does, because his body is already entirely corrupted.
And it is necessary that the cautery be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the manner of the irons.
Afterwards, treat the site with a poultice of wheat flour with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
When swelling comes to a limb and is cured by medicines and oils and poultices, but it is not healed, then he should make cauterizations on the limb according to the size and smallness of the limb;
and let the cautery be a little into the depth of the heart; then cure it with ointments until it is healed.
And sometimes cauterizations are made on the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that paralyzes the limb, and thus is removed the swelling;
and yet one should not intermeddle with this unless he understands the limbs and the exits of the nerves moving the body.
When the disease called "albaras" is woke up, and medicine's art is of no use, then cauterize it with a cautery tool slightly deeply, according to the amount of thickness of the skin, so that the whiteness is removed, and its color changes.
Then treat it with a poultice of wheat flour and lentils, with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood from the gut and blood from the almond, each in equal parts. Mix it all together, then bind it with a cloth, and keep it in place until it is healed.
the treatment of sores by cautery
When a chancre appears at its beginning, and you see it stopping, then cauterize it with a cautery that looks like a circle, all around the perimeter of the chancre.
And nonetheless, the wise say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the ulcer:
And I do not think this is good, for I fear that it may be burned and damaged, and indeed, I have seen this happen.
and a better way is to cauterize around it with the cautery called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it delays death either due to the excess fluid it creates or because of the age of the patient when they are decrepit (that is, very old) and they have little blood, or because of time; and you see them hastening to die: then cauterize them around with many small cauteries by pricking; afterwards, leave it as is. Because it will hasten its death.
And if you see it piercing all around with the cautery, then heat the cautery from which the form comes:
And put your hand in the middle of the disease called  "adubelati" until the cauteries have pierced the skin, and let the cauteries be such that the patient feels them throughout his body in such a way that the flow of the pus is relieved.
Afterwards, heal it perfectly.Si li saingne ne vult point curer ou si il demoure longuement en la meureir: adonques tu le remets a leu et covient que li fies 10 cauteres entor de l’esgoutte, et estraigne li keur par les eculz qui sont sus le piez, ou s’il ne veult point aler par les piés, adonques tu le traites a la maniere qu’adibele.
Another kind of disease is called "corroding", and it is nothing other than a melting of the member, for it melts the members as fire melts dry wood.
If you see this disease in a place that can withstand fire cautery, then heat the cauteries small and large according to what is appropriate for the location of the disease;
afterwards, cauterize it all over until you reach all the corruption and none of it remains, so that all that is corrupted is removed.Se il a grant dolor sus li leu qui tu cauterise, adonques tu prendras un petit trefon que tu aschaufes en la flamme del fuo et li laves li oucis de leu ou il a dolor, si com il
And then leave it for 3 days, and apply soft poultices with oil upon the cauterized places until the burns from the fire are healed, and all the corruption is removed.Et si li cauteres feuz ne puissent osteit toute la corruption, adonques covient qu’il soit remede par eschaudures de leus.
After the treatment of inflammations caused by humidity.
And if you see after three days that no hair grows, that is good.
and if not, then restart the cautery on what is left of the corrupted hair.
And this baldness has sometimes been cured with medicine in place of fire cautery;
but nonetheless fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already described the cure for medicine baldness in the division: take as much as you need.
of warts that come on the feet Many times it happens that on different feet a disease called "clos" according to our understanding occurs, and is a large, hard lump that affects the foot.Et si li pies sont trots, et ne peut aller en son office, que il soit eslongeant de la foyt que il doit; et si li pies de la main sunt trots, qu’il ne peut faire aucun ofis de main: et est li pies de la main et le pied trots, selonc la nassance.
And the cauteries for this disease are according to two methods. That is, fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Fire cautery is made so that you heat the cautery iron as hot as an oven, and it is made of good steel to the size that it can pierce the claw all around, and it has fine edges;
afterwards place it directly on the claw, and rotate your hand all around the claw until it reaches the bottom of the claw; and let him leave it for three days until it begins to ooze pus; then make a poultice of wild mallows crushed with salt, and leave the poultice on all night; the nail will come loose and be pulled out by the roots.
Then heal the wound with an ointment until it is cured.Cautere d’aigue chaude si est que tu prends de l’aigue boullante et la mets sus li clou tant qu’il fieent giter, et le remuers tot entor, et le remuers tot entor; puis li fai un emplaustre come celuy del cautere de feu.
And if they are turned around in the body, and often occur in hands and feet, then you must apply hot water cautery; and it is done in this way: take a brass or iron rod, or a pen of reed, and place it on the nail and the warts, that is to say, calluses; and place the rod so that it wraps around the nail, then put a little hot water on it, and hold your hand steady, and press your hand as you turn the rod so that the edge of the rod comes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot water a deep path all the way to the root;
and let the patient endure the biting of hot water for an hour; then let it be, and it will all come out by its roots.
Thus do one after another, until you have pulled out all those in the body, then heal them with ointments that generate flesh.
When someone trembles from coldness in their nerves, or from a fever, or something else, you should make 4 cauteries on the spine of the back, one cautery between each vertebrae: and one cautery on the penis, and one cautery on the stomach with an olive-oil cautery;
it will stop the trembling, and hasten the healing from the cold sickness.Si aurent les ches et les costez et les cuissiez fies, si covient que li fuiles la fi
There appear sometimes through the body sores or stinking pustules, which come from corrupt humours.
If they have sores and blisters on their shoulders, ribs, or thighs, then one must, when they first appear, make cauteries at the top of each blister:et li cauteres si fient ains qu’eles se brisent; et après que ele sont and the cauteries should be done until they burst; and after they have been burst, a fine cautery with a sprig of myrtle, or with the long root of aristolochia, or with a lens-shaped cautery.Si aurent les ches et les costez et les cuissiez fies, si covient que li fuiles la fi
And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow from thereforth, but the excess from which they come is disrupted, and they are healed.
but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
Many times there are great bleeding from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the surface, or in the incision of an abscess, or in the cautery of a limb, and in similar things; and it is very difficult to stop the bleeding.
And yet, when this happens to someone, you must quickly place your finger over the wound of the vein and hold it very firmly until the bleeding stops underneath your finger, and no more blood comes out;
then heat up several small and large olive-sized cauteries until they are all red hot;
then take a large or small cautery according to the wound and the location where the artery is running, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery there until the blood is staunched.
And if the bleeding starts again when you lift your finger from the wound and the cautery goes out, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are in the fire.
And do not cease doing this one after the other until the blood is staunched;
and be careful not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient;
and know that when blood escapes from an artery, it cannot be staunched easily itself when the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods we have described; either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by a tight bandage, or by medicine placed on it that has the power to staunch blood; and it should be bound and restrained skillfully.
He who administers a tight bandage or places hot objects on top, or similar things, will not benefit much if at all.
And if this happens to anyone and there is no mirror or medicine available, one should place their index finger on the wound as we have said, and apply pressure until it feels tight on the wound and on the vein. and do not move the finger but wet it with cold water often as long as it is very cold until the blood is congealed and swollen and tight.
and make inquiries beforehand about what he needs in terms of cauterizations and medications.
We have told you in the first chapter about all illnesses that require fire cauterization, or burning medications, and their actions, causes, instruments, forms of cauterizations;
and have placed this chapter from the head to the feet, and I will go through this same path in this chapter because one can more easily find what they are looking for.
And so that I may begin this, it is necessary, dear son, for you to learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and because of that greater caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often an evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and making an incision over an abscess, and in treating wounds, and in extracting arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things. Where there is doubt and fear, many die.
And I admonish you that you do not attempt foolishness. For in many ways people come to cures. they come from such people who, because of their disease, change quickly and die because of the great severity of their illness.Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoignes la dislocation premierement. and one should fear these.Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por
And from these there are those who give their sense and say:"Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor Wait, I am ready. and the patient is desperate.
You should not consent to those who come to you with this condition, but place more importance on your honor than your desire. Do not open it recklessly, but wisely and carefully, from what you are certain of and what you can cure and gain reward from.
Use prognosticating and indication in curing your patients so that salvation may be achieved.
And that will help you gain a good reputation, glory, and praise.
Very dear son, Our Lord gives you good understanding and uprightness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Now I have assigned this chapter to you in discussing the topic of cautery, according to what has been presented before in the chapter on cautery from head to foot, so that you can find more easily whatever you need.
Know that this disease often comes to children during childbirth, and when the head of the child is squeezed too tightly.
And sometimes it comes from an unknown cause.
I have never seen this disease in adults, and in all the cases I have observed, death has always resulted. and for this reason, it seems to me that I should leave the work in several parts.
I saw a child whose neck was filled with fluid, and his head swelled every day so much that he could not support it;
and it filled with fluid to the point of death, and this fluid collected under the bone above the throat, between the heart and the bone;
and the procedure is such that if the fluid is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, you should make a large incision in the neck;
and it should be as long as two fingers, so that the fluid runs out;
and here is the form of the spleen:
If the hollow is deeper, and the abscess is larger, then make two slits in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the fluid is under the bone, and you see the edges of the wound gaping open in every part, and the fluid spurts out when you press it with your hand from within, and it does not close up for you: then you must cut three slits on the head according to this manner:
And after the incision, draw out all moisture forcefully. After that, press the slits with pieces of cloth and powders, and apply wine and oil, and leave it thus for five days.
Then remove it, and treat the wound with poultices and ointments, and let the head hang freely, and give the patient dry food without moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
And another way of incision is that you observe where the abscess opens, and the gathering of pus;
for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Therefore cut where the abscess opens and drains pus, and make an incision according to what you are able to do.
and guard against covering the artery; and blood will flow, causing the patient to die from blood loss and the evacuation of moisture.
When it happens to someone that they have a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or the feet, and the disease is old, and the medicine does not help, then the last resort is cautery with which one will cut the two arteries.
Therefore, when you see them covered, have the patient lean back; then rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then squeeze the patient's neck tightly with the cloth; then look where the vein bites, and the veins on either side are behind the ears, and they are very close together;
then sign the veins inside, then cover one and press the other with a sharp spatula for two parts, so that the neck vein comes to the bone, and it should be done from the side of the head.
And if you see, insert the spatulum under the artery and cut it from above, cutting also .ij. fingers across.
And when the vein is cut, the blood will flow out continuously upward.
And if the artery does not open on feeling, then you must measure the quantity of space of three beans, then sign inside and cut to the bone;
and the amount of blood to be let out should be VI ounces, and perhaps a little more or less, depending on what the patient can endure and the fullness of the artery.
then examine the wound: if there is a lump on the bone, and pus does not come out, then open the wound and drain it, and treat it with ointment until it heals.
from the emetic When old-age anemia comes, and catarrh is acute, due to moistors of the eyes and heat in the temples and ancient soddeness and similar things, and he has been treated by various methods of medicine and all of it does not help him, then we should open the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
And the method of extraction is that the patient should stand behind the hair on his temples, and feel for the artery which opens in the temple, as it can be felt clearly through its pulsation, and is not very deep beneath the skin in some people who are too thin.
And if it is deep, the patient should press his neck with some fabric, then rub the area with something rough, and wash the area with warm water until the artery appears clearly. then take the spatula from which its shape comes: then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then pull it upward with tweezers, and carefully separate it from the tissues underneath in each part;
and if the artery is thin, then cut off that part according to the amount of the two fingers. For if it is not cupped, the blood will not flow everywhere throughout the body.
And draw out the blood from six parts, just up to three;
and if the artery is large, then you must tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread so that pus does not enter before the wound heals, and the blood comes out freely;
then cut off the excess between the two ties in that same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with a hot iron all the way to the bone until the shoulder is cut through;
and it is the mother's work, if the patient does not have a fever and is of a hot complexion. For the cautery is used to dry up moisture: therefore it is of greater help for moistures.
Or, for the extraction of veins, one should fill the hole with old cotton and place a well-made tent on top;
and when they are removed, they should be treated with dry medicines that cause scabs to form, and with tents, until they are healed;
and if, without cutting the artery as far as you operate, you hasten to cover it with cautery, then employ the site of vitriol and squeeze it in your hand so that the blood is stanched; and if you do not have vitriol available, then place your finger on the site so that the blood congeals, and apply cold water to the site until the bleeding stops, and then squeeze it as necessary;
And it must have between the two knives a thickness of a finger's width, and then when you have cut into both sides, you should place the hot iron on it until it reaches to the bone, and close the vein in two places. and they must be spaced apart between the two joints because it is not fused together by this cautery in its entirety.
And here is the shape of the cautery:
and that which is more mature and easier to extract from the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cutting cautery in two parts, but the cutting should be well-spaced so as to guard against their heat for a longer time. Because when the instrument is too thin, it holds less heat.
tears When tears from the eyes are flowing from veins that are above the forehead, and it does not respond to any medicine that is applied, and you see the face of the ill person turning red, and feeling a pulsation as if from trembling; and if they are dark and moist so that the hairs of the eyelids have fallen out, and the eyelids are swollen and scorched from the heat of the tears, then this treatment is necessary. And the ancients called it "cured by contusion", and it is that you do to the patient who has this disease, letting the hairs grow on his forehead, then make three incisions on his forehead evenly according to the length of his forehead;
And the ancients called it "cured by contusion", and it is that you do to the patient who has this disease, letting the hairs grow on his forehead, then make three incisions on his forehead evenly according to the length of his forehead; and one of the incisions should be about two inches down from the forehead in the middle, and the other two at the sides above the eyelids; and beware of cutting into the arteries that are at the sides above the eyelids;
and keep your hand away from the continuations of the two mandibles, and let each wound be about a third of an inch deep across the joints;
and have at hand a piece of sponge and plenty of bandages to wipe away the blood, then insert the spatulum, cut into two pieces, with which you will make the incision:
from the incision by the temple all the way to the second incision; and cut all around the skull between the two slits down to the bone, then cut from the middle slit to the other second one, and then remove this spatula. if you put into the first cut the instrument that is called "culter", and is very sharp on one side and not sharp on the other, and this is its form:
And place the knife cutting towards the chest bone in the heart, and the other knife towards the bone, and cut it so that it comes to the middle split.
And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous down to that which opens up the skull, and then likewise make an incision in the middle slit up to the other one;
and then draw out the blood equally, and express the area for the blood that has been taken;
then place in each slit a tent of old cotton, and place on top wet bandages soaked in wine and oil and garlic, and be sure that no abscesses form there;
and on the third day loosen the bandage, and administer a plentiful poultice of warm water, then treat with basilicon ointment and rosemary oil, and other remedies for wounds, until it is healed.
When someone experiences acute cataracts and you see their eyes become dim and small, and their vision weakens, and the eyelids burned: and the hair falls out, and in the forehead there is great pain, and the patient sneezes; therefore you may know from these accidents that these matters and this cataract come from many veins, and the mother fluid that is in it, is thus cured.
And you should command the patient to raise his forehead, then make a large cut in the middle of the forehead, and another wide one nearby. And begin from the left temple to the right temple, and make the incision up to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves in the temples that move the eye;
and when the bone is exposed, [the surgeon] should suck out all the blood with a sponge and then stuff between the two lips of the wound with old cotton and linen bandages. then [the surgeon] should lay moistened cloths in wine and oil on top, and beware of hot abscesses;
when it is removed, you should rub the bone until pus begins to form, then clean the wound with dry substances that cause pus to form.
In this manner: take 2 parts of flower of wheat and 4 parts of colophony, and make an ointment; and administer it in these wounds to cause pus to form throughout.
of the cleaning of the ears
All that falls from the ears is one of four things: or grains, or a stone from a mine, or something similar like iron;si est grain, le leve et le met en aigue vieille que n’ait poil, si covient que tu or seeds, such as beans, peas; or flowing substances such as water, oil, and similar things.
When it shrinks in the ear, or something else that doesn't adhere to or grow in the ear, put the ear towards the sun.
If you see a stone, then drip some violet oil or oil of castorem, then administer an extract; and make him sneeze with a solution, and plug his nose when sneezing comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and prop up the ear at the top.
Many times it comes out through this treatment;
and if it does not come out, then administer an extract with sharp tweezers, of which this is the form:
If it pops out with the tweezers, that is good;
if not, then administer an extract at the thin end of a small needle;
and if it does not come out with that, then make a brass rod and insert the head of the rod into the ear canal firmly, and plug around the rod with soft wax so that air cannot enter with the rod; then treat it again later, because often it comes out again as we have said.
and if it does not come out in this way, then grab some grit with your fingers, and put some instrument that is suitable for doing this, and put a little cotton around it; then press the grit onto the stone or whatever it is, and push it out.
And if it does not pop out with all the things we have said, then you should quickly split the ear so that pus and blood come out, and a spasm.
And the way to split it is that you first make the patient bleed from the head, and draw out blood according to his strength, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn his ear up, and make a small slit at the root of the ear where the grease depends; and make the incision as deep as a moon, so that you reach the stone, then squeeze it hard with your finger and suck vigorously with your mouth;
and treat it until it is healed.
And if there are grains within that are swollen, then administer extraction;
and if it cannot come out, then administer the spatumile tenve subtly according to this form: and bring about incision of that grain.
But do not do this if you think the grains are moist from the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces;
then extract it with delicate tweezers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.
Therefore in the water that runs into the ear, the patient should use scent to cause sneezing first, and fill the ear with soft cotton.Quant il distend l’oreille si que li muque se distende, met a l’entree de l’oreille, es deux costez del garnement, quelque oile violete et suc, si com nos avons dit; et s’il ne peut venir fuer par ceste manier, si covient le faire estracter as pinceures subtilz. And let him lie on the affected ear itself. If it jumps out by itself, that is good.
If not, then take many stones according to the length of your fingers, thin and light, and heat them slightly in the fire; and cut a hole in the patient's ear, and pierce through from the other side of his foot, and pierce another stone onto the stone that is in the ear; and do not cease to push this stone through the other until all the water comes out, and so it will flow out entirely;
and if you see that it is taking hold, push one end of the reed into the ear and heat the other end in fire until the most painful reed is burned;
then do this with other reeds until all the water comes out, as we have said about the stone.
In extracting a foreign object from an animal, if it is small in size like a tick or similar, remove it as we have described in the section on division;
but if it is large enough to be felt, use forceps for extraction; and it is the lightest thing to remove from the ear.
In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the section on distillations, and the treatment is not helping, then you must examine the ear in the sunlight: if you see no worms, then treat it with subtle pincers, and if they don't appear, then take the skin of a hen's egg.
And it is tight below and loose above. Then insert the most slender end into the ear according to the amount of suffering of the patient, then suck gently on the egg; do this frequently until all the worms come out.
And if they don't come out, then stop up the ear with cotton as I have said in the section on stones;
and if they don't come out as we have described, then administer the distillations that the ancients have tried in the extraction of worms, and you will find them in the section on distillations;
and if you distill your oils and medications into the ear with all this equipment, so that it is shaped as you see it: And let there be tubes of silver or bronze beneath the small holes and above for distillation;
and to push into the distillation within the instrument of bronze well made for this purpose, and if you see take a razor and wrap cotton around the point neatly; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever you want of your medications into the canal, and let the canal be in the ear;
then put within the razor all the cotton, and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled into the canal of the ear; and let him feel the pain within, and let the distillation be heated by fire so that it is distilled into the ear; and make sure it is not too cold, because the medicine would not be as good.
of the cleaning of the ears
No child is born without an opening in their ears;
and the same thing happens in houses through a blockage of the ear, or from pus born within the ear, and this blockage sometimes bursts open in the ear, if one cannot see it;
and sometimes there is a slight discharge from the opening, which one can see quite clearly.
When it bursts open without being seen, it is a sign of a serious condition in many cases, and when one can see it, you should put the patient's ear to the sun; and look inside:si li pertus de l’oreille est em par if you see the lining exposed, and the hole in the eardrum is visible, then this is how it should be treated:et s’il n’est pas em parfont, tu mets l’oreille au soleil, et la oevre a tot cest
And let it be sharp and pointed at both ends, so that it does not pierce the ear.
if the operation is on the cartilage of the ear, hold it with small forceps and cut gently until all the cartilage is removed.
And if the growths are deep in the ear, take a thin, small razor and heat it slightly in the fire, then place it on the body of the ear.
If you feel the operation where the patient feels great pain in his ear, pierce gently and be careful not to cut the nerves of the ear;
then insert a tent into the ear according to the size of the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment. Do this for several days until the wound is closed, or take a tent and moisten it with rose water, and powder over with ground vitriol;
and if you see the ear is swollen, it is necessary to pull out the tent and insert another tent moistened with cerotum made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is removed; then treat it until it heals.
And if there is bleeding, take a sponge and dip it in cold water, and apply it to the ear, and use other remedies which stop the bleeding that come from distilling treatments.
This is a description of a treatment for hair that is damp and tangled. The instructions are to use tweezers and pinches to straighten it out from the roots, and then cut off the ends with a spatulum. then apply powdered vitriol to the area.
If there is no scabs, then cauterize it with a thin lens-shaped cautery iron, and after the incision, apply honey.
Many times they grow back, as nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, the roots are burned and they do not return.
of hail Many times, a substance that looks like gravel forms on the hair, and this is what the disease is called "hail," as it is a collection of thick moisture above and below the hair. the works are such:
the works are such: take care that hail does not strike from both sides simultaneously, and this is an easy thing to understand.
then make a large cut, then very gently peel the skin from each side, and then grasp it with forceps and stitch it up.
if you cannot sew it closed without piercing the paper a little, do not worry, as this will not harm the patient;
and if the wound is large, stitch it closed and treat it until it is healed;
and if it is small, do not force it shut, as the natural healing process will restore and close it quickly.
And if the hematoma is descending into the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper inside out and grasp it with forceps and stitch it up, pressing from both sides;
and if the paper is removed by incision, this does not matter;
and when the blisters are cut, wash with salty water and treat the area with a poultice until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the eyes Eczema is a fat that is woven into the paper-thin skin of children and the elderly, and it is very painful. They get pus in the mornings and cannot look at sunlight because their tears flow freely.
This is why they sleep with their mouths open and snore, because the skin around their eyes is wet and swollen, covering the eczema that appears in the corners of their eyes. And when you press the place between your fingers and feel the exinach between them.
And the way to treat this is for the patient to put his head on the lap of the healthy person;
And then take a linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains exirnach from each part, then place it on him; And press with your fingers on both sides so that the exirnach is gathered within the circle;
Then make in the center of the moisture with a sharp spatula a slit that is not wider than the wound one makes to let blood out of a vein;
And cut through the skin down to the bone until you reach the exirnach; And in many cases, exirnach comes out of the slit, according to the shape of a piece of white grease.
Therefore, take it all out with a piece of cloth squeezed between your fingers, turning your hand to the right and left until it is spread out;
and be careful not to cut into the fissure, or you will reach all the way to the eye and injure it.
And if the pus does not open at the beginning of the fissure, then gently widen the fissure slightly until it opens;
then extract it as we have said, then moisten the area with water-soaked cloth and apply pressure to stop the bleeding, and finally bind it up tightly.
And if there are men who grind salt and place it on to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Then heal it until it is cured.
And if a hot abscess comes to the place, then treat it with cooling poultices until it is healed.
of hair from papers When hairs grow from paper, other than the natural color, and they turn grey, then they harm the eyes, and cause various diseases such as inflammation of the eyelids, softness of the paper, and white film, until it leads to the destruction of the eyes;
and there are three ways to treat this: either by cauterization with fire, or with medicine according to what is written in the chapter on cauterization, and it can be done by incision and stitching, or with tweezers, according to what I will describe.
You must place the patient's head in your lap, then return the paper to your left hand.
If it is converted, that is good. If not, put an awl through the thread. and it is to be at the edge of the paper where the hairs grow along these hairs, and draw the thread across to the other side of the paper, and return it to the razor.
Then they make an incision under the paper, under the hairs, all the way to the great artery, just to the small one.
Then pull out the thread, and place under the paper a small tent of cotton and linen, then mark on the paper a figure in the shape of an inchworm, as the fuel of myrtle, and still according to the quantity you see rising up through the divided paper.
And if to one who needs it, he applies a large amount of the paper according to how soft the paper is;
then make the spatumile over the 2 lines you have signed, and start from the large armpit up to the small one; and let one of the slits be near the natural hair in the thickness of a hair root, then pierce the skin in one of the 2 angles of the heart, then peel it all off;
then join the 2 lips with a single thread of fine wool through an eye needle, and stop the bleeding, and dry up the excess threads over the 2 eyelids with any sticky substance if you see fit to do so;
and if not, then don't worry about it, and leave the stitches and threads for 3 or 4 days;
then dress the wound without suturing with dry and constricting things, for paper lifts up suddenly from the wound and its closing, but sutures are painful (as the ancients say), and this is a work without fear; and if in another way:
and if in another way: and you should mark the paper with a shape that is also like the leaf of myrtle, as we have described, at three inches removed according to the form which is here:
then cut what is on top into small pieces evenly according to the shape that is there:
And if you cannot hold the tweezers and the object is not straight, then take a needle with a thread and weave it through the shape; and weave another thread through the larger pore, and the second thread through the smaller, and bring the threads together evenly between your fingers;
then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin that you have marked, as we have described, then bring together the two lips of the wound by suturing, and dress it until it is healed;
and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with cerotem and similar soothing ointments.
and sometimes the hairs of the paper are converted:
if you should use what we have said about the incision;
but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
The treatment of bones is as follows: and is to convert the paper and insert it inside according to what I have said, then make two bones by art, and two subtle strings as long as the paper and the spatulum is wide; and cut as two heads on either side where you hold the strings;
then assemble one and the other subtly above what is on top of the paper of the eye, and straining the two bones from the two formed parts; and let it remain thus for a few days, and the skin that is stretched will die and shrivel and fall off as it dries.
If it takes time, if the wound has some strength, then treat the scar until it heals;
and when the wound is sewn up and the paper is lifted, the hairs will no longer be pricked;
And this is the form of the II chains that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
The work is such that you thread a fine needle, and put in it a fine silk thread;et li bout esguisies, et li passe au traittement des ovraiges sus la piere ou sur les saiges, et ad leu les guarisit. Then assemble the heads and tie them together deftly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long;et si adonques covient que tu le remees en la dislocation du chie, car il ne peuit demorer ains doit ad les remuement de l’ovraige qu’il revint.
then place in the wound another fine silk thread, and tie the ends of the thread together.
then put the patient's head into your lap;
and be in the shade so that the work is clearly seen, for this is a fine and delicate work. Then insert the needle into the skin at the root of the hair, and pierce through the paper slowly while pulling the thread through above the natural hair;
then pull out the hair to the surface of the skin, and put in that hair into the wound, whether there is one, two, three, or more hairs;
then pull your hand back so that the hair comes out through the skin and paper with the natural hair.
And if the wound is treated and the hair does not come out with it, then pull at the thread that you have placed in the wound from underneath, until the wound comes out through the opening above and you can see it with your eye.
then you will pull out the hair and thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair grows back in its place and the skin grows over it.
And if the hairs are short, accompany them with a long hair from the eyebrows, and let it grow with that one, until it is grown out and then you can pluck it out.
of the eye pustule When this disease called 'aleacrati' or warts comes in the eye, there are two ways in which it can manifest.
One is natural, and one is supernatural.La natureile est qu’alques fois li ommes ayent en lor oeuil un porriture
And it happens suddenly from a wound, or cutting, or cauterization, and similar things.
The natural way is that sometimes people have a wart in their eye. And the treatment for this is to split the wart, open up its edges, place linen tenters inside it, and keep it clean until it heals.et li natureil est que alques fois li ommes ayent en lor oeuil un porriture qui soit natureile, c’est asses que la soudure se fende et la peau s’eslieve et ne soit point brusee, si
and you must not use in the treatment of it things that dry and constrict. For if you do this, the disease will return worse than before;
but work with softening things, such as fenugreek; and rosewater or elderflower and flaxseed are cooked, and onions fried in some oil, and wrap it in a tent, and treat it this way.
And the essence of your treatment is to ensure that it does not harden according to its previous shape;
and these procedures that we have described are not remedies for this disease, so that it does not return according to its previous shape.
This disease which is below and which is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Accidents come from wounds and cuts and cauterization and similar things;
and the way to do this is to take a needle and thread it with a double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce from one earlobe to the other, so that the thread comes out in both ears;
then the hair is pulled up to the top of the needle, and the cap is placed over the broad spatula. And if the shape of the paper returns as it should, that is good;
if not, then take a razor and place it in the slit, and turn the paper over, and make two slits along the inside of the paper;
and let the edges of the two slits be the two angles of the incision that you have cut, and make angles so that when they are assembled, the shape is like the shape of a letter which has the form «I griesche»;
then remove this hair, according to the amount that its sides are cut under, from that which follows the paper, then join the two separated parts and sew them with a thread of wool;
then treat it with what we have said about the softening remedies, and with poultices, until it is healed.
And if the disease comes from a split or stitch or cautery, then you must make a clean split under the hair of the eyelids, and according to what is written above. then split between the two lips of the tent, as I have said.
then split between the two lips of the tent, as I have said. And one must do the work according to the form of the disease, because it is very diverse in form, and the wise master prepares tools with all his might so that he may bring the form back to its natural shape.
And the disease itself, according to what it needs in terms of work and instruments, in many different arrangements.
When this soudure happens to men in such a way that the papery part above is separated from the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must insert the tip of a razor under the papery part and lift it upward;
and stretch them as pins until you reach the тонкие, not too pointed or too sharp, so that the patient does not feel pain and the тонкие do not hurt the eye;
and make your incision lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural shape;
and all of this assembly is healed, and sometimes in the eye there is a salty water, and they lift it with fresh water, and bandages;
then place between the paper and the eye a tent of linen, and place on the eye wool dampened with egg; and after the third day, use a bandage and soothing things until it is healed.
You know that the nail is in two ways: it is nervous and resembles a hard cyst, and another that is not nervous, but resembles frozen white moisture, which, when touched with iron and pinched, cannot be pierced by anyone;
and both appear from the great tear duct, and grow little by little until they cover the entire eye and all sight and movement.
And the way of the incision is that the patient puts his head to you, then you work on them. and lightly hold the eyelid in your hand, then use your fingernails like tiny pincers, and stretch it upwards; then take a needle, and thread it with horsehair, or cow hair, or ox hair, and strong thread; and double the needle's point slightly and insert it into the eyelid, and pierce all the way through the needle, and tie the eyelid with a thread and stretch it upwards, and scrape along the edge of the eyelid that follows the tear duct to the eye socket gently and with small forces, and leave the natural channel for tears, so that by the incision the body's tears do not leak;
and sometimes only the nail at the finger or toe is affected, and on the thread, as we have said; then there is scaling all over the scrotum, from which comes the form of this disease.
And be careful that the scrotum does not touch and break the flesh-colored membrane, and that the foreskin is not pierced;
and after the incision, put a little crushed vitriol in the eye, and the collar made of litharge, and leave it until the next day; then treat it as needed until it is healed.Et se li gautes de l’oil sont troves ou l’incision a este feite, si li traie le sang par la fente, et li
And if the eyelids are swollen where the incision was made, and the thread draws blood from the wound, and the
and they grow as I have described in the division, and if you see it covered, then operate on the eye of the patient, and take the spatulum lightly, poking gently according to this form: And gently press the nail on top, and if you see that it does not lessen and the inflammation gets worse, then drop from your mouth into the eye a collar made of litarge and red copper ore, ground up, and stop up the eye until the next day;
If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then milk it, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then begin again the work as before, until it is healed.Et se il y aveit aposteme froid, adonques cure l’aposteme par le chaus; et si tu vois qu’elle ne voulent point arder, si distille en l’oil du vin de groseille, et du coliere dou ver, et du litargire, et du sal amoniac; et si la chose n’est pas trop chaude, si peit de ta bouche.
then restart the other work according to this same method, until it is completely removed.
And if the appearance of the flesh around the eyelid is harmful to the eye through great damage, then suspend it on the lid, and cut off a part and not all of it, so that no tear fluid enters;
then drop into the eye red collar made of litarge.
In some men, a red lump sometimes grows from their testicles, covering the scrotum and constricting it on top of the papers, and it looks like a rose from a balcony.
and the treatment is for the patient to put his head on something firm, then he works on the lump, and then he twists it into knots appropriate for that purpose, and holds it firmly in place.
Then he shaves the first lump, going all around at the base, and you must be careful not to cut the eye during this treatment.
and make an incision at the bottom of the testicle, as we have described in the section on incisions for nails, and with small tools you remove the pus, as the diagram in this chapter shows.
And when the incision is complete and all the pus has been removed, apply a mixture of egg white and red vitriol to the eye, and then cover it with cotton soaked in egg white so that the abscess remains warm.
and if it persists, and the hot pus overcomes the blood, and you doubt that it is a hot abscess, then leave the eye and treat the abscess with things that soothe the hot abscess;
then return to your work until it is healed, and thus you will treat any eye that is affected in this way.
However, you should still lighten the treatment for each weak eye in the natural way; and in accidental work, with iron;
and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from that work.
So are red veins that are covered over the eye, and tolerate the sight of its work and weaken the eye all day.
So therefore, first you must look at the eye, and see if it is soft, swollen, and free of any other disease except for the ulcer; then treat it in this way:
instruct the patient to put his head in yours, then open the veins all around gently according to your wisdom, and make the openings subtle twice according to this form:
And two edges in .I. body according to this form:
then we press these veins gently, and let the blood flow out an hour after another, until you see the veins recede from the eye;
and be careful not to cut the eye on the points of the spatulas, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very diligent in your work so that you don't go beyond these veins;
And when you have done this, distill into the eye a green and red collyrium to corrupt what remains of the disease.
And if you do not have the power to collect it all in that hour, then make an ointment for the eye of soothing things for eye pain, and let it be for several days until the pain is eased and there is a hot abscess formed, then start again according to what is before until it is healed.
and this is the form of strength:
He calls these "arissati" fistulas:
when you treat it with cautery and medicine with fire according to what I have already said, and it is not healed, then there is a lump in it that you must cut open over the abscess, where it should be, and draw out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see the decay and blackness, then return to the instrument from which this form comes;
and it is called "aspre chief", and it should be made of iron into a sharp chisel, and pointed like a file as it is in the current form.
And place it on the decayed bone, then turn it between your fingers and press your hand a little so that you know the decay has been removed;
and do this sometimes, then restore the place with drying medicines.
if the sores are healed, and hair grows from it, and the body of the boil is healed, and remains so for 40 days, and it does not open up again and no bad thing happens, you may know that he is healed;
if not, there is only one other thing to do, which is to open the fistula at its narrow opening according to this form: and you must uncover the bone a second time with iron and hot medicines; and when it is uncovered, take an iron tool according to this form, and let the head of the tool have three edges, and let the shaft be tapered to a point as you see here:
then place the tool on the bone next to the fistula, and move your hand away from the eye, then return the tool repeatedly until it pierces the bone, and the patient will feel it through his nail if he holds his hand over his nail;
and then restore the place with dry medicine as I have shown you, and when the flesh has grown and hardened, look at the matter with your fingernail; if it is a minor issue for the patient.
When the eye is fully opened, and there is no disturbance or lessening, then you should bind the patient's eye;
then cleanse the eye, then apply leeches or a hot iron without burning to suck it out, then apply to the eye an ointment made of honey and aloes and incense and myrrh, and then bind it up, and put on bandages and linen;
and the manner of the bandages is such that you fold soft linen several times, and then put one on top of another according to the amount that the eye needs;
then we stretch it with a hard bandage tightly, and reapply the cupping glasses to draw out without hurting.
then remove the cupping glasses and leave the area stretched day and night, and if the ligature softens, then you must stretch it tightly.
then remove the bandage after a day and a night, and if you see the eye iyile, that is good;
if not, reapply the ointment and the bandages, and the ligature, and the cupping glasses until it is healed.
from the rupture of a woven cloth When disruption occurs in the woven web, then it opens, and there comes out of the paper like grains of resin, and is terrible to see;
then if you see it covering, the work is such that you push a needle into the root of the part below up to the ceiling of the part above; then push another needle where there is a double thread from the eye socket; and have them pierce, and leave the first needle according to the arrangement;
then thread the double thread through the hole and tie one end around the tissue, and tighten it well; then withdraw the needle and place the other eye of the needle in the moistened wound;
and let it be until the thread cuts into the tissue, then treat the wound with comforting things until it is healed;
and sometimes the wound is constrained by the cloth on each side in a circle, so that it may be healed.
And if the eyes are pushing out, then pierce them with a sharp spatula which comes from the corner of the eye, and correct the white bulging and push in the eyes, and enter immediately;
then withdraw it as soon as it is healed.
This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing other than an inflammation which has gathered in the eye, resembling descending water, but it is not water;It may be white or yellow, and it is hot,
and the manner of the appearance of the work is such that you cause the patient to sit on a prepared and straight seat, then take the head between your hands from both sides, and move it until you see the bow come above your eyes; then it is fixed, and the light is dimmed, and the patient sees things as he used to;
and if it does not go down, know that it is acute, and if the movement of the bow is not prepared as we have said.
have the patient sit between your hands, then take the spatula and gently press on the white of the eye, along the extension of the conjunctiva with the white of the eye and the cornea, until the bow comes out;
and when it is out, drop into the eye warm water mixed with honey, or hot water or fenugreek boiled and strained through honey, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
of eye waters We have learned the appearances of diseases in their varieties, and what is needed to pierce them. act according to health.
You should make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light to avoid the sun, and press his healthy eye tightly while keeping it still.
Then, hold the paper over the eye with your left hand if the eye is on the left, and with your right hand if it is on the right.
Take in your right hand, if the eye is on the left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eye is on the right.
Then, place the tip of the instrument, which is called "almagda", alongside the edge of the eyeball at the white part of the eye near where the tear duct is located. Push the instrument gently and firmly until it penetrates the eyeball, feeling for when the almagda reaches the hollow space inside;
and it is necessary that the measure of the alchemy way be at the bottom of the space measure which is from the prunelle until the end of the nourishment. and that is the crown of the eye;
if you see the bone in that paper due to the clarity of the horny tissue, then place the instrument where the water is and then press it down a little at a time.
If the water is coming out now, then the patient can see his own instrument and himself in front of him.
After you wait a little, and if the water rises up the second way, push it down with the instrument, and when it is stuck in and does not rise, gently pull out the alchemy while turning your hand a little bit at a time.
Then put in some water with a little sealing wax, and leave the eye inside. Then insert an eyeball soaked in rose oil and abundance of egg white, and bind it with clean eye-oil.
We, and those who are from our time, put on comfrey crushed with an abundance of egg white.Et si li aigue ne descend pas la seconde voie, puis remette l’oil de l’autre costé, et met par defuer sus leu de l’eyelet une piece de lainne moillie en oile roset; et lie almain avec l’oil sain.
And if the almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are some people whose eyes are too hard, then you should take the instrument called "alberit", of which this is the shape:
And so just pierce the conjunctiva, and do not go in too deep, but make the hole subtle, then insert alchemy as we have said.
and when the work is complete, prepare for the patient to lie on his back in a dark place;
and he must be restrained from all movement, and eat light foods, and not move his head or to the right or left, and be tied according to his condition for three days;
then untie him in the same dark house, and test his vision, and show him some things, and then put the bandage back on until the seventh day;
and you must not do this during the hour of the procedure or after the incision now, but you must reduce it, so that the water rises rapidly.
if a warm abscess comes, remove the bandage before the seventh day and use that which soothes the abscess;
and when it is quiet, he uncovers his face and puts on an eye-patch to protect his eyes from the light, and then he can go into that dark house.
And then he leaves the house little by little, and returns to his normal state;
and know that no student should interfere in this case. And one came to us from Spain who said that in his country they made almucadars, which they used to draw out water, but I have never seen any in our land, nor have I ever read about them in ancient books; and perhaps it is a new thing.Et si le poignent est de la guirbe ou de la teste, il conv
And these are the similarities of the forms of almucadars, so that those who do not know them may see them;
and they should be made of proper bronze: And let the ends of these be of the same subtlety, and the hindmost have four points.
There are times when various types of warts grow on the body, some resembling scorpions with many feet.
Some have warts that are raised and a dark color, while others have warts that are flat and the color of skin. For those warts which are flat and not raised, you should have the patient sit in your hands facing the sun;
For those warts which are flat and not raised, you should have the patient sit in your hands facing the sun; and open his nostrils, and breathe onto the warts, and drive them out. Then, hold the spatulum firmly with one hand as you know that the wart has been completely removed.
And if anything remains which you cannot scrape away, open it with the sharp end of a straw, so that nothing is left; and if there is an abscess, pierce it as it should be;
and if it is a malignant abscess, then hasten and cauterize it until the pus is dried out and all the corrupt matter has been removed; then pour in vinegar or wine and water. If the nose works, and moisture comes up to the palate, you will know that it is healthy;
and if moisture does not pass through as it should, you will know that there is corrupt matter in the bone above, and so the instruments will not come to cut it out;
therefore you must insert a thread of linen that is somewhat thick, and let it be tied by the hand, with a knot between each nostril, no more than a finger's width apart; and let the patient hold the thread in his nose to its full extent, and pull it through the nose into the mouth until he feels an odor;
and many children do this in school, and it is an easy thing for anyone who wants to do it;
then hold the head that comes from the nose in one hand and the head that comes from the mouth in the other, and twist them one after the other while standing as we do when spinning yarn.
Do this until you know that the thread has corrupted the flesh, then pull the thread, wipe off the blood and soak the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back in the nose as before.
do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of the flesh;
and then put in the nose a plug of cotton wool for several days until it is healed, and if there is need for dry medicine, use it.
and this is the form of the instrument for cleansing the nose, through which one distills oils and medicines into the nose:
And it can be of silver or bronze, resembling an open lamp, like a candle, and guide it likewise.
And if you wish to make a closed candle, then the instrument should be filled for purging the head;
and hold it to the head to keep it steady when one heats the oil or any other liquid.
of the heart above the diaphragm
Many times a disease arises in the head from the nose, called "telul", which grows and becomes large, so that it is an ugly sight to behold;
and for this reason one should cut it at the beginning and remove all of it, then place upon it the cautery or burning medicine;
and if one delays in cutting it until it becomes large, then take care, for if it is hard, of foul colour, and poor in sensation:
do not touch it with iron, for it is an encrusted abscess, for when one cuts it, great mischief comes to the patient;
and if the abscess is from a soft touch, not from a flow of color, and you see that one can completely cover it, then empty the patient and cover without fear, and treat the area with dry and constricting things.
Know that when the solution of continuity comes in one of these cartilage openings, it is beneficial to some people.
Therefore, when this happens to someone, one must see if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then bring the two lips together with a stitch, and then treat it until it is healed;
and if the lips are torn on both sides, one must scrape all the parts of their skin until they heal, then bring the two lips together with a stitch, hold them tight, and powder dragon's blood over powder, and ground incense. and place a piece of strong plaster or other binding plaster over the powders, and let it stay until it comes off on its own, then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
The manner of the cautery is as follows: assemble the solution. or with needles, as we have said in the suturing of the belly; or with thread, as I have already informed you.
of lip abscesses
Within the lips there occur hard abscesses, resembling peas in size, both smaller and larger;
therefore you must turn the lips inside out, and slit them on each side, and take them with tweezers and squeeze in every part;
then apply vitriol powder to the wound, until the bleeding stops;
and then leave it with garlic, and treat the area with dry substances until it is healed.
Many times there grow on the gums a swelling called by the ancients 'albus'.;
You should hold it with tweezers and squeeze it at its root, letting the pus or blood run out;
then put on vitriol powder, or other restraining and drying powders;
and if the vein bleeds again after the incision, and it happens many times, then cauterize it a second time: if it does not bleed after cautery;
Sometimes they are gathered at the top of teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, ugly and rough scabs;s’il est en l’un et l’autre chief de la dent, si le chef prend la couleur du fer: and if it is at both ends of the tooth, its tip takes on the color of iron: and sometimes teeth are black, yellow, and green, as far as the corruption reaches the gums, and the teeth stink;si le coruption vient entre la gencive et li dent si que la gencive
if the corruption comes between the gum and the tooth so that the patient sits in your hands, and his jaw is in your holy hand, examine the teeth or scabs until nothing remains;et si la corruption est entre li dent et la gencive si que la gencive soit eschaude, et la dent froide: and so it is with darkness and greenness, and yellowing and other discolourations, until they have healed.
And if one removes what is at the root of it, that is good. If not, then one should begin again on the second and third day, until everything has healed.
And know that teeth require various instruments to reset, according to what the work demonstrates to you, for the forceps with which one resets the teeth have a different shape from those used to reset teeth inside. You should have these shapes and others among your tools.
When you treat a tooth for its pain, you should take as long as you can, for one must not hurry this.Et se li dent sont si apaisiez et la dolour si desraiz que li dent n’ont plus grant dolor, s’il sunt entre les dens, adonc leve li dent because it is a very high substance just until one has no excuse to pull.
Then, when the patient is compelled to pull, you must be certain of your teeth. Many times the pain deceives the patient and he thinks it is in the tooth of Saint, and pulls out the good tooth; and yet the pain does not leave him because of this, as long as the bad teeth remain, because we have already tried to do it with those healers;
and when you are quite sure of the tooth that hurts, then you should scrape around the tooth all around with a strong spatulum to push back the gums from all sides;
then pull it with your fingers or with fine tweezers gently and gently until it is well loosened, then grip the tweezers tightly; and let the patient be in a seated position between your knees, holding him so he doesn't move.
Then extract the tooth firmly without breaking it, and if it does not come out, take one of these instruments and insert it into each side gently, and move it as you did before.
And if the teeth are broken and eaten away, then you must fill the holes with linen. and if you hold it tightly with tweezers so that it does not break while being held.
and one must work around the gum to loosen the tooth.
And be careful that you don't break it, or part of it remains, and the pain returns worse than before because of the root's sharp edge.
And be wary that you do not act like the ignorant healers who, in their haste and boldness, sometimes break the jaw, and do not follow what we have described:
but sometimes bring about great illness through the roots that remain, or break the jaw, as we have often seen;
and when the tooth is drawn, wash the socket with wine or garlic and salt;
and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, apply crushed vitriol to the socket;
and if this does not work, then cauterize it.
The forms of instruments, with which one pulls out teeth, should have long points and thick handles so that they do not break when you pull the tooth.
and these are the forms: And be made of large pieces so that they don't bend during pulling, and be made of good iron, and be serrated to hold the gums.
from the root of teeth When the root remains in the socket, one should put wet cotton on it for a day or two until the socket softens, and then one uses tweezers called "algefri" which look like a pair of tongs, to pull out the tooth.
and they should be made like a file inside, and this is the form:
And if the roots will not come out with all these tweezers, then you must uncover the flesh all around the root and insert the instrument called 'althali', that is, forceps, of which this is the form:
And it should be strong and thick so that it doesn't break, and if the root comes out with it, all the better.
if not, then use all the instruments, whose forms are described below:
And let one assist with this instrument which has .ij. tips, of which this is the form: and other tools which are before in the reason of the teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large tweezers, of which this is the form:
And let this instrument be outside so that it does not break, and know that many dental instruments are; and also other instruments, which are not counted;
and the skilled master craftsman finds by himself his instrument, according to what his work and the disease demonstrates, for there are many diverse diseases where the ancients did not teach about an instrument; if it doesn't break through the jaw or other bones, but protrudes, then he seeks the instruments that he needs, which I have told you, and helps with gestures, so here is the form:
And let them be thick and strong to hold the bone, so that it doesn't slip away, but he can hold and remove it;
and then restore the place with appropriate medicines, and if there is protuberance in the bone, and it is small, then he should use this instrument:
When the tooth appears not according to nature's course, and its shape is ugly, especially in young women, you must know whether the tooth is growing correctly, and is not in its proper place, and cannot be pushed or filed:
then pull it out; and if it is growing with the tooth, then take this instrument, whose shape is like a small beak, and made of iron sharpened at its point;
And the gum recedes little by little day by day because of the hardness of the tooth and so that you do not move the others; and if it is apparent that one can be filed down, then file it with a file such as this, according to its shape:
it is as sharp as the file used to make needles;
and gently file the tooth a little bit at a time, so that it does not move until it breaks;
then smooth it at the end with a rasp until it is even, so that it does not cut the tongue or impede speech.
When the tooth in front loosen, either by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot bite down on what he eats without defecating, and you have treated them with constricting medicines, but it does not help.
if they should be restrained by a gold wire, for silver wires turn green and rot, but gold never moves.
and the wire should not be too thin or too thick, according to the amount of space between the teeth;
and if you want to straighten the teeth, take the wire and tie it double between two healthy teeth, then place the ends between the loose teeth, whether there is one or more of them, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then start the binding again from where you began, and tighten your hand gently but firmly until it does not move.
and hold your fire cautery to the root of the tooth so it cannot escape.
Then cut the teeth of the file with tongs, and assemble them, and bind them between the healthy tooth and the tooth that is not, and put it in so it does not bite the tongue;
and then leave it tight as long as it can stay, and if it comes undone, or the file breaks, then hold it with another file;
if it stays and serves throughout its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the alignment of the II healthy teeth, and the II rotten ones, as you can see;
And when the tooth falls out, one replaces it in its place, little by little, as we have said;
and one who is not wise and suffering should not meddle in this; sometimes one makes the form of a tooth from a calf's bone, and puts it in the place where there is a defect, and holds it as we have said, and it stays and serves for a long time.
Sometimes this vein, which comes from under the tongue, where nature places it, causes one to be born like that. or through an accidental wound;
and the treatment is such that you open the mouth of the sick person, and place his head in your lap, and lift up his tongue;
then grab the nerved vein firmly, as widely as you can, so that the tongue is loosened from its place, and if there is a lump or wound there, and it is from a sudden injury, then cut the vein with your fingernail;
and be careful that the cut is not too deep, so as not to reach the artery underneath;
and when you are done, raise the level of the sick person's head with rose water and garlic, or with cold water, then place a tent made of linen underneath the tongue;
and the patient's scabies every night, so that the sores cannot heal.
And if there is bleeding, apply powdered vitriol to the site. and if the blood stops, then cauterize with a slow cautery, which is good for this purpose. then treat it further until it is healed.
and if you see that it has turned red or black or hard, and the patient does not feel anything, do not touch it, for it is a ulcer.
and if it is inclining towards a pustule, and there is moisture in it, then open it with a needle, and drain it from both sides; and if the bleeding stops with your treatment, apply powdered vitriol until it is stanched, then return to your treatment until you have removed everything.
then raise him up from bed and chair, and treat him with other treatments until he is healed.
of abscesses in the throat Sometimes there come into the throat warts which are called 'godath', and they are properly called the tonsils, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then take heed:
if it is a hard abscess of small size and dark color, do not touch it with iron.si le gosier est delicat et li tros, si la remede de vinger adonques il faillet; s’il est grant, si
And if the throat is delicate and sore, then it needs the remedy of the finger; if it is large, then it must not be touched with iron, also for fear of bleeding.if it is red and the root is swollen, then do not touch it with iron either: but let it be until it bursts, and then you will part it, or else it will break on its own;et li sang qui vieni de la root a l’esguier, si tu le remuieras, et il fuit adés et se rompre
and if they are of a white color, and the roots are fine, then have your instrument ready to cut, but first check that the abscess is cool and calmed.
Then have the patient sit facing the sun, and let his head be in your shade, and let him open his mouth and the assistant grip his jaw between their hands, and press the tongue down from under so that this is the shape:
and it should be made of silver or thin bronze like a little knife:
Then you press the tongue against this instrument and see the abscess, then take the needle and insert it into the pistachio nut, and pull it out above as far as you can;
and draw something from the threads with it, then cut the instrument into the shape that resembles a scythe; but their heads are curved and hooked, and they are very sharp, and are made of iron or steel.
And if you do not have this instrument present, cover it with tongs, of which the shape is like this: And some are serrated on one side, and smooth on the other;
And when you have cut one of the testicles, then cut the other in the same way, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and water and garlic, and if there is bleeding, gargle the patient with water, or with the bark of pomegranates that have been cooked, or with myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding stops; then bandage him until he is healed;
sometimes other abscesses appear in the throat besides the two testicles, so cut them out just like the two testicles.
I once treated a woman for an abscess that had formed inside her throat; it was a small one,
and the throat was almost completely closed, so that the woman could not breathe through the blocked passage, nor eat or drink, and she would have died if it continued for another day or two.
And the abscess had become so swollen that it had forced out two hairs from the nose holes.
So I immediately inserted a hook into one nostril, then pulled the worm out, along with a large amount of phlegm;
then I did the same in the other nostril, opened her mouth and pressed her tongue;
after that, I inserted a hook into these abscesses and scraped out some of the pus, and only a little blood came out; and so the passage in the woman's throat was cleared, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I continued to cut this abscess for a long time;
and the abscess re-formed and filled up the space that I had emptied, until it became very large again;
then I taught him and cauterized it inside his throat: so that it will not grow;
and I left those parts, and God did what He would with him after me.
of the grape
When the tear sac descends towards the eye, and it is swollen and it is long, then it is called «perpendicular»;
and if it is fat and round, then it is called «eye».;
When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the eye's abscess is pacified, and it is thin, then you must cut it;
and if it is round and not long; and if it is blood red or light brown or black, then you must avoid cutting it. For there is great danger in doing so.
Therefore, when you see it according to the way that I have described, its whiteness and length, you must make the patient sit facing the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument which we mentioned earlier;Adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: then insert the needle into the vein, and pull it through, and cut off one of the two instruments that I mentioned in the incision of the two testicles.
And you must not cut anything further than the natural limit;
because if you cut too much, it will harm the voice and speech;
and after the incision, follow what we said in the incision of the two testicles, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the patient has fear from covering, then you should use the cautery of the sense of fear.
And the manner of the cautery is for acute fever. And let the patient put his head into your lap, and then press his tongue against the instrument that we mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and mix it with warm vinegar, neither too thick nor too clear; and use this tool to create a mold of the shape:
And it has a hair on its head where the medicine is placed, like the handle of a spoon, and put the instrument with all the medicine into the vein;
and let the patient lie on his side so that saliva and mucus run from his mouth due to the medication inside, so that it does not descend into his throat and lungs;
then hold your hand over the medicine and press it onto the ulcer for about half an hour, until you see it softening and the bites of the medication calming down;
and if you see it, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and wet the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument completely with the cotton on top into the ulcer;
and do this often until the cautery is complete, then let it dry and fall off after 4 or 5 days.
And if you need to renew the cautery of the medicine, then renew it, and after the cautery wipe around the ulcer with cotton dipped in butter, and cleanse what is around the medicine.Et se li mordications sont trop grans et qu’ilz ne puent apier, si le mets a tout la medicine sus l’uve, et le presse tant que tu le vois nercie;
and let him drink cold water, and let him gargle until he is healed.
This treatment is safer than incision or cautery.
If it is treated with fumigation according to this method, take calaminth and hyssop and origanum and rue and camomile and avens and similar herbs, and combine all or some of them in a pot, and add garlic, and let them boil.
and the pot should be well glazed with strong clay, and once the pot is made he should spread the mixture on it according to this method. And let one of the lips be placed in the mouth of the patient so that the vapor rises to the eye through the nose, until the eye is deadened.
Afterwards he should repeat this often until the eye dries up, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the appearance of the hot abscess, for various things can happen. and do not make it too hot when treating an abscess.
And if this instrument is not available, take a cane and place within the handle an egg-yolk, so that the mouth of the instrument is not too hot for the patient; for the yolk will not let the vapors overwhelm the patient's mouth, and it is a beneficial treatment all around.
Often there is a fishbone or some other object stuck in the throat;
so you should try to remove what you can see, and press the tongue against the instrument in sunlight until you dislodge the object.
For what you cannot remove and remains stuck in the throat, you must make the patient vomit so that the meat is cooked in the stomach; perhaps the object will come out with the vomiting.Si li viande ne s’est mie cuite as en la gorge, covient que tu le faices
or the patient should swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of bread, or a lettuce root, or a piece of dry bread; and attach a thread to the sponge and then swallow it; and when it reaches the spot, it will stick, and then you can pull it out;
and if it doesn't come out as we have said, take a piece of salt plaster according to this form:
And the instrument should be bent at the tip so that it can more easily enter the throat, and the head should be held up; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, or it will choke, nor push anything into the bone inside;
And you must make sure that the patient swallows the instrument so that it reaches the spot where the object is lodged; if the bowels move downward, or he pulls them outward equally with all his strength, until they are forced out.
of the blood from the throat
Sometimes medicine is given to the patient, as I have said in the section on remedies, to treat the disease. And if that does not help, then examine the throat of the patient in the sun, and then press his tongue with the instrument I have described to you.
And if you see the blood, draw it out with a small hook or fine tweezers suitable for this purpose.
And if this does not work, take a curved cane and insert it into the throat of the patient, then heat the tip of the cane, and do this frequently. And if the patient has a fever all day.
Then take some cold water in a glass, open his mouth and pour it in without swallowing, moving his jaw often with your hand. And as soon as he feels the water, let him vomit.
And if it does not come out as we have said, then smoke the patient with assafetida, using the instrument I have described for smoking out the throat.
Do this many times, for he will vomit without hurting himself.
And the manner of the fume is that you put burning charcoal in a container with a perforated lid, and the instrument's head goes through the hole.
Then you blow the smoke into it, and the patient places the instrument's head in his mouth, closing it so that no smoke escapes but goes to the blood vessels.
And the blood will drop immediately, and if it doesn't, repeat the fume treatment many times.
Let the patient be thirsty, eat salted and dry foods, and drink no water.
Then it will be necessary for it to go out through this method of treatment.
And the instrument used to treat the blood vessels is similar in shape, when one can see it, to bent tongs designed to go into the throat. and resembles a sow's mouth, and has the roughness of sandpaper, so that whatever it grasps, it cannot let go.
Mouths of similar abscesses are, according to the recollections that come hereafter from one and another in this book, and they are diverse in penetration and size;
and there are two ways in which the first is in its own appearance, and that of what it contains moisture.
And the second way is for the places where they are in the body.
For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the fundament, and the abscesses of fleshy places are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in action.
And if one must not pierce abscesses until the bowels are dead according to their completion;
and some which one must pierce when they are crusty, and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses near joints.Et c’est ains qu’on dist que les apostemes son meures quan il sont creuzes et vides; car quan il son creuzes selonc lor acomplissement, si doivent ilz mouoir et ne puet mie rien plus demourer en lor
Because when abscesses develop near the joints and are left untreated until they are pus-filled, it is likely that the ligaments and nerves of the joint will become damaged, causing contraction in that limb.
Where the abscess is near a main limb, and if you delay the piercing until it is mature, it will harm the main limb.
or where it is near the fundament, then one must pierce it in such a way that it drains completely.
And one should not pierce an abscess without its digestion being completed, except for the one that is by the fundament, which can be allowed to drain a little and extend inwardly, so that a fistula may result. and not heal in a long time.
And one should know the hour of piercing an abscess that is mature according to its accomplishment, and that is when the pain has subsided, and the departure of fever, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and the softening and hardening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs;
and you must pierce the vein where it depends most on the abscess, and where there is movement.
Let the piercing be in the longest part of the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints, and on nerves and arteries, and in all places where there is no fold. For those who bend, depending on the limb involved.
And when abscesses are in fleshy places, it is better to wait until after digestion is complete before piercing them, as we have said.Et quant il est delez lou membre principal, et tu ne veillies le perforer tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, fuers que il soit meurez entor, si nuira au membre principel; et est grant dolur a celui qui le por; et li maux est plusors foiz perilluz.
For if you pierce it before this, the venom will flow through the body, and it will be filled with much filth; and perhaps harden its lips and depths.
And if there is an abscess that should be punctured according to the width of the body, according to what the member needs.
And you must treat small abscesses with small incisions; and in large abscesses, large incisions, and many cuts according to the appearance of the size of the abscess;
and if there are such abscesses where one should cut the skin, and cover; when he has become as soft as a cloth, and is lifeless, one should then do what one does to blisters.
and if they have split into three angles and are like the blister on the miter tree, as with abscesses on the fingers:
and if there are others where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar cuts.
Those without a head, like a superficial sweat blister, you should pierce directly through;
and when the abscess is large and has drawn a lot of pus, and you pierce it, then do not draw all the pus in that hour, but only a portion. ; Then stop up the abscess until the next day and then draw some more out the next day; Do this many times until all of the pus is drawn out.
If the patient is of weak constitution, or a woman carrying child, or a small child, or an old man enfeebled by age. For the pus sometimes jumps out with the release of the blister, and the patient might die without your realizing it.
Therefore, handle this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced the abscess, wash the wound, and check if the wound of the abscess is small. And if it's a clean cut, apply bandages made of linen or old cotton. And if it's a large abscess and there are many openings, you should place a tent in each one so that they touch each other.
And if you have cut into the skin of the abscess and it has bled, you should fill it with dry cotton or linen cloth shavings without moisture, and let it be for a third of the day;
then the bone, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs in your work, bring cold water and ease, and wet the cloth, and place it over the bleeding area many times.
And if the bleeding persists, if it is administered control and treatment, and the powders that I have described in this book with my own hands, and if it is in the winter season, and the abscesses are very nervous, then you should put wet tents and cloths soaked in warm wine and oil;
and if it is in the spring, and the abscesses are fleshy, then you should place wet cloths soaked in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, for a third of a day, as we have said;
and then open the abscess, wash it out and treat it as it should be until it is healed.
And this is what one must know generally about the treatment of abscesses:
Or I have told you how one must go before the treatment of abscesses, and see this chapter.
From the head come small abscesses, and they are caused by people who wear hats, just as the ears of a chicken are, and there are many variations of this type.
There are some with fat and such that also have moisture as well as pus;
And there are some which are hard and stony in texture, and there is no doubt if the artery does not act contrary to them.
And the work of the body is that you should test with every instrument called "trocar", whose form comes afterwards, what it contains.
For if it contains moisture, they open it from above and draw out the long one.
And when the moisture has been drained, one should scorch it without leaving anything behind that contains the moisture, for it will return again if nothing is left behind.
Then plunge cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in water and salt, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and then cleanse again what is remaining from the night.
And then begin again with the cotton, as before, the second and third day, until you know well that nothing remains overnight;
then heal the wound with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains pus, then open it according to this form, lengthwise: and he will pour out his bile, and cut away all around it, and use all his skill to draw the poison out from under the skin where it lies;
and if the artery acts contrary, then do as I have told you above.Et demourera en celi lieu i jus de ceste incision, si laisera li sang couler tant qu’il soit sanz venin;
And also do this for a stone-abscess, cutting and treating it as I have said.
And the incision on the stone-abscess is lighter, because they are full of blood.Et si li artere ne fuit pas, si mettés li chié sus li berlingot, et li muesche a li costez, et li sienge au bout de la verge, et li vachez a l’autre cap; et prendes une fiole d’or et une de verre, et le piez ou il gist, et mettes li cief sus li berlingot, et le corps sus li piez, et les piés sus li sienge, et li col sus li vachez. And if some of these abscesses have no moisture in them, and the chief of them was on an old woman's head:Et li chiés et les costes et les fesses, et le col et la gueute: si fai I chié par incision sus lor nassance;
and the shoulders and ribs and buttocks and neck and face: in these cases make an incision over their source;I found the abscess just like a hard, rough, white stone, and it could not be broken;Et le corps qui tenoit la piere, et li artere et li veines, et li nervaus, and if anyone were struck by it, they would be injured just as by a stone.
For other abscesses coming from the head, especially those that come to the heads of children and to the roots of the ears, the opening should be kept in the most dependent place so that the pus can flow out;
and treat them as they should be.
Many times abscesses come on the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes elsewhere in the body, and they are large, and some are connected to each other.And these that come on the head, and those that come on children, if they have no moisture, and are not broken open, then they are called 'stone-abscesses'. And they cause great pain, and often kill the patient, and sometimes they can be found in the neck, armpit, groin, or elsewhere in the body. They are large and hard like a stone, and if cut open they will bleed profusely just like a wound from a stone.
And each scrofula is properly within its coat, like the node and abscess of the head, as we have said; and there are many similarities among these scrofulas.
and there are many similarities among these scrofulas. There are some that contain moisture, and there are some that are malignant and will not respond to treatment.
So in the one that you see has a good disposition to touch, and is similar in color to the body, and is not swollen on either side, nor pressing on the nerves of the neck or artery or duct, and is not deep;
you should cover it from above, and scrape each part, and the two lips of the wound should be stitched together, if necessary, as we have said for abscesses of the head;
And pull it gently, little by little, and be sure not to cover the nerve or the vein, and do not use the spatulum or forceps so that the hand does not slip, and do not look too far forward, so that you do not cover what you should not.
And if you cover the vein or artery, and it does not let you work, then put crushed vitriol or some powder that stops bleeding into the wound, and bind it tight. And leave it until the abscess is quieted and the wound softens and begins to fester.
And when the blood is stopped, return to your work, continuing until it is finished.
Then examine with your finger if any small scrophules remain; cut them out and clean the wound.Et li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient ad
And if there is a large vein in the root of the scrofula, you should not cut into that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread and let it fall from it without harm.
Then treat the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then dress the wound.
And if you cut the whole ulcer, you should bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them now, so that no excess remains due to the size of the ulcer.Et si tu troves en la plaie grant quantite de sangue qu’il ne se peut estaincher a ton ovraige, si covient que tu metes li sur la plaie un panne, et le tiens fort; puis emporte li sang, et laisse li panne adessuz tant qu’il soit estanchié. then you must understand how to cover the root of it, and pull it out, and cut it as we have said.
then you must understand how to cover the root of it, and pull it out, and cut it as we have said. For those scrofulae that are superficial, pierce where there is an exit for pus;
and pierce it in the same way as the one described above, and then treat it with poultices and ointments and similar things, so that it corrupts what is left of the corruption; and when the wound is clean, then dress it with ointment that promotes scabs, until it heals.
The ancients spoke of incisions in the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is their written word.
For those with squint, it is necessary to cauterize the opening of the throat called the "epiglottis". and this must be done by a professional, because all the veins and the lungs of the sick person are affected by heat in the mouth, or in the throat or in the armpits.
When the illness is in the channel of the pormon, one must cover the epiglottis to avoid loss of life due to strangulation.
Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, we must make a small cut across it between two circles or four, not in the cartilage but in the amount of the cut through the soft palate.
and those places are suitable for the cutting of the epiglottis where there is no cartilage, and the blood vessels are long underneath.
And if the master is fearful, he must stretch the skin of the throat to the very end, then cut the skin until it reaches the bone; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see anything, and then cauterize with the hot iron, as we have said.
and it is demonstrated by the section of the artery in the neck that blood flows out through the opening where it is broken, and by the deficiency of voice.
and leave the wound open for a while.
And when the time has passed that we fear strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound in the heart, and sew it up entirely without the cartilage;
then administer remedies which promote flesh growth until it is healed.Et s’il advint que la plaie soit trop grande por leuee, si covient ades couper la chair du costé
Albucasis says that one should not do this until the throat is completely swollen, and the patient is judged to be near death, and the deficiency of blood has been restored. Therefore cut away some of the meat from the side [of the wound] if it is too large to be sutured closed. Then cut open the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe and not suffocate, and he will thus be saved from death;
and for this reason, the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the maliciousness of the disease had passed, and it passed in three or four days. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and treat it, until it was healed.
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw a young lady take a knife and stick it into her throat and cut part of the windpipe;
and I was called to heal her, and found her as good as dead.
I discovered the wound and found that blood had come out of it, and that she had not coughed up any phlegm or spittle except what came out through her throat, and the wind was coming out through the wound.
I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and treated it until it healed;
and the young lady had no more than a hoarseness in her voice, and then she returned to her usual state;
therefore I say that one should not fear cutting the epiglottis.
This hernia is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a large hernia in the color of a grape, and it is found mostly in women;
and it occurs in two ways: natural and accidental;
nor does nature help.
And the accidents are of two kinds: one resembles fat growths, and the other kind resembles an abscess that comes from an artery; and there is fear, and one must not use fire that is too hot but only moderate heat, and test and probe throughout the entire opening: if you find it as smooth as fat, and it cannot be opened with any effort, then cut it, just as one cuts a nut, and slice it all the way to its core, if there is none; and probe carefully throughout, and treat it as it should be, until it is perfectly healed.And if you find it as smooth as fat, and it cannot be opened with any effort, then cut it, just as one cuts a nut, and slice it
There are many types of growths, and I will describe all their appearances:
and now I must explain the difference between a dislocation and a joint disorder.
I say that a joint disorder is a continuing fever until the swelling has subsided and the pustules have burst. then the fever and heat will cease.
With a dislocation there is no fever, heat, or pain, and it contains pus, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a pimple, and becomes large;
and they are according to two appearances, either dry or moist, and their colors are as I have said in the division.
You should, when you come to the treatment of the nose, test and examine it first with all the instruments called "endoscopic", according to what its shape will allow in the chapter that follows.
And the method of inquiring into abscesses on the head is to squeeze in the most moist place that you find in the abscess, and then press your fingers gently, gently, until you feel that the pus has broken through the skin, and this should be according to the size of the abscess.Et se tu ne le veois pas percer, retreine ta main et li estrumens, et comence a la parfaicte incision sus l’aposteme, et retreigne ainsii tant qu’il soit bien inciz, puis que tu le traies, puis que il soit si espans comme un poing.
then remove the speculum, and take care not to jump out.
If moisture runs short, whatever its color, they should treat it as I have said for other abscesses:
and if after the speculum no moisture comes out, know that it is fat, so they should make a cross in it, and take it with tweezers, and lightly scrape each side and guard the skin where it lies so that you draw it out healthy with the nail;
and if you cannot draw it out healthy, then draw it out in pieces so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, it will return to the body many times;
and if a little remains and the pain is not grave, then employ the wound with some corrosive powders, and press the wound, and put warm healing poultices on it, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed;
and if it is large, then cut both lips of the wound, and the cure of that which clogs it.
and if the pulsation is contrary or else you hasten and employ the place of ground vitriol, and leave it lightly for two or three days until the wound suppurates, and calm the ebullition of blood; then return to cover what has been left for a day.
Here are the forms of instruments that pierce, and they are threefold: large, medium, and small;
and there are three edges which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, to surround abscesses of fistulas;
and they are also like the needles that pierce sorceries, and they are made of brass, iron, or silver, and those with yellow tips are more effective in black pus for surrounding the curves of fistulas;
and are of three kinds: large or small, depending on the size of the hole.
The shapes of the scissors are very similar, as you can see here:
and there are scissors with two curves of three kinds;
and there are scissors with three curves, and they are also of three kinds;
and there are scissors with two curves and scissors with only one curve, and they are of three kinds;
and all these are necessary in their place.
The heads of these tools are sharp, and some only cut one side, so that they do not cut the vein or nerve;
and these tweezers are placed in handles so that the patient does not hurt themselves when opening abscesses;
and they are of three kinds: great, small, and medium, as you can see;
and we do not use them except in fleshy places, such as legs, and arms, and breasts, and in similar places;
and sometimes another small instrument is made, similar to slices of garlic, according to this shape, with which blood is stopped: and it is sometimes placed in the area that heals by stopping the flow of blood from the veins and arteries, and sometimes they are cut according to this large form:
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they become corrupt, so that they look like women's breasts;
and they remain ugly and swollen, and if anyone wants to cure them, they must cut according to this shape from line b. to line g.: then cut into the fat, and fill the wound with healing medicine, then bring together the two lips of the wound with stitches, and heal it until it is cured;
and if the breast sags down, and is softened due to its size as it does in women, then they make two cuts above, through two similar slits; one of which is attached to the other at their end, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from line b to line g; then scrape the skin between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitches and powders, and what is necessary for the treatment, until it is healed;
and if it is not healed, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient will not rest, or due to bleeding, then you must fill the wound with wet cotton soaked in corrosive ointment; and let it sit until it absorbs the remainder and the fat, then treat it until it is healed.
This abscess that comes under the armpit is like a hard scrofula, and some contain moisture.
Those who contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line .b. up to line .g. And when all the pus inside the abscess has been drained, employ the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and treat it with appropriate ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess is like scrofula, they should proceed as we have said in the treatment of scrofula, and if the wound becomes pus-filled, they should apply cauterization as we have described earlier.
When the artery is open and the skin above it is sewn up, then abscesses often result, and this also happens in the swollen vein and abscess.
and if one knows it thus when it is from the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep. and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel the estrangement;
and when it is from the vein, then there are visible pus and blood;
and it is foolishness to cover this abscess, especially when it is under the armpits and in the groin, neck, and many other places, and it is large. Therefore, one must avoid using an iron needle, and that which is on top should also be avoided, and with that which is swollen from the artery, they should pierce through the skin above.
then cut the arterioles, and carefully separate the artery from the veins, until it is exposed.
then insert a needle underneath and pierce it all the way to the other side, and compress the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I taught you in the extraction of the two arteries in the temples.
then puncture the area between the two ties with an introducer, so that the blood flows out and the abscess is drained.
then administer the cure that turns yellow, until the tie falls off. then treat it with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
and if the abscess is due to a vein opening, then you should dye your hand with something from the abscess all over the skin, then insert the needle underneath the area you are holding in your hand, and pierce it, and use a double thread so that you can pull it from the other side; then tie the abscess, as I told you, or one of its two parts to the shoulder with a thread.
and if you fear that the thread might slip out, then insert another needle through both threads under the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tie the threads in four places.
then scrape off the excess pus, then scrape off the excess from the skin and leave what is tied [to the thread].
then place a moistened cloth in wine and oil on top, then administer treatments of bandages and ointments until it is healed.
Also, as abscesses come in the artery and vein, they come to the nerves when they are hurt, or from too much work, and similar things.
And this happens more often in shoulders and elbows, and all joints where there are abscesses, and the color resembles that of the body, and it has various conditions without pain.
and when it is tightly restrained, the patient feels pain, and it is not completely in the body, but under the skin.
and must be quiet everywhere, and neither go forward nor backward, nor downward nor upward, and that which is in joints should not be covered by iron: by chance there might be contraction; and those who are on the head or forehead, use the spatulum.
and those who are on the head or forehead, use the spatulum. If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers and cut it at its root;
and if it is large, they suspend it on the hook, and slit it open, then cut out the stone and close the wound with stitches, and heal it up.
Sometimes this happens in bellies and nowhere else, and it is a disease called 'fungus' because of its resemblance to an ear, and its root is fine but the head is large;
and there are both small and very large ones;
I also saw one man who had two in his belly that looked more like mushrooms than anything else; there was no difference between them, they were white and had thin roots, and they were split open and moist fluid ran from them.
I cut them open and found that one weighed 18 ounces and the other 6 ounces; the procedure for incising them is to look at whether the illness is moist, and the color of the articulations is white and moist with fine roots: if the spatumil is large enough, and have the fire cautery ready in front of you.
if the spatumil is large enough, and have the fire cautery ready in front of you. For many times there are great bleeding wounds when cutting, and if the blood does not stop, then hurry to use the cautery:
and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the iron incision, then take a well-prepared piece of lead wire, bind the articulation as we have said, and leave it for two days;
and then restrain it, and do not cease to squeeze the hair of the finger until it pops out the joint, and piece by piece without effort;
and if the roots are thick, then have fear of covering it all at once in the same way for the belly, but you can indeed cover half of it, then cauterize it so that it does not return;
then cure the wound, and be careful not to cover the tubercle which is of a purple color and poor in sensation and of milky aspect.
For this is a deep abscess, and I will come to the treatment of sores next.
when the boil bursts If the appearance of the boil comes from cauterization of a wound or split ulcer, and it is on the belly and in some of the bowels, as happens in other routings, or of blood coming from veins or arteries according to what is before, or from windiness;
and if it is from the routing of the ulcer and from the exit of the bowels, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a slight thing without pain, and it opens with diverse exits. And if it is through the outlet of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it with their fingers, it recoils, and then returns, and sometimes it becomes serrated, and grows larger at the entrance of the bath and from great exertion.
If it is due to moisture, it is a minor matter, and it becomes apparent when you press it with your hand, and it does not restrict movement.
and if it is due to blood, it is indicated by large, hard abscesses, and it is fixed according to a certain quantity; and if it is due to wind, there will be swelling upon touch, and the actions will indicate whether it is due to arterial or venous blood, or wind.
and if it is due to wind, there will be swelling upon touch, and the actions will indicate whether it is due to arterial or venous blood, or wind. Let the wound heal. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, because of the artery and vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestines or bowels, then you must instruct the patient to tighten his abdomen and extend it straight, then sign all around the navel; then command him to lie down quickly between your hands, then go around the area you have signed all around the navel, then bring half of the abscess up to the top, all along the great toenail; then tightly wind it with a strong thread or a firm silk cord, and let us tie it firmly.
then cut the abscess open halfway along its length over the ligature, and push your finger inside, and seek out the intestine; if you find it caught on the ligature, then release it and pull the intestine outside the abdomen;
and if you find a lump, then cut it off at its base and remove the excess;
and if the artery or vein opposes you, go around it smoothly, then return to your task and take two needles, thread them with strong thread, and pierce through what you have done in a cross shape;
then draw the abscess out in three places over the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave it open so that it may drain on its own; or you cup it when it is subtle and porous, then the cure of what is appropriate, and drain the abscess as we have said;
or you cup it when it is subtle and porous, then the cure of what is appropriate, and drain the abscess as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the area as is appropriate, and close up the wound.
from cancer We have already discussed the types of sores and how to treat them with medicine, as well as how to avoid using iron in the treatment.
and we shall speak of the sore in ulcers, and the great care that must be taken in treating them, and the ancient writers say that when a sore is in a place where it can be scratched, like a sore on breasts, or thighs, or similar places, and it must all be removed when it is in its early stages;
I have never seen anyone heal from this.
And the treatment, when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you sometimes purge the patient of black bile;
then let him bleed if he has a manifest fullness, then bind up the wound in a good place to perform the operation;
then cut your onions or garlic, and shave the head all over, and remove the bones without leaving anything behind;
and let the blood flow out freely, and squeeze the wound with your hand or something else, and if the blood flow is contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the bleeding stops; then heal the wound with another healing until it is healed.
of dropsy We have already said in the section on dropsy the similarities and how the accumulation of fluid is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the treatment which is made with medicine, and that which is treated with iron:
and one must not touch with iron in these two cases: that is to say, tympany and iposarchy, for it is a deadly thing;
therefore when you treat this condition of dropsy which is called "dislocation" in medicine, and the treatment does not help, then consider whether the patient is weak, or has another illness than dropsy, such as a fever and similar things; do not touch with iron, for there is doubt in it;
and if you see the patient is very strong, and has no other illness but dropsy alone, and is not too young or too old, then you must work thus: let the patient lie on his back in your arms, and press his belly down by pushing out the water to the lowest part of the penis, then take the spatula according to this form: And make an incision of 2 parts. to a point, and yet not so sharp that it can penetrate to the intestines when pushed in, nor can it pierce the skin.
then look to see if the dropsy is pressing on the intestines: you should split open under the armpit; and if the dropsy is due to a liver ailment, then your split should be on the left side of the armpit;
and if it's due to a kidney ailment, then it should be on the right, and the patient should not lie on the split so that the excess fluids do not flow to that weak spot;
then pierce the skin with your instrument, and stab it, and lift your hand to the entire area between the skin and the syringe as if you were skinning in the amount of a fingernail or more;
then pierce the syphilis until the pus comes to the surface, and that is the place of the water, then pull it out, and insert this instrument from which there is the form: And it is similar to a thin silver needle, and it is made of lightweight copper or brass, and has at the bottom a small hole: and on one side there are three holes; and two on the other, and one elsewhere;
and the head is shaped like a feather, and that is the shape of the incision that scribes make in feathers:
at the top there is an eyelet, so that when the instrument reaches the water, it is pulled up through the eyelet;
therefore empty half or a third of it, because if you empty more than is appropriate in that hour, the patient might die from the loss of vital fluids, or he will faint, or he will approach death.
but empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the disease signify, and his pulses;
then treat the instrument and retain the water, which is now retained by the membrane that blocks the aperture above the sciatic nerve, about which I have spoken, piercing it according to this method:
then resume the instrument the next day if you see that the patient is suffering from it, and treat a small amount of water;
do this for a few days, and be careful not to follow until there is no more water left but a little bit.
And if you doubt the disease, and leave a lot of water, then treat with hot sand or ash, and much sweating in a bath, and tanning, and drinking; and treat with drying medicines until he is healed, and cauterize the stomach and liver and spleen after extracting the pus, as I said before.
Sometimes children are born without a foreskin, or with a small foreskin, or it is not in its place.
If necessary, cut it with a very sharp knife according to this form:
Then put a subtle plug into the penis, and tie it and keep it like that for 3 or 4 days. And when he wants to urinate, remove the plug and urinate, then put it back in again.
And by chance, this may not be necessary, because the urine that comes out doesn't let it stay closed.
Those with small wounds, if treated with a plaster of honey, as we have said, will broaden.
Those who don't have the opening in their place are blue, because some are born with the opening at the tip of the penis, which prevents them from urinating until they lift their penis upwards. And they can't ejaculate because the fluid can't reach the glans, and this is a serious illness.
And the way to do this is for the patient to lie on his back, then the tip of the penis and glans are cut to the size of a feather, so that the slit goes through the middle, as it should be.
and beware of bleeding which often occurs, and if it does, then stanch the bleeding with something that stanches blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
of the penis Many times this hernia occurs in the penis, and it has an ugly appearance;
and there are both malignant and non-malignant types;
so you should grasp them with tweezers very gently, pull them out and clean the area thoroughly, then place wet cotton wool soaked in Egyptian ointment over it. Then treat it with diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
And if the ulcer is malignant, discolored and putrid, then you must apply cautery.
When you have cut it, and if the wound is on the shaft, and part of it is inside the skin and part outside, then you must first remove the foreign object that is inside. And when it is sewn up, the patient can be discharged.
For when you treat it together, there is the risk that the head of the shaft is not healed and it becomes perforated, causing blackness and corruption in the shaft and in the scrotum.
So you must cut away all that is black and corrupted, then apply an ointment made of honey and flour from pomegranate rind and poppies, and then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
And if there is a bleeding, apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
There are two ways to perform cautery:the first is when the wound is old and the skin around it is hard, which that is, in the case of bleeding and corruption.And the second is when the wound is new and the skin around it is soft, which is as follows:
and if the head of the penis is corrupted and withdrawn, then you should pierce or insert a cane of reed into the penis, and the patient should urinate through it.
and when the foreskin is swollen at the head of the penis, which happens to those who have not been circumcised, whether due to a wound or an abscess, then you should cut it with a sharp instrument until the swelling is reduced and the head of the penis is relieved of pressure all around.
and if it is a serious matter to discuss this, then you should cut it with a spatulum on the head of the penis and the foreskin.
Then clean gently between them, and place a thin, damp linen cloth in cold water on it so that it does not swell again.
Circumcision is not a matter of dislocation like the other wounds; Yet when we do this work of our own will, and properly with children, it is necessary that we make the best work, and the lightest for their salvation.
I say that the ancients did not mention the circumcision of their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experimentation.
For I have seen most of the masters and surgeons who made circumcision around the foreskin, and with force, and on every new born baby.
If it is a hernia because there are two membranes, and by chance one is above and the other below remains. Now they cover it again, and the pain is doubled, and in the purification which is from the foreskin is not secure the tip of the member.
And in the purification of the nail by chance escapes the iron, and they ruin the work, and many times are born so that they do not need purification, and I have seen it.
From the cleaning that is done on the scrotum, I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the testicles are cut justly above and below.
For when you press your hand, you cut equally in a circle all around. but that the son be well tied around the skin;
and the method of the first work is that you make the child think, if he understands, that you only tie the thread around the penis, and then pull it in all the ways you can;
then hold him upright between your hands, and press down on his genitals with your hands or under your feet so that the child cannot see them, or any of the instruments;
then put your hand over the penis and blow or breathe on it, and pull it upwards so that the head of the penis goes in; then cleanse it well from the dirt that has accumulated there, then tie the place with a double thread, then tie it under the testicles with another thread;
then cleanse it well from the dirt that has accumulated there, then tie the place with a double thread, then tie it under the testicles with another thread; and hold it by the two fingers of the second hand at the scrotum and index finger, and squeeze between the two threads, then lift the head of the penis rapidly and pull the chief of the penis; then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the wound. and put powder on top of the powder and then cover with a bandage glued with an egg yolk cooked in rose water, infused with rosemary oil, and left until the next day, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
The shape of the forces for purification is as follows:
the two shoulders should be thin and sharp, and the hands should also be as large as the wrists evenly:
the mistake of purification is when the heart inside bleeds with the incision;
therefore, you must stretch it with your fingernail so that the flesh makes an abscess;
and cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, hold it with tweezers and then cut it.
And if they persist for three days, and what is underneath the skin is swollen, let it be until the abscess is drained and the skin slightly scarred.
then press on it as much as you can, but avoid the area of the penis, which will not be harmed by this.
Then treat the area of the wound with a poultice, as we described in the treatise on powders. If they press on it too hard, and the swelling goes above, this will not cause any harm.
Treat it then as we have said until it is healed.
from the retention of urine
The obstruction of urine may be due to a stone, or frozen blood, or bowels, or dead flesh, or similar conditions which we have described in the division.
And if the urine is not flowing freely and you see that it is retained by a stone which is lodged in the throat of the bladder, then the patient should be made to bend his knees; and let his feet be placed on his back, and extend his belly from the upper part of his back, and restrain the patient's pain as much as he can. and then the bladder is compressed for the extraction of stones from above, which causes the urine to flow out.
And if it does not come out as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must perform an extraction using a instrument called a "syringe," which has this form:
And it should be made of thin silver wire, like the feather of a bird; The cane should be about a palm and a half long, and thin at the end.
And the way to extract the urine is as follows: take a doubled wire and attach a ball of wool or cotton at its end, then insert the end of the wire into the syringe.
and cut away the excess of the wool and plug it up to the tip of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or lard and yolk of egg, and have the patient sit on a chair, and raise his bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and warm water;
then gently insert the syringe into the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, then fold the foreskin back over the glans;
then fill the syringe up to the bladder, and feel the patient urinate until the bladder is empty, and this is not done according to this order unless the conductor where it goes is crooked;
then wind the thread around all the wool little by little, and the urine will follow the wool, then pull it out, and let the urine flow;
and restart the syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient is relieved.
When scabs or blood comes into the bladder, or pus is accumulated there, and you see it oozing out with water and medicine, then do everything using the instrument called "clepsydra", and that is its form:
It is closed and has three openings: II on one side and I on the other, as you can see;
and the small hole through which the medicine is applied should be such that it blocks the penis without addition, and one should be able to draw out moisture and insert when necessary;
and when you see your medicines entering the bladder, place the tip of the syringe in the moisture and draw it out through the opening;
you will draw out the moisture with the syringe, then quickly plug the hole;et si le chief dou keusteur est en la moistor, tu le tiens, et trais au traiant qui est ens. if the tip of the syringe is in the moisture, hold it there and draw out through the opening. If the moisture enters now, the patient will feel it;
and this is the shape of the subtle catheter used to catheterize the bladder:
And it is made of silver or bronze, and its head is higher;
and below to the armpit where the lymph nodes are located;
then take a sheep's bladder and put in it the moisture you see fitting for the blistering of the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts in the form of a loop made from a double thread, and heat that moisture over the fire;
then insert the tip of the blister into the penis, then squeeze your hand over the bladder gently, until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder;
and if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make it into a round, holey circle; then thread a strong cord through these holes and assemble the circle like one assembles a wheel, and put inside what you want of oil, moisture, and water, and tie it in the instrument;
and do as you did with the bladder, squeezing it with your hand until the moisture comes out into the bladder.
of stone
We have already discussed in the division the methods of stone extraction, along with medicine;
and I have described the difference between a stone in the bladder and all the signs, and which type of stone one should operate on; and in the bladder and penis;
and I will tell you plainly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder happens more often to children, and it is a sign that the water flows from the bladder like water in its subtlety;
and he clearly sees, and feels pain in his penis, and he can urinate many times, and then it blocks up; and has much of these discharges the fundament;
and healing is swift in children until they are four years old, and it is very slow in the elderly, and it is moderate in those between youth and old age;
and the cure is easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient through an enema, to draw out all the feces that are in the intestines. For it sometimes blocks the search for stones.
Then take the patient by the feet and lift and move him so that the stone sinks to the bottom of the bladder, sometimes emerging from above.
Then have him sit in your lap, his hands under his thighs so that his bladder is completely tilted downward;
then probe and touch it inside;
If you feel the stone in the channel, then hurry to cut on the stone.Et s’il ne le sent pas dedens, si doit il demorer assiez ains qu’il ait grant desir; et tu te leves dedens li quier
And if it does not drop when touched, then the patient should remain sitting until he feels a great desire; and you lift up inside him the urethraIf it does not drop from the touch of the whole, then wet your index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is adult, or your middle finger, if the patient is a young man. and press it into its socket, and seek out the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, then draw it towards the neck of the bladder;
then press down on your finger, and put the stone back into its socket where you see the incision.
And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and tell the patient to extend his testicles upwards in his right hand, and with his left hand pull back the skin underneath the testicles in the area where the incision is made;
then put the spatulum in its proper place, for that is how it is formed: And cut between what is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side of the navel;
and cut straight down to the stone, and your fingers should be pressed against the anus, and the incision should be made across so that it is wide at the top, and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large;
perchance the press so the testicles which are at the foundation, that they leap out without work;
and know that there is a certain stone in it with angles and margins: if it is grazed to come out;
and if there is one underneath that resembles a grape, and round, whose exit is easy.
For those therefore with whom it has angles and margins, make the incision larger;
and if it does not jump out, then you must hold the testicles steady with tweezers that are just like a file at their tip in order to squeeze out the stone so that it doesn't escape; or you insert under the instrument an extremely thin, curved hook;
and if you cannot grab it like this, then enlarge the opening and if the blood is exposed, then squeeze it with vitriol;
and if there is more than one stone, then plug the largest first at the neck of the bladder, then pour water on top, then pull it out, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are several.
And if it is very large, then it needs to be sutured, and a larger wound made. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine comes again through the opening where the urethra cannot heal;
but nevertheless try to draw it out, or tear it with tweezers, until you have drawn it out in pieces;
and when you have finished your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and press it, and put over it a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then re-catheterize the patient on his neck, and do not loosen the ligature until the third day.
And when you loosen it, wash the site well with oil and water, then treat the wound with thin ointment and thick ointment until it is healed.
And if hot abscesses come upon the wound and scorchings, and blood clots in the bladder, and the urine is retained by this, which occurs in such a way that without salt with the urine: therefore you should place your finger into the wound, and draw out that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder, and burst it;
then open the wound with water and vinegar and salt, and help him in every way you know until he is healed;
and you should bind his two thighs together with medicine on the wound every hour that you treat him.
And if the stone is small, and it is in the ureter, and lodged there, and the urine cannot pass through; if this treatment that I say is done several times, it is an excuse for the cutting, because of this treatment.Et si li piere sont grans et ne puent issir, mais sont en leu ou li urine se retint; I have tried this myself.
Take a piece of iron according to this shape and let it be spiked at three angles on a poker:
then take thread and tie it around the end of the penis, so that it cannot go back into the bladder.
then pierce the foreskin lightly with an awl, until it reaches the glans; and turn the awl in your hand in the penis little by little, until you can pierce the glans from another side;
then the urine will flow, and then press your hand on what is left of the stone which is inside the penis. It will be broken at once, and will come out with the urine, and the patient is cured;
and if you cannot do this for any reason that impedes it, then tie a thread under the glans and another one above, then make an incision in the penis between the two threads, then pull it out, and untie the thread, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound; and let them grow until they are healthy.
of women's stones
It sometimes happens that stones are lodged in women's wombs, and if it does, the cure is difficult and prohibited for three reasons:
one is that the woman may be a virgin;
and the second is that one cannot find a woman who is skilled enough to examine her, especially if she is chaste.
And the third reason is that perhaps one cannot find a skilled woman skilled in this manual art;
and the fourth reason is that the woman's stone is often deeper than a man's, so it requires a deeper incision, and there is great fear involved. If necessity demands it, then you should press a skilled midwife, and with difficulty you will find one, and if you do not find one, then seek out a subtle, clever castor.
and present to her a very wise dance in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command of the inquiry into the stone; and look very carefully if the woman is a virgin:
and look very carefully if the woman is a virgin: then she must push her finger into her vagina and search for the stone;
and if she finds it, she should press it under her finger, and he should command her to push her finger into the wound and squeeze and press her left hand firmly on the bladder.
If she finds it, then she should move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder until it comes to the root of the thigh;
then she should press on the stone in the root of the thigh against the middle of the urethra, the place where it is located; then she will feel the stone in that part; and do not move his bowels above or below, and let the incision be small at first;
and do not move his bowels above or below, and let the incision be small at first; then pour in wine into the incision if you feel that the stone is as sharp as the wound so that the stone can come out, and know that there are many kinds of stones;
that is to say, small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and which have many variations.
And if you know their appearances to identify the exit.
And if the blood flows, put crushed vitriol in its place, and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops;
then return to your work until the stone is out, and have the instruments that I told you about for extracting stones in men to assist you in your task;
and if the blood flows and it is from the artery that has been cut, put the powder on the spot and hold it in place with bandages and splints, and do not touch it again, and leave the stone and do not pull at it, or the patient might die; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the swelling has gone down, return to your work until the stone is out.
Ramice aquose is nothing other than an assembly of moisture or white pus, which is under the skin of the testicles that contains the egg;
and is called "syfac", and sometimes it is properly in the membrane of the egg if one believes that it is another egg; and it is the skin of the testicle between the white pus which we have mentioned;
and that does not happen by itself. And the generation of this disease is due to weakness that comes from the testicles, and this matter is spread out.
And sometimes it comes from a blow to the testicles, and this moisture has many colours: or it is yellow-tinged, or white, or black, or water-white, and there are more variations;et ceste moistor, s’el est de color declinant a jaunice, si vient de malancolie, ou de sang mist en la veine, et ceste moistor ne doit estre curée:
and the signs to recognize this assembly are that if it is in the white pus which we have mentioned, then it is an abscess, a little longer than an egg, and does not open the testicle, because there is moisture all around it.
And if there is moisture in its own webbing, then abscesses are formed with an egg-sized portion, and because of this, one thinks it is another egg.
and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white scrotum, then he feels good;
therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, test throughout the entire scrotum, from which the form is as follows. According to this, then, which comes after the instrument, judge what is inside.
And when we treat it with iron, then the patient should be healed according to his strength and the fullness of his body;
then lie on his back, on something slightly elevated, and put under him a lot of blankets;
then sit on his left, and instruct the assistant to sit on the right, and extend the scrotum towards one of the two ribs near the heart of the testicles;
then take the spatule of lead, and cut into the skin of the testicles from their end to the root, and make your incision straight while separating the skin of the testicles up to the white scrotum, and carefully peel it according to your ability.
then pierce the scrotum with a large hole, and draw out all the water, and then insert your fingers, and lift up the scrotum.
and do not touch the heart of the testicles but only the scrotum; cut into it all around carefully and in sections, especially the edges of it subtly, for if you do not cut well enough to draw blood, then the water will return.
and if the testicle jumped out of place during your work, then put it back into its place when you have finished working on the scrotum.
then sew up the two lips of the cut with one stitch, then treat it as you would any other wound until it is healed.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then you must tie off the suspended vessels to prevent the flow of blood.
Then cut the scrotum all the way around the suspendory ligament, extract the testicle, and treat it as we have described.
If the wound is divided into two parts, know that these are two testicles; cut the other part in the same way, then wipe away the blood and put soft lamb's wool soaked in rose oil into the wound;
cut the other part in the same way, then wipe away the blood and put soft lamb's wool soaked in rose oil into the wound; and put on another layer of lamb's wool soaked in wine and oil, and place it over the testicles, and put on doubled linen, and tie it all around according to this form:
Take two pieces of cloth and fill them with wool wadding according to this appearance and sew them together at the crotch of the breeches, and let one piece hang over the buttocks to the back, and the other to the part of the groin.
and let the other two ends hang over the two hips, and let the whole girdle be tied in a knot at the loop of the breeches;
and sometimes this ramice is used as a cautery instead of an iron knife, and you must grasp the thin cautery with tongs, and cut through the skin of the testicles, and it will be heated as we have said, so that the white pus contained in the fluid is exposed;
take the cautery according to this shape, and pierce that testicle gently, and scorch it with this thin hot cautery:
And cut in every way you can, until you have cut out everything.
and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg;
and know that this work is safer; and avoid bloodletting and cutting wounds;
And if anything goes against you, such as an abscess, bleeding, or anything else, then treat what goes against you according to what is said above.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this procedure due to its horrible appearance, then perform a puncture, as I have told you, and when you are certain through the signs we have discussed that the watery fluid is gone, then have the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess at its lowest point all the way to the bottom of the body;
and let the holes be wide so that all the water flows out
then put cotton on the spot, and tie it, and leave it so that the rest of the water flows out, then treat the wound until it is healed.
and if the white membrane does not let the water out through the mouth of the wound, then you must pierce it with a needle or instrument used to treat water in hydrophobia, as described earlier.
and widen the wound, and know that the water will come out, and will gather again after six months or so, and when it is gathered as before, then the illness will pass its course.
Know that in the cutting of this nerve there is fear in many ways, because of which I think it is better to leave it alone.
And I will tell you the treatment and the appearance of the abscess.
I therefore say that many abscesses come about the body, and especially in the groin. and this happens in many cases.
This is to be understood as resulting from an excess of bitterness and ague, which is spread to the groin, or from a blow;
and the color of the abscess follows the color of the body; and it causes no pain, and is a serious abscess;
and sometimes there are dark, pus-filled abscesses, and others that are blood-red in color, and at times they originate from an artery, or from a vein swelling.
When it is from an artery, it can be detected by the hot disposition of the abscess when you press on it with your fingers; and you must not touch it.
He who is made from the swelling of a vein is known by his reaction to the touch of your fingers, and anyone can properly make an incision on this sort of abscess, and on others like it; and you should cut the skin of the testicles, then the sac will be above, and the thread will come out from under the white membrane, and free the suspensory ligament from all parts of the sac.
If the testicle is already swollen with these new growths, then you should cut the sac and tie it off;
and if it is herniated in the membrane, or in what is inside the vessels, then you should free that tendon and tie it off roundly.
And if the tumor is in the back, then you must cut it out entirely and extract the egg, as we have said.
And when your work is finished, then dress the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then apply other remedies until it is healed.Et quant tu as curé la plaie, si covient que li patient soit a l’ombrage et au repos, et qu’il s’alimente de boire et manger legier, et qu’il ait peu de dormance, si com il oult.
This is a hernia wrapped in a wrapper similar to a cherry, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient suffers greatly when he walks;
and the treatment of this disease is just as fearful as the one above, and yet we will tell you about it according to what the ancients did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then tie the suspenders of the testicles low to your fingers, to all the vessels that are near the penis, and press them firmly, and extend them strongly.
Then cut through the skin with a sharp, wide blade across the vessels, so that they are exposed, and then scrape on each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples;
Then he inserts a needle where the thread is doubled, and ties it at the first place where the vein appeared, and ties it directly to the other end. Then he cuts them in the middle correctly, following the length of the body, and draws out the corrupted moisture;
Then he treats the wound as in the others, that is, one testicle may hang down;
for there is no harm from this, and if it becomes visible in all the vessels, then one must milk the testicles through all the vessels; so that the veins do not lose their color due to the incision of the vessels, and dry up and cannot help themselves.
The cause of this disorder is due to the incision that occurs in the sigmoid colon, or the extension over the abdomen in the area of the veins, causing the intestines to descend from that rupture to one of the testicles;
and this rupture is in the sigmoid colon, or due to the extension of it, and these two types come from many causes:
or from percussion, or jumping, or coughing, or lifting a heavy load, and from similar activities;and this happens through the sigmoid colon, or its extension, and these two types come from many causes:
and the signs that it is due to the extension of the sigmoid colon are that it occurs little by little over a long time, and does not happen suddenly;and this happens through the sigmoid colon, or its extension, and these two types come from many causes: and the abscess is even all the way to the bottom, because the ulcer pushes on the intestine.
And the signs are when it is a dissection of the shoulder, that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses are diverse appearances under the skin near the surface, and this is due to the output of the intestine and the body being pushed by the shoulder.
And sometimes the nerves go with the intestine, and are retained inside, and cause great pain for the patient, especially when they are pressed.
And in these cures of iron, one must fear, for which one must avoid it.
And the method of treatment is to have the patient push his intestine back into his abdomen with his hand through the wound, if he can reach it. then you should hold him by the neck between your hands and lift his hips;
then they are pressed down from above, and all the skin of the scrotum is cut away from the testicles; then insert hooks into the wounds of the abdomen according to what is needed to open the wound, so that the intestines can come out;
then scrape away the ulcer under the skin of the scrotum until all of the hard, white ulcer is exposed on all sides;
then insert your index finger into what follows the testicle, in between the white ulcer under the skin of the scrotum and the second ulcer, and separate what is behind the testicle from the second ulcer;
and then move your right hand inside the heart of the testicles, and have the white soffac on top in your left hand, and lift the egg to the entire soffac towards the waist; and instruct the assistant to stretch the egg upwards and loosen what is air behind the string;
and feel with your fingers if there is any intestine wrapped or hard white soffac, and if you find anything, push it into the belly below;
then take a needle with a thick thread made of six threads, and insert it into the back part of the soffac, which is after the skin of the testicles;et puis tire fortement l’aguille et le fil dedens, si que li intestin soit tirée derrier le syfac, et est le membre en sa place. and then pull the needle and thread inside strongly so that the intestine is pulled behind the soffac, and the limb will be in its place.Afterwards, cut the shoulders which appear from the threads, so that there are four threads left;et puis quier si li chiés ne se remue pas then he ties them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and binds it with a strong thread made of two parts. then he wraps the roots of the threads and binds them tightly from two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter, so that no abscess forms; and ties the thread according to the first long thread in two parts, and after these two threads leaves the syringe which is under the skin of the scrotum with a large amount of one egg; and then the other according to the roundness that the egg carries;
then cut into the part which is under the skin of the scrotum, so that the blood flows, and the bowels, as we have said before;
then apply wool moistened in oil, and place it on the wounds, and then the thread that we have mentioned. And sometimes the white syphilis that we have mentioned is cauterized after the incision out of fear of bloodletting. For this happens many times, leaving the ligament intact as it tears through.
And if it doesn't drop quickly, use a hot water compress and apply what we have described until it does.
Then treat the wound with another treatment until it is perfectly healed.
of flesh hernia
In this section, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the cure with iron.
And the ancients say that it is made like the thread that binds the vessel, after cutting it slightly from above to below;
then cut it in half, and treat the abscess with this, until the vessels are closed;
and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes, a rot comes in the gums, as we have said, and the place opens;
and none of the intestines come out as testicles, and if any do, it is rare, and they heal quickly;
and yet if it remains too long in this state, the wound or ulcer will increase in size as the intestines descend;
and this happens because of the extension of the ulcer which is in the intestines, as we have said, for it is extended, then made soft and swollen, and open;
and the treatment is by cautery, as we have previously said;
and sometimes it is treated with iron in this way: and the patient should lie on his back between your hands, then apply a poultice of the powdered herb according to the size of a bean three times;
then draw out the ulcer which is under the skin and take some of the juice and place it on the visible ulcer;
and press it into the depth of the abdomen, then cut the two visible ulcers on the head of the juice, and cut both;
then pull out the head of the bowel, and do not cover it with a bandage or extend it with anything else, as I have made you aware in the treatment of the rupture of the intestines; then treat it through the treatment of wounds.
then treat it through the treatment of wounds. And when you cut the threads, clean and treat the wound until it is healed.
The ulcer is constrained and has no appearance in the roux, and cautery is more beneficial in this case and closer to healing.
softening of the skin of the testicles
Many times the skin of the testicles becomes soft in some men, because the parts inside become soft and can be seen through the skin;
and it is necessary, when one wants to treat it, that the patient lies on his back, and the physician presses the soft skin over the natural skin;
then bring together the two lips of the wound with one stitch, and if you see it, sew the excess of the soft skin firmly with three or four stitches;
then bandage between the stitches, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed, then remove the thread.
of chastisement
Know that castration is considered a sin in our law, and for this reason I would prefer not to speak of it in this book;
and it is only necessary for two reasons:
the first is that physicians know how to answer when asked about it, and know how to treat it;
and the other is that we often need castration of certain animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and donkeys and other beasts.
I say then that castration is done in two ways: either by attraction or by cutting.
In the one that we do by attraction, we have the animal sit in warm water until the testicles become soft and hanging; then grab them with your hand, until they are dislocated and you no longer feel them.Et si li testiculoz ne sont pas pendans, mets ta main souz le menton et tire vers le haut tant qu’il soit dem
On the castration of the testicles: you should hold the animal down and squeeze its scrotum with your left hand, then tie off the scrotal suspension strap, and cut into each testicle at the bottom, when you have thoroughly dried them.
and leave a little pouch of fat on top of the delicate vessels;
and this method of castration is better than the one done by pulling them off, because in that method some testicle might be left behind and cause the animal to desire sex.
then treat the wound until it heals.
Of Hermaphrodites
There are two types of hermaphrodites in men: one type is where between the testicles there appears a woman's sexual organs, with hair and sometimes the ability to urinate.
And the other method is for women; it has a handle like a rod and two testicles.
And the treatment for both men and women is that you cut off all the extra growths and treat them like any other wound.
in the second way, men whose urine leaks through the skin of their scrotum, there is no cure.
A tentige is a wound that is healed over the natural part, so that it is too ugly to look at; and some women have them as large as a hand, and that is the cure.
You should dye the excess of the tentige with your hand or with a knife, and then scrape it gently;
and do not go too deep, so that bleeding does not occur, then the cure of one cure with another until it is healed;
and at another wound that occurs at the mouth of the ulcer, and treat it, and perhaps it will heal, and is according to the appearance of a boil, and therefore they called it the 'cow disease'. If you must treat it, as we have said regarding the tenting, and heal it until it is cured.
Erratic is when the nature of the woman is not understood, or the passage is small. It is natural at birth, or accidental due to illness that comes upon it;
It is natural at birth, or accidental due to illness that comes upon it; or it is caused by a foreign object, or by a suppurating ulcer or wart, and it is formed as a deep wound in the mouth, or on the sides, or underneath, wherever it may be;
and they affect conception and childbirth, and sometimes flowers as well;
and the understanding of this is through observing the urine.
If the stumps are visibly close by, then cut them with your fingers or with a knife.Si li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.
If it is due to a wart and it is close to the urethra, then hasten and treat it thus:
Place your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread;
then squeeze the urethra firmly until the wart is dislodged and expelled;
take wool, moistened in oil, and apply it to the area, and let the woman lie still for seven days, so that it may not heal.
And if the syphilitic sore is hard and thick, then you should cut it with a spatula similar to a myrtle leaf.
if the wound is new, suspend them from the ceiling and the beam;
and have the blood-stanching remedies, such as oak gall, dragon's blood, incense, and an abundance of egg yolk;
then apply a plaster made from crushed lead, so that the wound may not heal;
and for a long time, and let him use a tent of dry flax;
then other treatments until he is healed.
And when there is fresh flesh in the ulcer, it should be cut in this way, unless it is a deep abscess. For one must not touch an abscess that is deep in the ulcer.Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.
of hemorrhoids Hemorrhoids are openings of veins from which blood flows without cessation, and when they are old, they become thrombosed;
And we have already spoken about their likenesses in the section on signs, and I will now speak of those that can be cured.First, take a cautery made of fire, and apply it to the hemorrhoid so that it leaves the hair; let the hair grow long and even; and if they prick
I say that hemorrhoids and throbbin, when they are deeply embedded in the rectum, and do not appear to the touch, are not cured by a cautery with iron.
Those that are at the mouth of the rectum, which one can feel, are those that can be cured.Si on appert li thelul et les emorroides par grant dolur, si convient que l’on le cuie par fer; car la piere n’est mie trove a la guaine, ains est trove en la chair, ou il avient grant dolor, et s’eleve li sang.
You should therefore place the woman in a cool house, then heat the tweezers and the comb at their roots, then powder them with blood-stopping medicines such as aconite and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things.
Then tie her feet to the wall for an hour, then put her in cold water;
And if bleeding occurs, then she should sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark and gall and similar things, and then take barley flour and boil it with honey and garlic, and make a poultice out of it for her back.
And if it stops, that is good. If not, she should breathe in steam on her back and breasts without hurting herself;
Then take wool, and moisten it in plantain juice or dogwood juice with old wine, and breathe in the steam on her back.
And when the abscess has drained, then apply ointment to the wound until it heals.
and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles rough wool, so it should be covered as I have said before. And then cure the wound until it heals.
Many types of abscesses come about in the body, such as ulcers and pus-filled sores, and herpes, and boils, and fistulas, and hemorrhoids, and hot abscesses, and various other ailments which I have detailed in the classification.
Therefore, I shall discuss in this treatise about hot abscesses that occur in the intestines, which are not among those that occur in the bowels:
and if you wish to know the treatment for iron, then observe whether the abscess is painful at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and whether it becomes red when you can see it. Therefore, do not be hasty in piercing it, but let it drain as long as the pain is relieved;
and then let the patient sit on a chair, and have two small chairs on which he can lean, and support his back and gather his feet towards his leg;
and let his buttocks be spread out, and let him put his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good rope;
then suck the wound towards the right side, and administer the instrument with which one opens the mouth of the wound, from which the shape [of the cautery] comes;
and it is necessary that when you see the instrument being administered, you should insert the rod first to know the depth of the wound, so that what goes into the instrument does not go in more deeply than it should, and so that it does not harm the patient; and if the instrument is larger, then the depth of the wound should be covered with cloth so that the instrument does not cause pain;et quant tu i vues amenistrer l’estrument de coi ci vient li forme sus la marris, si covient que tu prends li cautere et li mets sur la marris, si qu’il ne se remue, et qu’il soit bien fix;
and he must put the horn of the instrument on top, and hold the instrument steady.
And when the abscess has opened, and they have made an incision in the soft part of the hand, then it must be covered with a bandage, with a light dressing.
and when the bowels have been emptied, then you must put in the wound moist bandages soaked in rose oil, or in dry verde oil;
and put the bandage over the wound, down to the bottom of the wound, and put another bandage above the wound, and on the little finger, a clean moist bandage soaked in water or mallows that have been cooked;
then treat it again after two days of ointment suitable for this, until it is healed;
and sometimes raise the wound and the injury with an enema of water and honey, and then with water or roots of lily and aristology that have been cooked for a long time; then return to the ointment.
And if the wound is sunken in the injury, then you should beware of cooking with iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
of childbirth It is necessary for the midwife to first know the natural signs of childbirth, and the signals that something is wrong when you see the woman push downward, and desire to smell flowers:
therefore the child rushes to be born; then you know that this childbirth is natural, and the baby emerges head first, with the placenta following;
and when you see these signs, you should gently push on her belly, so that the child is born quickly;
for when they descend head first, the placenta comes with them, and the mother's excess fluids are cleansed through a good cleaning;
and those who come differently do not come naturally.
For sometimes they come out feet first, or outside the body through the chest or arms, or they come out upside down, or they are turned around in some other bad way;
If it is necessary at the dance that she be wise and skilled in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the ways she should be helped.
If the baby comes out head first through a natural birth, and the woman gives birth with great effort, and her strength is weak, then let her sit on a saddle, or have women hold her.
And use the natural oil of rose or fenugreek that has been cooked, and then put the baby between her breasts the small spatumile of which there is the shape: and split the afterbirth, and scrape its nail until the fluid that is within flows out;
and press on the woman's belly until the baby descends, and if it does not descend, then one must enema the woman with mucilage of fenugreek with oil of seisment;
then have her breathe and sneeze out some of the powder, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: if she now expels the fetus.
And if both hands come out, then you must gently push them back in a little at a time; and if they cannot go in, then put the woman on a chair, and raise her feet up high; then raise the chair off the ground, and hold the woman so that she does not lean forwards when standing up;Apres que li sieges esteit debout, si covient qu’ele soit en ses sens, et teigne le membre qui est disloie,
After the chair is upright, the woman should be conscious and the dislocated joint should be held in place; if the hands cannot go in and the child is dead, then grasp the hands with a knife at the tip of the fingers as described above, extract the child, and reset the dislocation in the same way.Et s’ele ne vuit pas lasser aller li enfes, si ten le membre en la main dreit et fort, et met le sie
of the child's issue upon its feet When an infant comes onto its feet, it must be pushed upwards. Then rock it back and forth gently until it is even;
then hold one foot and stretch it out gently.
If he jumps up to his hips, instruct him to grab hold, and make him sneeze from the stomach; if he jumps out, God willing.
And if he cannot jump as we have said, then turn him little by little until he is in his natural position. For then he is easily cured.
And if he does not come out as we have described, take mustard and oil and gum, and crush them all in a mortar; and apply this ointment to the mother's abdomen and then make her sit in warm water up to her ribs;
and when she is soaked underneath, put the myrrh collar on her and let it stay there for an hour; then have her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, for the child will soon jump out.
for the child to come out over his knees When the child comes in this way, she puts her hands on it little by little; then she lies down on her back, and her feet hang down below, and she lies on the bed; and bends her knees little by little, and then she presses her hands on her belly, and takes away the cushions from under her, so that she is exposed below; and if the child does not jump out, she takes her feet and moves them about, then she rubs her belly upwards, and then puts in her hands; and pushes the child little by little; and instructs the woman to press until the child comes out.
of the issue of the child which comes out width a hand during We must find a way to return the hand: if we cannot return it, then have the woman stand up and walk.
If she cannot walk, then have her lie on the bed, and raise her legs straight;
then bring the mustard that I described;
and if she does not give birth, then have her sit on a chair, and then try to return the hand; and hold the child according to its natural position, and make her sneeze, and instruct her to grab it as it comes out.
from the child's exit at its neck, and spread his hands, and turned his face towards his mother's back We must have the midwife tug on the hand, then pull it gently bit by bit, and wiggle it lightly;
and when it's even, put the mustard mixture of arnica and oil as we said before, then instruct her to move it bit by bit;
and when you have done this, make her sit on a chair, and tell her to hold onto it. and make her sneeze. in the same way with all the afterbirth
in the same way with all the afterbirth When all the afterbirth has come out in this way, catch the afterbirth with your fingernail so that the fluids are expelled;
and if the child can move its face and neck, catch hold of it so that it does not struggle, and the child will die.
Then put the child back inside, positioning it correctly; instruct the woman to hold on several times:
of the exit of twins You should know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four are born; and this is not a strange thing, and it happens often. These are strange, and do not live long if they do.
These are strange, and do not live long if they do. I know that they will multiply, and are separated by the membrane that divides them, which is attached to the womb.
And sometimes they emerge as naturally as a tail, just as we have said.
And if they emerge quickly, the midwife should act as we have described, and be quick and skillful in what she does; and act in such a way that it benefits the mother. of many children
Sometimes they are formed in the womb as one, or two, or three, or four, or five, or six, or seven, or more, up to fifteen, and they are all formed in the shape of a child according to the measurement of the wise glorious sage, and the midwife should know all this, because by chance something similar might happen; and she should act accordingly.
of the dead child
When you are treating a woman for a dead child or abdominal pain, as I have said in the previous chapter, and there is no progress, and you are forced to use manual manipulation; If you need to know whether a woman is of sound health, and has no incident that causes her fear of death.
It is necessary for the woman to be laid on her back, with her hips tilted downward and her legs raised.
And if she is tied to the bed so that she does not move, this will aid in delivering the child;
Then rub the mouth of the mother with moist oils mixed with musk, fennel, and flax seed; then anoint the midwife's hands with these oils and musk.
Then gently insert them into the mother's privates, taking care not to hurt her; and pay attention to make sure that the child is positioned to come out head first.
If it gets stuck in her throat, or under the beard, or in the navel, or near the ribs, or if it's feet are coming out first, push on its bottom and sides.
and he must dye the thread with his right hand, and place the needle between the thumb and forefinger of his left hand, and draw the thread through all his fingers gently, and insert the needle into one of the places we have mentioned, until it reaches the empty space.
then insert another needle, or a third if you need it, so that the extraction is even;
and then they are moved evenly from one side to the other, so that they can exit; and the needles must be gripped tightly so that they do not move, as shown in this drawing:
And if any part remains, he should anoint one of his fingers with oil and insert it into that part, and pull the other part;
and if nothing remains, he should insert this needle or a higher one, and do this until it all comes out completely.
And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot bring it back due to the dislocation, then you must wrap a cloth around it, so that it goes all the way down. Then, you must cup your hand at the base of the palm or wrist, and you must do the same with the other hand and feet.
And if the head of the child is large and it is stuck in the birth canal, or if it has a sharp pain gathered at the head, then you must push the spathumile* between your fingers, and press the head, and draw out the sharp pain; or you can use the instrument called 'almidach', from which the mold comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one;
and thus you will do if the child has a large natural head;
and then pull out the bones with tongs, and if the head jumps out and is forced, let it be split, until the moisture that is in the wound comes out.
And if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces as small as you can.
And if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you should pierce it so that the moisture runs out.
And if the swelling is on their feet, the pull is light, and the movement towards the mouth of the wound is easy.
And if it is bound in the belly or the udder, then you should loosen it with your hand wrapped in a cloth. And cut the belly or the udder so that the moisture that is inside runs out.
And if any other part is broken, and the head remains, then push the shoulder-bone with your hand into the wound, and pull it out to the mouth of the wound. Then put in the hook or two, and pull it out.
and if the mouth of the wound is narrowed by a hot abscess that has formed there, one should not work on it, but rather apply moist and fatty substances; and let the patient use poultices, and wash with warm, softening waters.
And if the child is on its side, and you can bring it to lie evenly, then administer what we have said for a living child;
and if one cannot, then cut it into pieces, and leave nothing of the afterbirth.
And when you have done this, administer what we have said for hot abscesses that come in a wound;
and if there is an discharge of blood, let it be put in restraining waters, and let the patient undergo other treatments.
And I saw a woman in whose belly a child had died, then another was sewn over it, and the other died too. After a long time she got an abscess in her armpit, which swelled so much that it opened and began to ooze profusely.
I was called to the wound, and I thought for a long time, but could not heal it.
I applied a strong attracting plaster, and one bone came out, and after a few days, some others. I was very amazed, because the belly has no bones.
I thought that they were the bones of a dead child.
I examined the wound, and found bones poking out, until the woman was in a better state; and the woman wore it for a long time like this, and then suddenly a little bit of bowing from the heat;
and I haven't recorded this chapter until now because when the master finds a strange thing, he will know how to apply a remedy.
Here after comes the form of the press, which is used in books;
and at two turns around the two shoulders. Nevertheless, the horns of the press should be more subtle, and they should be made of ebony or boxwood;
and its mouth, two fingers wide, and the margin of the wood, one palm and a half; and in between the two limbs there should be two adjustment of this same wood, which are secured in one and the other, half a palm long or a little more;
and these two settings are placed at the mouth of the wound to open when one turns the two horns.
A different form, which is more subtle and lighter, should be made from ivory or boxwood, according to the appearance of tweezers; and has two settings, as you see, one palm-long, and two fingers wide;
and when you see the wound open with all the instrument, then let the woman lie on the bed, her feet hanging and her legs spread, then insert the two settings together into the wound, and hold the head of the instrument between her thighs; then work your hand on the whole instrument, just as you did with the tweezers, according to the amount that you want to open the mouth of the wound, until the spouse does what she wants.
All instruments are tipped and their appearances multiplied. And when the surgeon has prepared them, the work is quicker and the patients are better for it in terms of quantity.
Do not despair about the instrument until you have prepared it, for their necessity is unavoidable.
When the afterbirth is retained in childbirth, you should instruct the patient to hold her breath and then cause her to sneeze with an emetic, and squeeze her hands against her mouth and nose; and if she vomits, all the better.
If not, take a pot and make an emetic with herbs that open the mouth of the womb, such as hellebore, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, are cooked in water over the fire;
then put one end of the pipe into the pot and the other into the mouth of the woman, and hold it there until the steam enters the womb;
then make him sneeze, as we have said. Then let the secondine dry quickly.
And if it remains after this treatment and is not cured, command the midwife to wet her left hand in oil of sesame or in musk-soaked water, then insert it into the birth canal and push out the afterbirth; and when she has found it, grab it and slowly pull it out straight so that the mother does not feel pain during extraction;
but it must be moved gently to the right and left, and then pulled out;et quant elle l’avra tirée hors de tout, si le veuit mettre sur une toille ne sur un cotte, et la couvrir and when she has pulled it all out, she should put it on a cloth or shirt and cover it up
And if the birth canal of the mother is tight, we have described the cure for sneezing and herbal fomentation;et s’elle deit en son lit et ne peut lever, et le sang lui vait par la ou elle a accouchie, si covient qu’ele soit sur une cotte ou une toille, et li
and if it is not one of those we have described, then beware of following their treatment;
but it is necessary that he who has the mouth of the wound, to tie him to the thigh of the woman, then cauterize with ointment of four drugs; if she defecates and passes gas, and then goes out;
but nonetheless, when she defecates, if a foul odor comes from the stomach and head, and causes the illness to flare up. Then it is necessary to use suitable fumigations:
some of the ancients have tried fumeation with watercress and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument used to smoke out the woman for the retention of flowers and afterbirth is as follows:
And it is in the shape of a dog, and one puts the narrow end into the nature, and the wide end above the fire;
and the fumeation is on the coals, and one fume until it is worn out, then starts again another.Et si le fumee ne tuit pas l’esguile, puis si doit faire le fumigation de sauge;
Many children are born who do not have the foreskin pierced, but instead have a thin membrane covering it. Therefore, the midwife must pierce this membrane with her finger, and not with an awl or anything else, and be careful not to touch the foreskin.
Then, she should apply a mixture of wine and oil on it, and then dress the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if you doubt that he will be cured, then put a plug of wool in the wound, and leave it for several days, and remove it when the child wants to go to bed.
Sometimes this membrane comes from a wound or an abscess; in which case you must cover the wound immediately: as we have said before regarding the treatment of warts.
Fistulas that originate beneath the foreskin are nodules, and they grow larger if they come from underneath the foreskin or in between its two parts, and they can be single or multiple.And if there is a fistula, or more than one:
and when this dislocation is old, it opens and often emits moisture, a white pus or thin fluid, and sometimes these are persistent ulcers.
and they are caused by an ejection or venting of wind when the patient ejects wind, and sometimes a worm comes out.
And there are ulcers that pierce all the way to the bladder, and halfway down the penis; and they reach as far as the hip joint, and to the anus.
And so one knows a persistent ulcer in the rectum, and one that does not burst: and you should thrust your finger into the rectum, and push in a thin needle made of iron or steel into the ulcer when there is no twisting.
And if it has a twist in it, then push in a thin wooden rod, or a horse hair, as far as you can feel the rod or hair with your finger;
and if you do not feel it, and it does not come out through the orifices as wind or farts or urine, as we have said: know that it does not pierce; if you want to cure it.
And when the fistula has reached the bladder or the urethra, then the urine flows out, and medicine cannot stop it.
If it is pierced up to the hip joint, then the tent will come up to that spot; if there is winding and pain throughout the body, then it will go away on its own without medicine or ointments;
and in these weeping sores there is no treatment except effort and the vanity of foolish midwives who interfere.
In those that are not weeping and are not old, there is hope of healing through fire, as I have experienced, and the patient should lie on his back between your hands;
and raise his legs up to his hips, and let his hips be inclined towards his belly; then put on an iron ring, or a plaster if there is tortuosity, as long as you know where the ring comes from.
If the patient feels it around the anus, then you should put your index finger in, if without piercing the ring;
and uncover where you feel between your finger and the flesh, then you know it is pierced; if one does not work on it, it cannot be healed.
They still say that some can be healed, but that happens rarely;
and the aid that is done, one burns the cautery subtly according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before; and insert it into the fistula all the way until it comes out from the anus; And do this two or three times until you know that these charred meats are burnt, which look like an owl's feather;
and then the cautery of moist tents until the swelling goes down, and then the cautery of ointment binding and sealing.
If it is thus healed, that is good.
If this is not done, it cannot be healed in any other way;
and if the tent goes in and does not reach the bone which is in the foundation, and there is between your finger and the tent a thick covering of pus or of syrup, and you see the fistula above the covering of the flesh; if you cut off the top of the fistula at its beginning, and then plug it with cotton before putting in the tent, and then cauterize after, until it reaches the tip of the tent; and the tent will be released, and will fall out;
then clean those swollen areas that look like a bird's feather, and nothing will remain.
And if the pus runs out, and goes between you and the wound, then cauterize it with fire or with medicine.
For the fire cautery joins two bone things together: that is to say, the scorching of these heated instruments, and the clotting of blood and the drying of moisture;
then the treatment of wet tents with butter or crushed substance, until the liquid flows out and the heated instruments are inserted into the bowels;
then treat the wound of burning-hot iron brands, and they are dry remedies.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if a fistula comes from the depth of the foundation, and is separated from the body, put your finger into it, and explore it.
If you feel the tent, and within it is the thread or the silk or the iron, or it is about to pierce, then do not have fear that leads to doubt and despair, but rather have faith and hope through the administration of one of three remedies:
either you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the quick, or if you can, insert tents and treat it as before;
and do not go too deep, lest you cut the container that holds the foundation, and cause the contents to spill out through that passageway; then treat, as we have said;
then treat, as we have said; by chance you will be healed, or you should remove that covering and clean it after it has been cut away from the foundation, either by scraping or with some pointed instrument; then probe the wound as deeply as you can; then examine how to restore the wound and stop the fistula from spreading in the affected area away from the foundation:
then examine how to restore the wound and stop the fistula from spreading in the affected area away from the foundation: if it is more convenient for the patient.
And sometimes they are like this:ou la fistule est entree en la plaie, et alerge vers le fondement, ou le and it is when you insert the tent into the fistula, and it is by the side of the foundation underneath the skin, then take a tent pierced at the tip in this shape:si la fistule est plus legiere chose que li cuirs ne soit pas trove, si boutes la tente en la plaie au costeit de la fistule, et elle alerge vers le fondement; And he inserts a twisted thread into it, and inserts the tent along the entire thread into the fistula as far as the top.
If it is pushing from the edge of the foundation inside, then pull out the thread of that opening, just as you would push your finger into the fundament.
and pull on the end of the thread, and bring the two heads together, and press them tightly against each other, and leave it for one or two days;
and restrain it some time until the threads cut through the flesh between the two, and they separate;
then heal the wound so that it is closed and healed.
If the fistula does not drain, then have it drained in every way you can, if it is not too deep. For it is not appropriate to cover with a bandage immediately after lancing, and then treat the wound, as we have said, until it has healed.
The form of the spiny spatomyle for making a fistula is sharp at one end and pointed; and on the other part it is not, so that one does not cut what one should not cut, as you see here:
There are two types of hemorrhoids: either they are inside the fundament, like grains of resin, and there can be small or large ones, and they discharge blood constantly, and there can be one or more, and they are located inside the fundament, and at the head of the fundament;
but those which are displaced have a little moisture, and still more or some yellow water or a little blood, and they have the color of the body;
and the treatment of those who have them in the anus, is to command the patient to straining to go to the toilet, until the hemorrhoids come out, and they will be seen. If you are in a hurry, and can grab it with tweezers, or your fingernail, then pull it out at the root;
and if they cannot be held with tweezers due to moisture, then they can be grabbed with a piece of cloth, or cotton, or a piece of lamb's wool; and pull them out with your fingers, then cut them, and powder some hot powdered medicine on top of the cut; or you can cauterize them as described in the chapter on cautery, then treat the other hemorrhoids until they are healed;
and if the foundations cannot come out, then cleansing the patient with a sharp and harsh enema to wash away what is in the foundations, so that they can come out clearly; then the patient defecates, and if the thread is loose from the foundations, then the cure is easy;
then the patient defecates, and if the thread is loose from the foundations, then the cure is easy; and you should grasp them with your nail or tweezers, and cut them, then cure them as we have said, until they are healed and afraid of incision by iron. You should administer the stitch in this way:
You should administer the stitch in this way: take a twisted thread, and insert it into a needle, then pull the thread through from the top, and pierce the needle from the other side, and return both ends of the thread under the needle, and let it be loose;
and tighten the thread tightly, then tie a knot in the thread, and remove the needle, and do likewise with all the others, and leave one for controlling the flow of blood;
then place a damp cloth soaked in rose oil or cerota over the wound, and instruct the patient to rest.
then let him defecate, and when he has, treat the wound with ointment and other remedies until it is healed.
from dryness of the anus or rectum Many times there is dryness of the bowels within the intestines, caused by natural constriction, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help. You should also cut off any scabs that form on the wound with a spatula or your fingernail, so that moisture does not get trapped underneath. then treat the wound until it is clean and healing as it should be.
if it cannot heal, then restart the process of scraping off any dead tissue until the wound is clean and healing well, even if this means causing some pain. then treat the wound until it is fully healed.
when it trembles A furuncle is a small boil-like growth that forms under the skin and can grow quite large;
and sometimes the shivering chills him, and he feels it throughout his body, more in his hands than anywhere else.
And the treatment is that you take a candle made of goose fat, or fat from a wild boar, and hold it to the shivering until the purple circle around the shivering goes away. Then return your hand to the candle and rub it all around the shivering until you've covered the whole area; this will pull out the shivering by its roots.
And if you see fit to make a candle of bronze or iron according to this shape, let it be thin beneath and drawn out on top. Do not pierce it, lest it stick to the candle, and do not press on it too hard.
And if you wish, you can cauterize the shivering as described in the chapter on cautery.
Sometimes they make a clyster of silver, or brass, or molten bronze or copper:
and sometimes these instruments are made small and large, depending on those to whom they are administered. Those who are administered for the treatment of children, and who are weak and painful, are small.
Those who are administered for the treatment of children, and who are weak and painful, are small. The form of the small and large enema is above wide, or the belly is bound according to this manner:
and there is a disconnect in the abdomen, as you can see, and the bowels are pierced inside;
and on one side there is an opening, and on the other there is none;
and the abdomen is where one puts the medicine, in a bladder made of animal hide or parchment, and it is pierced all around with small holes, and there should be an inch of space between each hole, then insert into these holes a strong thread wound in a spiral, and assemble the abdomen as if it were a goat; and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread in front, then climsterize;
and this is the shape of the circle:
And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head of the catheter with oil or egg yolk, or similar things, then insert it gently; Then the minister squeezes his two hands together, until it is completely empty, then removes the enema, and helps the patient to his feet, and if the medicine wants to come out, he holds it in as much as he can. and if he sleeps a night at once, it is greater help.
And if you treat him with a syringe for dysentery, and the medicine rushes out quickly, then repeat it until he is healed.
And if the hemorrhoids are in the anus or rectum, then the enema should be as gentle as for a child.
and this is how to make the gentle enema that will not hurt the skin:
We have already said in the section on wound treatment:
now we will tell of the cures for hands and medicine, according to completion.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and according to what makes them.
The things by which wounds are made are by the impact of stones, and cuts from sword and knife, or lance, club, spear, or similar objects;
where they are made according to the places of the body, as a wound that falls on the neck, or the head, or the leg, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;
and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, because the memory will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, then take care if it is a stone or similar object, and the skin is still broken and the wound is large, and you fear quickly of a hot abscess: then let him bleed at once from the head itself if it comes from a little blood from the wound, and let the bleeding be in the opposite direction of the wounded part;
and dry out the patient's fullness from wine and rich foods.
If he does not want to fast, then his diet should be reduced, and he should drink no wine or eat no meat.
and put a poultice on the wound, if hot abscesses form, only moistened cotton in rose oil or wine with styptic properties;
and if there is no hot abscess, then put on the wound, if it is still bleeding and not moved by air, powder which I will describe shortly;
and if the wound has been moved by air, then put on some ointments until it is healed.
And if the wound is large, such as from a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together with stitches, then bring them together with sutures, as I will describe for wounds of the abdomen, of the chest.
If the wound is exposed to the bone and can be closed and only holds by a small amount, then stitch it; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard food in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods such as eggs and cooked wheat, as well as pulses, and similar things.
And if you find a skin boil, and it is not on the bone, then cut off the boil completely, and squeeze it out, then treat it.
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, causing blood loss, and it cannot be stopped by medicine, then cut and tie off the artery, and if you open it, then ligate it with a thread. And if that does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light:Car les maladies de la chair sont legierement curables, se on le cueille promptement; mais en And it is important to apply this powder that draws out the pus as soon as the wound has healed over.
And the way to make the powder is:Prends fin amont de sal armonie, et de vitriol blanc Take equal parts of harmoneal salt and white vitriol;take one part of incense blood of a dragon two parts white vitriol three parts, and the powder subtly, and apply to the wound, and hold it firmly, until it is well healed and joined with all its blood;
and then dress it well, and leave it bound, if it does not swell; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And sometimes one makes it only with chalk, when one doesn't have incense or dragon's blood, but so long as the wound is moved by fire.
And if the fire has moved the wound, the same way it was, put on some of this powder;
but put on some digestive poultices, or barley flour made with water and honey, until it becomes soft; then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.Et se li est aisi granz maux et grant mortur, il doit estre traittes d’aic
And if the fracture of the bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then draw it out with fine pincers;
and I will tell you about fractures of the head afterwards.
wounds to the neck
If the wound is on the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
If it is a nerve, there should be nothing done but to leave the wound alone and not put anything restraining on it, because it hurts the nerves and makes them withdraw; and nothing cold should be put on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member;
but the medicine should be warm, like hot water washed in soft water and mixed with rose oil, and cooked washed also in soft water, and other stones of similar type, and moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, then cut and ligate the vessels, then treat it until it heals.
And if the wounds are deep, and she is pregnant and full of fetus, then it should be pierced higher up;
and if the artery is cut, and blood comes out, then open it, and ligature it, and cauterize it if necessary;
and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the neck, and the conduit is kept, through which the meat goes, then cut the neck over the spine of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape. and then he tightens it gently, and leaves it for a few days, then cleans the wound with herbs until it is healed.
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then cut it out. and if there are bone fragments, then remove all those you can, and the ones you cannot reach, leave until the wound pus, and is drained and healed.
and if the wound is fresh, then powder it with the powder I described earlier. And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as I have described in its chapter.
If it is a stab or cut wound, and the wound is deep, then examine if from the wound, winds blow through the body: you know therefore that the wound is mortal;
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put the powder in it at first, nor ligature it because of the blood which will flow out, piercing through, and return to the heart, and heal the patient. but apply an attractive ointment, and tie it twice a day;
and if you do not have an ointment, then put old cotton in the wound to draw out moisture, and let the patient sleep on the wound for 3, or 4, or more days; and if no spasms, nor tremors, nor pain in the limbs come; and when you see these good signs, then you know that the wound is saved. Then cure it with poultices and other remedies until it is healed;
and if it cannot heal, and works, then know that there is a fistula.
treat the wound as one should. And if the wound is from a sword or knife, and it is superficial, in front or on the back, then treat it as follows: if it is large, with stitches;
and if it is small, with powder, and if it is deep in the bone, and has chipped pieces, then clean the wound, and pull out the foreign objects if they are loose; and if they are not loose, let the wound fester, and it will ease the extraction.
and for other wounds in other limbs, the judgment is as we have said.
from rupturing of the belly
There are great, medium and small ruptures of the belly;
of the great rupture, sometimes the intestines, or the nerves of the intestines, pass through;
and the sewing is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one, because the intestines are not sewed in at once but gradually heated.
because the intestines swell as soon as they feel cold, they close up more at once, and therefore a wound in the bowels is better than one elsewhere; and so dislocation of the bowels should be reduced to its place before others.
And you should know that there are four ways to sew up the belly:
The two common sutures happen in the belly, and the sutures of other wounds of the body; and two proper sutures are common to other wounds.
Nevertheless, they are more appropriate with the belly, and I will describe each one and clarify:
I say that when the wound is small, and some thing of the intestines are outside, and there is little danger of putting it back, this is through one of two ways: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen with cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in such a way: moisten a sponge or soft cloth in tepid water only, or cook it in water with squills and cyperaceae and spicery, and wash the intestines until the swelling is gone;
and sometimes they make this restraining wine, and it is helped only by being alone to deflate.
And when you see the swelling leaving, moisten the intestines with water or with honey and vinegar in which mallows have been cooked, for through this the entrance is slowed to a little thing;
and if it cannot enter, they make a small wound in the instrument with which one cuts hemorrhoids;
and the first treatment is moxibustion of the back, which no one should cut into without great need;
and here are the instruments for splitting it:
if it is split within the curve and does not break, see the shape here: And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out, then put them back according to their natural shape in their proper place, if you can, because this is worth it.
When the wound is large and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, you should have the patient lie on his back with his legs raised higher than his head: and if it is in the lower abdomen, place the head and feet higher than the lower parts, and also if the wound is in one of the two lower parts, place the injured part higher than the other;
and thus you should manage those things that I say about large and small wounds.
For small wounds, take what you are equipped with, then hold between your fingers and thumbs a piece of cloth which covers the entire wound and gathers its lips;
and this is the common method of sewing, and it is that you thread a needle or several, according to the width of the wound, then leave two threads' length from the edge of the wound, and insert a needle with strong thread through it; and pierce the two ends of the skin with the two ends of the stitch, which is under the skin inside, so that you make it pierce from that part, and bring the two ends of the stitch together;
then pull the double thread around the needle from both sides, then bring the two edges of the wound together smoothly, and then leave two threads' lengths, and insert another needle;
then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not cease to do this according to what you need of needles, until the whole wound is closed;et quant la plaie est restraine, tu i mets I boin fil de linteaue ou de cotoen par dessuz les aguilles en la plaie, et li raides entor le corps, et puis tire les II chiés dou fil, et li raides s’ad
and let the needles be medium-sized, between fine and thick, because fine needles pierce all the flesh, and those that are too thick cannot pierce well: for this reason they should be medium-sized;
and one must not push the needles too deep into the flesh and through the skin, so that they do not pierce and open the wound before it heals;
then cut the heads of the needles so that they do not blister the patient when sleeping, and place tents or bandages on the heads of the needles to keep them in place, leaving them until the wound is healed;
and this method of sewing with needles is most appropriate for small wounds, because it only requires one or two needles.
The second sewing method is common, and it is where you bring the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the wound together with one needle and a strong medium-sized thread;
and when you have sewn these four together, then return the needle to the place where you started, in the manner that one sews a dress.
and put spacing between each stitch equal to the thickness of a thumb nail;
This sewing saved a man whose stomach had been cut open with a knife; the wound was more than a palm wide, and the intestines protruded two palms out of the abdomen.
I brought him back the intestine, which had been outside for 24 hours; I sewed up the wound and it healed in 15 days.
And the physicians had judged that he would die, but it was a miracle:
and I did not treat him with ointments, for I was in a place where no such things could be found, nor medicines; and changed the cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he healed.
Here I will tell you about two proper methods of sewing:
take the needle and thread it with the end going into the inside of the wound;
once it has pierced the skin straight on, take hold of the needle where you threaded it and pull it through to the other side of the wound, piercing from the inside out;
and the technique of this sewing is that you sew just as a leatherworker sews hides, and that you take hold of the skin on one side and pull it towards you, and then take hold of the skin on the other side and pull it towards you, until the seam is complete.
The second method of sewing, which Galen describes as proper, is to bring the two sides of the wound together naturally and to apply one side of the skin to the other, in such a way that:
stick a needle or tip of the mirror close to it, and just pierce that spot, and leave the two sides of the syringe; then turn the needle, and have it pierce from outside inwards to inside, through the two sides of the syringe;
then pierce one and then the other from outside inwards to inside, through two other tips of the mirror that are on the other side;
and this is the main way of sewing and the most common.
Galen says this word, and some testify to it, that one should sew up the belly with two needles, with thread in each;
and one must push one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew hide;
and know that when the wound is in the middle of the belly, then the sewing is more difficult than in other places on the belly.
The judgments of the wound are such as the judgments of other wounds:
and it is when you find the fresh wound full of blood, so that the fire has moved it, then return the intestines and the bowels;
then put on the powder, and if the fire has moved it, then put on some ointment that is present until the wound heals; and cut the thread, and sew the sutures, and the bandages; then treat the wound as the others, until it is healed;
and if you do not have medicine, then put on old cotton as soon as it begins to heal, and change it twice a day until it is healed.
For you do not need any other medicine in most cases when the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound will affect the principal limbs, then you should moisten a light woolen cloth in tempered oil, or rose oil, and place it around the edges of the wound, and under the scabs;
and if there is pain or pus in the bowels, and it often occurs, then enema with warm red wine, especially if the pus comes up to the intestines;
and open it inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to cure than the small one.
The intestines which are called "young" cannot heal when they are damaged, and this is due to the thinness of their walls, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity of their nature to nerves.
And if the worm jumps out of the wound, then put it back inside with the intestine while it is still fresh;
and if it is old and has become like worms or black, then you should tie off the black area so that bleeding does not occur there, for there are veins and arteries there;
then grasp what is between the fingers, and place the two heads pendant from the part below the wound until it is dislocated to ease the extraction when the circles contract, and the wound heals.
of the rot of boiling water
When the intestines are ruptured and the wound is small, it can sometimes be restored in some people; for I saw a man who was pierced through the belly with a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became an abscess, and the excretion and flatulence came out through it;
I applied treatment according to what I knew, and did not cease to treat him until he was healed and the wound closed.
And when I saw that it had healed, I feared that the patient still had pain in his belly; but he remained in good health, eating and drinking;
and some experimenters say that when there is a small wound in the intestines, it must be bound in such a way: take a large thread, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the thread has opened its mouth, place it on top of the two lips so that it holds its mouth closed;
and then tie off the head of the thread, and this will hold so that it cannot come undone, then place another thread afterward in the same way until the wound is completely bound; and then cut the wound.
If these wounds are in the intestines and there is no harm to the patient, then one can ligature the intestines with a fine thread cut from the intestines of an animal, in such a way:
take the end of this intestinal thread that is very dried out, and then tie to the end of this intestinal thread a thin twisted linen thread, then thread the needle, cut into the intestine, and wind it in the groove;
and this way of sewing bones is not unsuitable, but according to the path of faith and hope.
and if the wound is great and wide, especially when it is in one of the internal bones, there is no healing without subtlety.
of a fistula, wherever it may be Know that any wound or abscess, when it wakes up, is universally called a "fistula", and especially when it is swollen and becomes bow-shaped.
And a fistula is according to the green, hard, and white nodule, where one does not feel pain, and is as smooth as the feather of a bird;
and sometimes it is clear and thin, and sometimes thick. sometimes small, and sometimes large enough;
and I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, it is not unsuitable due to one of the nine causes: that is to say, due to the smallness of blood or body; or for its wickedness; or because there is hard flesh within it, and on the lips, which prevents new flesh from growing; or because there is too much puss; or when the wound is rotting and the matter is of poor quality; or because the medicine is not good for the treatment; or because the rot is like a pestilence; or because the digestion is slow in that region and so is the recovery which also swells by nature; or there are veins or bones:
And I have already shown all these causes and their signs and treatments with medicine in the division.
Now I should let you know about the treatment of fistula which is done by handiwork.
Know that a fistula can occur in any part of the body; For it can occur in large veins, or in arteries and nerves, in the eye socket, intestine, bladder, sides, spine, shoulder, or any joint of hands or feet. ; and if there is swelling that comes to the principal member, and similar swellings.
And all the fistulas that are in this way, they are of grievous healing, and there is no other than labor and ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not come to the place I have described, and you have confidence in its cure, and you see it known, then take a tent of bronze or iron, if the fistula is straight, then pierce it;
and if the fistula is crooked, then look for a slender tent of lead, because lead bends with the crookedness;
and if the fistula has multiple openings and you cannot pierce it well with tents, then cleanse it by enema through one of the openings, because moisture moves from one opening to another;
then let the patient bleed at your hand, so that you may feel whether there is bone or nerve, and whether it is swollen all over, and ask the patient about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and where he feels it.
and when you have learned the exact location and whether it is far from a joint, nerve, artery or vein, or in any of the places I told you about, then cut according to what I instructed, and remove the rotten flesh and matter inside.
then treat it until it is healed, and if the fistula is very deep in a straight place, you should cut deeply as much as you can, then put moist bandages in medicinal vinegar, and insert them into the fistula up to its head, so that the medicine corrodes the excess matter remaining at the bottom.
and then I put warming poultices on healthy flesh until it is healed;
and if it does not heal by this method, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it out.
If a vein or nerve causes pain in the principal limbs, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and darkness, then cut it until the corruption is entirely removed, then treat it with warming poultices until it is healed;
and if it does not heal, and the wound is closed as before, know that you have not gone to the bottom;
if it exposes and pierces until you reach the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the place;
and if it is thus healed, that is good. If not, then know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach. if there is no other remedy except to let nature take its course;
and if there is a small bone that is rotten and you can pull it out with tongs, then remove it with the appropriate instrument for this purpose, but if there are many bones, then draw them all out, leaving none behind;
and if the moisture causes no harm and there is no error or fear, then cut through the flesh and moisture and free the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in one hour, then place something over the wound to encourage pus formation, and leave it until the flesh around the bones becomes soft, and then they will come out more easily;
and if it is a large bone, such as from the leg or thigh, then clean out the corruption only until the blackness is gone, and then close the wound;si n’at maint os ne grans, si met li meisme remede et restoure la plaie.
and if there is a large portion of it that is corrupted, and it comes to the softness of the bone; then cut away and cover all the way to the corruption, then treat until it is healed over;
and I will tell you of a fistula that occurred in a man's leg, so that you can take example and help from it in your work.
He was a young man of about 30 years old, who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, so that the matter came to the leg, and it was swollen with a large abscess, and had no reason to drain to open;
but the doctors, through their folly, worked so much on it that the abscess burst, and a great deal of matter came out, and it became a fistula, and there were many openings that all bled and secreted moisture from the body;
and many bled him for two years, and there was no surgeon in the art of medicine, so I was called to see his leg and the remedies with which he was being treated, and the pus that flowed through the holes in great abundance. and the body of the youth became red and had a yellow color.
I placed a tent over one of the holes and then examined all the openings, finding that they connected with each other throughout the leg.
I therefore hastened and cut one of the holes so that I could see part of the bone, and found it to be rotten and pierced, and the corruption was going right through to the bone inside.
I removed what appeared to be rotten from the bone, and believed that there was no other corruption except for that which I had taken out;
and began to heal the wound with dried medicines over a long time, but it could not be closed;et s’il eust estoit curat des premiers joures qu’il fuist mal curat, quare li pertuis erent trop grans,
and then I began again and uncovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continued in the bone, and I removed it, and then I tried to solder the place; but I could not, so I cut around a palm of the bone, and drove it out with all its molars, then I restored it with medicine; and it healed and was soldered quickly, and the wound need not be opened again except for the weakness of the disease, which he could not bear, and because of the fear of death that I had of him. For often because of the bloodletting he bled a lot, but he was completely healed and in the place of the bone a hard lump formed, and he had a good disposition and did not suffer any harm or ill effects in every way, neither when walking nor when standing.
And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated in this way: take a string, and tie it to the head of the bone which is open, and order someone to pull it upwards; and tie another string of linen larger than the first string, and tie it around the flesh which is above the bone, and pull on the head, so that you draw up the rotten flesh from below, and uncover the flesh above the place where you want to solder, so that the soldering does not hurt the flesh;
and place a fire or a table under the bone to cover the rotten flesh;
and one must probe as far as one can see and feel the corruption, and probe again afterwards.
And if the bone is rotten and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then uncover all the flesh;
then place fire under it, and probe from one side of the corruption to the other, probing deeply into the corruption as we have said;
and if the corruption is at the joint, then uncover the rotten joint and probe the bone on the other side of it;
and if the corruption is in the middle of two joints, there is no need to uncover it all;
and if the corruption is at the base of the hand or the foot, then that is a serious matter, but nevertheless you must probe to find out how it opens; and cleanse it in every way you can, but be careful not to damage the vein or nerve.
and know that the types of knives and needles used for cutting bone are many, depending on the position of the bones, their appearance, their thickness, their thinness, their size, and their strength. and because of this, you must prepare a tool for each type of work.
and know that the work will show you what tool to use, depending on your knowledge of this craft and the nature of the disease. then choose the tool that is appropriate for what is needed.
The shoulders may dislocate due to internal or external causes;
And when you have treated that corrosion with various medicines, but it does not improve, then you must cover that limb up to the place where the corrosion is, so that the patient escapes death or, if it is greater, the evil of the limb.
and the signs are that the limb becomes black, so that it seems to be burned by fire, and then the blackness appears, after which the corrosion spreads from one limb to another and throughout the body.
and if it is caused by poison from certain venomous creatures such as sea scorpions and vipers and the like, if the corrosion is on the head of the arm, then cut it off, and do not give any time for the venom to spread to the hand.
And if it reaches the hand, then cut at the joint so that the corrosion does not spread to the arm.Et s’il vient jusc’a bras, si la coupe a la coude, et ne li doner mie espais de venir adé;
and if it reaches the arm, cut at the elbow so that the corrosion does not spread further.And if it reaches the elbow, cut at the joint of the wrist
and if it passes the wrist, that is death, and there is no remedy but to cut off the affected limb.Et s’il est al chief du bras ou al coudé, si le coupe a la jointe sus la piere, et s’il li viegne par maint ou par auter member, si le cope a l’
and do likewise when frostbite occurs on the foot: if it occurs in the first joint, then the toe after the other joint;
and if it occurs on the foot, then all of the foot; and if it ascends the leg, then at the knee joint;
and if it occurs above the knee, there is no remedy except to cut off the limb and the patient will die;
and the method of covering the affected limb is to tie it above and below, and extend one minister below the binding, and another minister above the binding, and you untie the flesh between the two bindings with a one-span wide incision, so that the bone is exposed;
then cover it with silk, and place a linen cloth on each side so that the silk does not touch the healthy area, and cause other injury and abscesses.
And if bleeding occurs when you operate, then cauterize the area strongly, or apply some restraining powders to it.
Then return to your medicine until it is complete, then bind the wounded member with suitable bandages and treat it until it is healed.
And I will tell you what happened to a man one night:
He had a darkness that looked like a burn from fire, and this corrosion first appeared on his toe of the foot, so much so that it discolored all the way to the foot.
And when the man saw the corrosion, he started to cover the foot, and it was healed.
A long time after, the corrosion returned to his finger on the hand, and he came to me, and I applied some powdery substances after cleansing the body, but could not stop the corrosion.
and he wanted me to examine his hand, but I didn't want to because I had no hope of understanding the nature of the matter. and I doubted that if I cut his hand, he would die, for man's strength was weak;
and they all despaired, and returned to their land, and had their hand bandaged, and were healed;
and I have not written this tale for anything but that one might learn from it if they need to.
Sometimes an abscess forms in a fleshy part, and remains so long that it causes great swelling; and then they rupture and discharge, and the flesh remains hollow, just like vessels; and the skin above is as delicate as a split piece of cloth, and it does not heal up to the bone or nerve, and such a disease is called 'sain', and is not called 'fistula';
but if it is so long that it reaches the bone deep inside, then it is called a "fistula".
and if it is so superficial that you can cover the whole wound with a single bandage, especially when it is thin, just like a napkin; and do not worry about its decay.
And if you suspect that the skin will die, and the decay is not deep, and the flesh around it is thick, then treat the wound with a blister:
examine if the abscess is large and the pus in it has an offensive smell; then blister with Egyptian medicine which is made like this: take honey, oil and litharge, in equal amounts, and mix the medicine in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and thickens like honey;
and then take this according to your need, and make it into water and honey, and inject the breast, and constrict the orifice; and let the medicine remain in for two hours, then remove it by squeezing;
do this as many times as necessary until the breast is deflated and the pus removed;
and sometimes they are injected with water of ashes when the other medicine is not available; take vinegar ashes from a grapevine, pour water over it, then strain and inject into the breast until you know that the breast is fully drained;
and if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the water of ashes, then inject a mixture of water and honey with a little quicklime powdered in it; or you can inject a mixture of honey and melted wax, so that the honey has the property of cleaning and washing, and the wax makes the breast perspire;
and when you have done this, and you are certain that the wound is well cleaned, then cleanse it with something that makes flesh grow in it, and you take a poultice of diafinit, and mix it with rose oil and wine;
or you cleanse it with some medicine and ointments, of which I have spoken about the properties in the section on ointments;
and if the wound is small and the tip of the clewing tube cannot enter it, then widen it with a knife a little, and put in it a tent made of egyptian ointment, or basilicon ointment, until it is widened enough;
and if the wound is too large, then cut it and leave only enough space for the clewing tube to enter, and if the opening that weeps is above, then cover it with a cup or something else that is lower down.
and if you cannot cover the target below as you wish, then adjust so that the bow points to the lowest place it can reach, for when the bow is drawn fully, one should not let the arrow fly; and if you cannot cover the target below as you wish, then adjust in such a way: let the bow point slightly downward, and leave nothing of the bow;
let the bow point slightly downward, and leave nothing of the bow; and take consolidation medicines to place over the wound, and they are on top of the linen cloth that covers the entire wound; then cover the hole of the wound as tightly as possible with the largest opening first, then apply ointment on the other cloth according to the size of the hole, and place it over the wound to loosen the bow, and do not remove the large cloth for several days once;
and that which is above the opening of the breast, often remove in order to take out the bowels, and know what flows from the bowels, whether it is venom or pus or enough, or digested, or undigested;
and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been applied in such a way and you see the nature that emerges above the opening of the breast, then you know that the milk flows out, and the breasts are empty;
and then loosen it in the morning, or the third day, and when you loosen the wound, change the other dressing, and renew the ointment.
And if subtle poisons creep slowly, you must not despair of health, for health draws near.
For there are people whose wounds heal slowly, and others who heal quickly;
and if undigested bowels emerge from the breast after many days, know that the breasts will not empty;
and if the breast is slow to dry and is swollen, then apply medicines that are moist in substance but dry in effect, like an ointment of diafragma, for it contains a large portion of vitriol, and it is the most effective medicine.
take diafragma ointment, and make it with rose oil, and equal amounts of old wine;
then cook it and use it;
and with the same make honey candy, when diafragma ointment is not available, or take myrrh and aloe and incense, grind them and sprinkle on the honey while it is over the fire;
then apply it to a cloth, and place it over the breast, and sometimes also administer aristologus, a long root, and roots of celestial lily, which is like barley grain and centaury; and use simple remedies or compounds: Grind them up into a powder and mix with the honey I mentioned earlier, then use it.
And if the wound is deep and not healed by this treatment, then you will know that the corruption goes deep, causing impressions in the bones, or hardening of the limbs or organs. if the wound is a fistula, as we have already said earlier.
Panarice is an abscess that forms underneath the nail of the finger or toe, or occasionally in other places. It may form on the hand, foot, or elsewhere.
And when it becomes infected and is left untreated, an abscess will form, and it will spread and discharge pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and sometimes it will spread all the way across.
This will lead to corrosion of the bone, causing a foul-smelling pain, and the finger or toe will become swollen and red in color.
When you treat it as we have described in the previous section, and the treatment is ineffective, then you must cut away all the excess tissue that remains beneath the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterwards. Cauteries are of great aid if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy.
and if the nail presses into the flesh and starts to grow in, you should place a thread under the nail so that it pulls the nail away from the flesh, and then lift it up, and gently cut away at the flesh underneath, and put medicine on the remaining flesh to burn and corrode it all away. Then treat it with ointments until it heals.
And if the corruption is in the bone, cut it away and draw out the pus, for as long as the bone is corrupted it cannot heal.
And if you see the toe become corrupted, cut it in half as previously described, and then treat it until it heals.
If it is swollen and filled with pus and causing great pain, then it must be treated first;
then cut the nail of the big toe with a chisel, cutting diagonally across it, and be careful that the chisel does not go all the way to the bone underneath the nail, for otherwise the patient will feel too much pain.
and if it happens, place something on it to soothe it.
The two toenails that sometimes grow on people's hands by chance are sometimes all flesh, and sometimes they have bones, and sometimes they have nails, and some grow from the root of the joint, or from one of the toes.
Nails that grow out of the top of the toe do not move, but those that grow from the joint of the toe sometimes move.
The incision for one who is fat should be made in this way: Cut it at its root with a broad chisel.
That which grows from the root of the joint is difficult to treat: if you try to cut it.
For one who is born with an extra tooth in the gum at the back, you should first cut away the round flesh to the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable silk thread, then heal it until it is healed.
The joints that come together come by birth, or by joint wound, or by burn from fire, or by similar things.
You should cut this growth so that the toes grow back together according to their natural shape; then place between them two moistened tents or pieces of cloth in rose oil, so that they do not grow together; or you place between two pieces of fine wood, so that the join is smooth, as it should be.
If sealing occurs on one of his hands with the palm, then treat that wound as it should be treated.
Veins are large enveloping tubes filled with melancholy excesses which come from various parts of the body;
and it happens more often in the legs of those who walk and work and carry things, than in others.
Therefore, you should administer to him a cleansing enema, and then the basilicon ointment.Et li amonestre et la maniere dou saine et dou cautere, et que il doit faire, si te veult dire.
There are two types of iron cautery: one is where they cut the skin and draw out the black blood; and the other way is to lift up the vein and draw it all out.
The incision is made in this way:Tu prends un fer chaud, et le mets sus li bouton ou sus la You take a hot iron and place it on the button or on the top of the leg where the pain is worst, until the large veins are made small, then you draw the leg out of the joint from above the thigh down to the part below the knee;Tu laves li bouton et la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, si traies le sans noir qui est en li bouton avec un fer chaud de ceste maniere:
then open the vein in place I, or II, or III, with an incision of a large size, then draw and squeeze out the black blood into your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood comes out as the patient can endure;
and then bandage it, and instruct him to bind himself with black woolen cloth;
and repeat the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are full, and help the patient.
The remedies for it are as follows: examine the leg of the patient, if there are many hairs on it, then put it in the bath, and pour hot water on the leg until it turns red and opens the veins;
and if you do not have a bath, then heat it with fire, and then open the vein from the top of the knee to the bottom of the ankle, or in the part below the ankle;
then open the skin at the knuckle, and scrape the vein from both sides until it appears when one feels it;
and one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin it looks like a white string;
then tie off the vein underneath, until it is raised from the skin, and then one can feel it at the knuckle lightly, then cut it in another place above in three places;
then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears, then lift it with the blade, just as you have done, and feel at another knuckle, just as you did before;puis la lieve au rait sus la voinne, et la coupe a III dois, si com tu as fait premiers.
then lift it with the blade on top of the vein, and cut it in three places, just as you did before. Then make another incision, or several if you need to, then lift it and cut it at the toe joint, then pull and lift until the second incision;puis la lieve jusques a la premiere taille, et ainsi adons qu’ele soit alevee de tout le cuir, et que ele soit teneue de
then I extracted it bit by bit, until it was all out, then the scabbard;
and if you cannot pull and lift it, then thread a strong double needle, tie it and pull it, and insert the needle under the nail, and turn your hand from side to side, until it comes out; and be careful that it doesn't split, because if it does, you won't be able to pull and lift it, and the patient will be harmed;
and when you have pulled it all out, then place on the wound wool moistened with wine and rose oil; and treat it until it is healed.
And if the nail is bent and twisted and wrapped around the finger, as we have said, then you must split it crookedly but not split it; and treat them as we have already said.
The shape of the knife used to cut the vein is curved, and it does not cut, so that it can pierce the vein.
and it is very curved, because if it were thin, it would cut the vein; but it should be thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
This vein is found in the legs, in dry areas where no herbs or trees grow, and in land without moisture;
and sometimes it grows elsewhere, and this happens from the humors that come under the skin, as do snakes and worms, between the skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this wound are that a great inflammation comes in the leg, then the place changes, and the wound begins to come out forcefully, just as the root of a plant.
When the shoulder is dislocated, you must wrap it in a piece of cloth four and a half to five and a half feet long, and tie a knot, leaving the cloth hanging down the leg; and every time it slips out of place, wrap it around the cloth again, and tie a knot.
and if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and wrap the remainder around, and do not cover it at all at its root, until it is completely healed. for if you cover it, it will enter the flesh and cause an abscess and pus in that place, and great illness.
For this reason, it must be treated a little at a time until the very end, and nothing should remain in the body;
and sometimes this vein is as long as two or three palms, and once a man came to me whose vein was as long as ten palms; and when you cover it, it causes pain in the hole, and penetrates to the very bottom, so that everything comes out.
and the matter within is evacuated, and healing medicines are applied to the area for a few days; then it is treated like an abscess.
And sometimes this vein opens up in the joint of the foot or the leg, and it bleeds profusely and causes swelling;
treat it therefore as we have said before.
from worms that grow between skin and flesh This disease is called "cattle disease" in our land, because it often affects oxen. It is a small worm that lives between the skin and the flesh, moving throughout the body, ascending and descending, until it breaks out of the skin where it goes, causing bleeding;
and it is caused by an excess of humor, like worms and serpents and roundworms in the belly;
and one fears its malice, for when it moves through the body and ascends to the head, it can enter the eye and destroy it; and this often happens.
When you see him being cured and milked, he cannot resist it, but when he sees it, he will resist.
So you should tie the area above and below with a strong string tightly, then squeeze it from above and milk it firmly. If the venom has spread deeply into the flesh, and you cannot draw it out, then cauterize it with fire until it comes out.
And one of the greatest dangers he poses is that he will run to your eye, as we have said;
and if you see him coming near the eye, grab under his chin firmly, then squeeze and milk him firmly.
And one should use the wound medicine for cleansing the body of putrid and corrupt humors, and the meat in the intestines must be dried out.
from the pain that comes from wind This disease is called 'vacirir' in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some members, and then moves from member to member;
and I saw what I am telling you. I was called to a sick woman and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling on the vein of her arm;
and soon after, I saw it rise up to her shoulder as quickly as a worm, as fast as quicksilver when it moves from one place to another;
the pain left that spot and moved to her shoulder, and then a little later ran through her whole body until it reached the other arm;
then she told me that it was circling around her body as I watched.
I was very surprised how she moved from limb to limb, for I had never seen this disease progress in this way before. Nevertheless, I have seen many who wanted the pain to move from one place to another, but I have not seen it happen as I did in this woman;
and I thought that perhaps it was because the woman had a dry body and exposed veins, and thus the wind was forced out;
and they do not appear according to this rationale for those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and relaxed veins.
And when you see this disease being treated, and the patient feels the pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then release it above and below quickly, and then press on until the windiness forced out of its place. and cauterize the spot;
and if you do not see it yourself, then treat it with the remover of windiness, such as foul-smelling pills, and pills made from saranapin, and similar others.
Arrows are diverse, according to their appearance and according to the part of the body where they land.
The variety of their points is that some have large ones, and small, and forked, and hollow; and some have two angles, and others have tongues, and some have pieces in them;
and those that break a bone do so in two ways: or in a principal member such as brain, heart, liver, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it therefore occurs in any of these members, and the signs of death that I will tell you about later become apparent: then you must be cautious about extracting this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many cases; and if these bad signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply lodged, then pull it out and treat the wound.
The signs of the brain are when the arrow pierces and breaks through the bone, and the dura mater which is above the brain is punctured, and there is bleeding and swelling of the brain itself, and redness and inflammation of the tongue, and spasms and disturbance of the mind, and vomiting of bile; and sometimes they issue from the nostrils, or the ears; and sometimes they lose their speech and voice; and from the wound issues white moisture resembling pus, and also as black blood;
and if these signs appear to you, then withhold treatment, and draw out the arrow if it is not inside.
The signs of a wound when it falls on the heart are that it is close to the left breast, and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not soft; and sometimes the wound also becomes mute like the pulse, and black blood flows from it, and there is chilliness and cold sweat, and syncope: therefore you should know without doubt that death will follow.
And the sign of an arrow wound that affects the lung is spitting foam from the wound, and a swollen throat, and the patient changes color, and breathes heavily and seeks the cold air.
And if the arrow falls into the fold of the foot, it is near the small bones; and breathes greatly with difficulty and with great pain and sighing; and all his limbs move from his shoulders.
And if the arrow pierces the stomach, by chance some undigested food may come out through the wound.
And if the arrow pierces the intestines in the abdomen, and no feces escape through the rear end, then there is no hope for a cure or for removing the arrow.
And if the arrow pierces into the bladder, and urine flows out in spurts and it escapes, and the patient feels great pain: you should know that the wound is deadly.
The other members, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulder, armpit, spine of the back, hip, thigh, and leg, and similar limbs, are safe according to various dispositions. When the arrow is in a nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you so that you may do likewise.
It happened to a man that an arrow pierced his armpit at the root of his elbow: I probed it, and withdrew it from under the fat of the ear, and he was healed without feeling anything.
And I extracted from a man's eye an arrow that had pierced under the papilla under the fat of the eyelid, and the arrow was bent, and it could only be touched at its tip towards the shaft, and the arrow was as long as a Turkish bowstring, all in one piece without any notches;
the child was healthy, and no ill accidents came to him.
And they pulled out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrowhead was made of Arab metal, and it was in his ears:
I cut off the barbs, and I pulled it out gently until I extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
And they pulled an arrow from inside a man's home that had lodged in his belly, and I thought he would die;
and then after thirty days, he showed no improvement; I cut into the arrow and inserted an instrument to pull it out, and it came out without causing any ill effects.
And if you see a man with an arrow lodged in his back, and the wound is closed over it;
and the arrow remains inside him, and he shows no change in his natural functions, nor any harm in any of his natural processes.
And I saw another man, to whom an arrow had hit his face, and the wound was sewn up. and stayed thus without suffering great pain.
and many others similar.
And I saw an arrow hit the king's nephew in the eye, and he was slightly inclined to the right side; and the arrow was all the way in.
I was called to treat her after she had been hit for three days. I found the wound very tight.
I examined her with all my skills and found nothing; and she felt numbness and pain under her right ear.
I thought it was from the tip of the arrow I placed a soothing and digestive ointment on the spot to reduce swelling; and I saw the place where the arrow had hit.
and I saw the place where the arrow had hit. I applied the ointment many times, and the wound healed directly, and the patient suffered for a long time until he felt the arrow one day inside his nose;
and he told me about it. I applied medicine with a corrosive agent to the wound many times until it was open, and I probed it and felt the head of the arrow which had pierced through;
then I adjusted the opening of the wound with that medicine until the head of the arrow appeared visibly;
and it healed well in about 4 months, and then I lanced the wound that I had probed with tweezers, and squeezed it from both sides, but it would not come out;
so I did not cease to use subtle methods and tools, until one day I took the arrow with well-made tweezers according to what its shape would allow, as described in this chapter, pulling and squeezing the wound.
And the doctors judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wound was sewn up and the patient completely healed.
Now I have told you about the extraction of certain arrows so that you can apply my instructions to similar cases, for books cannot encompass everything.
But the wise masters compare based on a few great things and on what is present and lacking; they find new treatments and new instruments in the descent of strange things that occur in this art.
I say that arrows enter the body where they are pierced in two ways: either through the place where they entered or through another part;
and that which enters through where it pierces is called an arrow entering the flesh, and sometimes it has exited now.
And if it does not heal now, leave it until the wound becomes putrid around the edges and the discharge has stopped.
and if it is embedded in the bone, and cannot drain, then leave it like that for a few days, stirring it each day;
and then it will drain. And if it does not, pierce around the edge with a very thin instrument until the edges are widened, and then draw it out.
And if the arrow is lodged in the body where it cannot be seen, then one wants to know its location throughout the entire body; and if you feel it, then draw it out with an appropriate instrument;
and if you cannot due to the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then cut it out as much as the wound is large;
and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has barbs that are holding it in place, then cut away the flesh where it is lodged on both sides as much as you can, and then bend or twist the barbs of the arrow until you can pull it out;
and be careful not to break the arrow as you pull it out more forcefully.
And if you cannot on one try, then leave it until the wound around it is swollen; then pull it out, for extraction is eased. And if the bleeding makes it contrary, then administer what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
and beware of cutting into the nerve and the vein, and put in a clean way as you can move the arrow without danger, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently;
and put the patient in the same position as when the arrow struck him, for that is his greatest aid; and if you cannot, then put him according to what the signs show you.
Arrows that come from another direction, or something appears from him, or his skin is swollen in that place where one sees or feels it apparently:
Cut therefore above, as far as the tweezers can reach, and then pull it out; if it will not come out now.
If it is stuck in the bone, rotate your hand rapidly, forcing it into the bone and widening the opening; then pull it out.
And if it cannot be pulled out, then leave it for now, and then try pulling again until it comes out;
and if there is a shaft of an arrow inside him, then it goes all the way through.
and if there is a broken shaft, and you wish to administer an extraction tool, then the tip of the arrow must enter into the groove of the tool.
and then pull outward, and if the arrow is hooked, then pull the tool inward with its tip entering in, to aid the extraction.
And if the arrow has touched [the wound], then you must cut away all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can; then treat the wound as it should be.
And if the arrow is broken in the shoulder or leg or belly or bladder or groin, and it is close to the surface, and you can reach it by pressing, then press it out.
And be careful not to press on a vein or nerve, and then pull it out, and then examine the wound, if necessary. and treat it until it is healed.
The shape of the forceps used to treat arrows is similar to an owl's beak; see the diagram.
There are many ways to do this: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
The shape of the broad-headed arrowhead is also like the feather of a bird, to catch on the tip of the arrow, just as its shape is:
There are 31 veins from which one can bleed, and they have 16 branches in total, as follows: Two veins that are behind the ears, called "the two little cows"; and the two arteries in the two temples; and two veins that are in the eyelids, which are called "aspirers"; and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the two windpipes which are in the neck; and the two veins that are on the upper lip, and they are the veins called "augerich"; and the two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins from which one commonly bleeds are five in each arm:
one is the cephalic vein, and it is on the left side of the chest, and common people call it the "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called the "fast" vein, and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, and common people call it the  "vein of the heart"; and the basilic vein is located on the right side, and the common people call it "vein of the belly", and it is situated above the bladder, and it is that vein which is clearly visible above the scrotum.
And the basilic vein is located between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches:
and in the leg and the foot there are three veins; one is below the curve of the scrotum on the left side, and the second superficial vein is at the ankle on the right side; and the third vein, called "nesse," is at the other ankle.And there are two more veins in the arm: one is above the elbow joint and is called "vein of the elbow" (veine dou coude), and the other is below
and in the other leg there are three veins below those mentioned.And in the neck are two veins, one on each side, called  "veins of
The bleeding of veins which are behind the ears is helped by old cataracts, and by emigration.
and the qualities of the bleeding, as I told you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then squeeze the patient's neck with your hand, until the two veins appear behind the ears, coming out of the head in two places. take them therefore to your fingers, and where you feel the pulse under your fingers, stop it there;
then take the lance and thrust it under the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand all along the vein, and cut through both skin and vein thoroughly with two strokes of the lance, and let blood out until you see enough.
then squeeze it and bind it, until it is healed.
and I have already spoken of incisions and cauteries in the first book.
The bleeding of the two arteries in the temples is good for long-standing migraines, and eye sores, and regular tears, and pain in the eyes.
and the qualities of the bleeding are as I have said: and the patient should stretch his neck so that the two veins are clearly visible; and feel for the pulse under your finger, and then press inwards;
then gently press the vein near the top with your thumb, and insert the lance underneath, and release the vein above, and stop the bleeding according to your need; then clean the wound as before and do the same for the other vein.
then release the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it; and then forms a scurf, and leaves it until it is healed;
and we have spoken of their appearance and extraction in the beginning of the book.
The bleeding from the frontal vein is just as dangerous as the bleeding from the cephalic vein in old facial diseases, and causes emigration and redness;
and its quality is such that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears; then take the instrument called "borer", of which this is the form:
And place the point on the vein, press firmly with your hand or something else, and let the blood issue according to the amount you see; then loosen the patient's neck, and ligature the vein until it is healed; sometimes the work is done with a wide flame.
However, the flames must not be too sharp; and the vein is crooked, for the bone is close by, and the flame may break when it is thin.
The veins of the two arms help each other, and so do those in the legs, and those in the face, and so do the diseases of the eye and the face;
and the nature of their veins is such that the patient turns his neck in twisting some ligament, as before;
then open the vein, and if the vein is deep, make the flame somewhat long and broad, for there is no flesh there. And if the flame is thin, it may break by accident;
then let the blood flow, as much as you need, and then ligature the vein, and tie it well.
The bleeding of the vein in the nose is good for the headache, and for a sudden seizure, and for illnesses of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes to the face, and also when it is old.
and the quality of the bleeding is such that the patient squeezes his neck, then pinches his nose with his left hand, and takes a long, thin flame, and inserts it into the lip in the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well there, and the blood will now begin to flow.
and do not go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your need, then ligate it for a night, for it is soon restored.
The bleeding of the two veins helps with strangury, and with the beginning of mensuration, and with many illnesses, and with impetigo, and with corrosives, and with herpes, and with stomach-aches;
and the quality of the healing is such that the patient stretches his neck back and forth, as we have said.
and the master standing above the patient's head, and the patient seated, then open the vein of the long arm widely, then draw out blood temperately, as much as is needed.
then do the same in the other vein, then loosen the bandage, and gently constrict the veins so that the patient does not choke. and leave it until the morning, for the wound to heal.
of bleeding gums Here is the translation: The bleeding of the veins in the lips above helps with sores in the mouth, and gum corruption, and splits in the lips, and the pain of teeth and gums.
And the quality of the healing is such that you have the patient sit in front of you and stretch his neck as I have said. Then turn the lip and examine the two veins, one on the right and the other on the left. You can identify them because they are black and because there are tiny black veins around them:
therefore take one and the other, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, then take the thickest of each side, and likewise do to the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same manner.
of bleeding under the tongue The bleeding of the veins that are under the tongue helps after the bleeding of the cephalic vein, and it is for the constriction of the throat, and for diseases of the liver, and for diseases of the mouth;
and the qualities of the bleeder are such that the patient sits between your hands in front of the sun, and he sticks out his tongue, and looks under each armpit for a black vein:
therefore bleed one and the other, and do not go too deep, for under them are the arteries.
The veins of the neck from which one commonly bleeds are bled according to two manners:car il y a l’une qui est desus la veine qui va sus la gorge, et l’auter qui est desouz
or with a pointed flame of a large myrtle twig, or an olive tree sprig as thin as you can get it, and it is called "anesil". and they are wide and thin according to the width and tightness of the veins. The shape of the candle flame is very important, and it should be as wide as you see:
And it is necessary to open the flat, veiny veins that hold large amounts of visible blood; and this is the shape of the olive flame:
and it is more pointed and suitable for bleeding the subtle veins where there is thin, yellow blood.
The basil vein, which is one of these veins, helps with illnesses under the throat, and in the neck, chest, and abdomen;
and the surgeon should bleed it, and then compress the artery underneath. And if he pierces the artery, and bleeding occurs, he must then stanch it as I have said; and the flame should not be piercing, but cutting like an "anesil".
And if the basil does not open clearly, then you must extract it and replace it with another; or you can tie some thread to it, or you can ligate the vein in the arm in its place: it opens clearly; and apply the cup to the flame, as we have said.
And if you want to find the place for bleeding, then you must stretch out the arm and touch the spot until you feel the pulse;et la sainie se fait en ce leu qui le poulz est le plus fort; et la sainie se doit faire sus le piez de costé li bras; then sign the place for bleeding, and then tie the arm, and apply the cup to the flame with the heat lessened;et si tu voulues saine a l'autre piez de li bras, si covient que tu liasse le piez en bas, et la vo And if you want to bleed at the other side of the arm, then you must let the foot hang down, and keep your hand steady so that you do not pierce an artery when you see the spot swollen, for it is an artery; Avoid it therefore.
And if you see it emerging upwards like a child's urine, and the blood is red and thin, know that this is blood from an artery: Therefore hurry, and place your finger over it for a long time, then remove your finger if the flow stops, which often happens. Bind the arm and leave it thus, and do not move it:
and be careful not to move it until it is healed.
And if the flow does not stop and the medicine is not present, then cut open the artery, for its source is within. Stop the bleeding.Et si tu vois sortir li sang a l’envers, si
And if you see the blood flowing backwards, then take an oak twig, split it, and take one half and bind it on tightly until the next day;
if it closes the wound, that is good; if not, then treat it with the powders that stop bleeding, as we have said;
and the wound is not cauterized in many ways due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
The bleeding from the vein in the middle, if it draws blood from above and below, because it is made up of basil and skullcap, as we have said;
and the surgeon must be careful not to go too deep and to find the nerve underneath, and if it pricks too much and the nerve is inflamed and the wound is cauterized, and perhaps cannot heal;
and this nerve often opens up, and if it does not open in some people due to its subtlety, then you must treat it with the instrument called 'anesil';et li sainie de la voinne de la man si fait que li santez ne soit pas griés en aucun maniere, et ne trieve li nerf por quoy il soit enfle, car en ceste maniere est granz paors. and avoid the nerve with your touch.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, they cut it deeply.
The headache if it helps, that it draws blood from the head, and helps the eyes;
and it is necessary to bleed them with an olive-oil flame or a myrtle flame, for it is the safest of all veins, for there are no nerves or arteries underneath it. Nevertheless, one should seek the lightest place, and not harm anything if one needs to do it a second time; and by chance, it swells in some people, where one needs to do it the first time, but it does not harm anything.
The quality of the bleeding is according to your thoughts.
The first thing you should know about bleeding is that bleeding is not done simply to maintain health and prevent diseases;
and the bleeding is done in one of the three veins that are in the arm: Here is to know, cephalic, fast, and basilic; and one should bleed in the beginning of spring, autumn, and winter after eating, when the signs of repletion are apparent;
and one should bleed the first day or the third, after two hours or three of the day.
The bleeding administered for diseases does not have a set time, but when the need arises, day or night, at all times and in all seasons;
and one must not bleed children until they are 14 years old, nor a woman carrying a child before the fourth month until the seventh month.Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n'a point d'oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; Nor should the very old who have passed 60 years be bled.
And when one wishes to bleed, in whatever manner, one should first cleanse the intestines with a gentle enema if one has retained much feces, so that the veins do not draw in harmful excess fluids from the intestines, which harm the principal members.Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;
one does not heal at all those who are too full of meat, nor the drunk, however long they may be, nor the dropsical.
and if one wishes to heal after colic, vomiting, and diarrhea, and excessive sexual intercourse, and exertion, from waking and fasting, and all that weakens the body, whether through injury or illness.
then gently draw out the humors, if the body is swollen, through meat and drink and medicine, if you have the skill.
then enter the bath, if nothing else harms them, to draw out the blood, and heal the wound around the navel, as we have said.
and avoid that day exertion, pain, and lust, and similar things.
and be relaxed and cheerful, and let the healer sit higher than the one being healed, and rub the arm two or three times, then tighten the ligature above the wound, for if it is too loose or too tight, it cannot heal the wound.
and then rub the area with the hands, until the veins swell, and you feel them;
then moisten the wound with a little old oil, then place his left hand’s index finger on that vein below the area he wants to bleed, so that the blood flows and doesn’t stop at the cut.
For there are veins that flow like strings when bled, and some are filled with windiness, so that when one applies the flame, it retreats, and the wound cannot be opened, and thus it is with some. And if he opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, so the bleeder must be skilled in these things.
And if the vein opens the first time, that is good;et s’il ne peut ovrir au premier coup de flaime, si covient que il fuige les voinne if not, then restart a little lower down that area or above the hospital, if the area isn't swollen.
And if the area is swollen and the patient is in fear, let him for a day or two, and don't bind his arm. perhaps hot abscesses will arise;
don't enter the bath, then restart the bleeding if she wishes;
and if the vein is small, cut it short and carefully, and you doubt that not as much blood will flow as you wish, then pierce in that vein directly;
and work a little on the hospital, until the area is swollen; for this happens many times, when the wound is small.
If you see the area swollen, then don't restart the bleeding, and put on a little lamb's wool, for it lightens the body of blood, and is medicine in this place where the oil is.
and likewise apply oil to each wound that you treat veins to stop the flow of blood;
and with this one does cauterize and brand, when it is placed on the area; so skillfully he splits and separates them when they are too large.
And if there comes a large abscess, which happens often, especially when it is not treated before the opening of the vein is small, you should act quickly and place a sponge moistened in warm water on the area, and hold it for an hour;
and you should do this after the flow of blood from the vein has stopped, and if it remains in place for several days, it will do no harm; and if you see any swelling, apply a poultice of aloe or myrrh made into a paste with rosewater, or something similar.
And many times there is an abscess and appearance at the exit of the basilic vein:
so put your hand above it, and if you find the area soft to the pressure of your hand, then that appearance is bad. So avoid putting anything on it of what we have said, for it may go into the artery;
but make a dry poultice to harden the area, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And treat each wound according to its blood flow and the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it out until it runs red; and if you see it thick, let it out until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.And so the blood must be let out of the basilic vein, in order to heal an abscess or wound
And it is fitting for one who is full and swollen, and needs bloodletting, that they make him a larger wound, and let the flames be wide;
and for the weak, do the opposite, and one should bleed them a little often, and they must be bled by cutting across, not piercing.
and this bleeding method is safe from bloodletting and nerve damage, and it is better than the long or wide incisions.
And for the one whose body needs bleeding, give moist bread in pomegranate juice; If he is hot-tempered, eat some pomegranate juice three or four times before bleeding. And if of a cold temperament, eat moist bread in rosewater syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-scented syrup.
And if he faints after losing a lot of blood, then he should drink a broth made from meat, and a subtle scented syrup, and use the other things we mentioned in the section on syncope, for the opening of a vein.
And if he wants to open his arm and bleed again, he should do so little by little according to the amount of his continuing strength.
And those who want to open their arms after the first bleeding, and they have a strong body, should bleed .7 hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And whoever wants to bleed elsewhere, they should bleed on the second or third day.
For he has a lot of blood inside his body that is hot, which brings on fever; if one must draw a great quantity, and widen the opening as much as possible. then you examine all the conditions of healing, and put your hand over the patient's pulse when he is healing, so that death does not come to the site of the wound, and this happens many times when the surgeon is negligent.
And one must not, when you see to release the arm and make blood come out a second time, and the opening is closed, press hard upon it; nor if it is crooked that he extends the arm suddenly, for this would be bad;
but let him keep still until it heals a second time. Or you put the cautery to the tip of the flame, until the blood which is congealed at the opening of the vein flows out, and put on it a little salt dissolved in water, and press gently upon it.
And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not bind it, until the abscess is soothed.
And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, let it be in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The veins in the arms are healthy in the area of the vein in the head because it is composite.
And the manner of healing is for the patient to place his hand in hot water until the wound turns red.
then let it be left to heal slowly, so that the vein appears well, then heal it now from the inside, not from the wide or long end.
and let the hole be wide, and let it be healed near the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot issue from it, then put the hand back in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough.
and if it is swollen, do not put the hand back in hot water, because it is put in more during winter than when swollen.
and the healing of this vein is safer than all other veins, that there is no artery or nerve in it.
The healing of the right hand's little finger is useful for all diseases of the liver, and here is how:
Hold the hand steady, and pour in hot water until the vein swells, as one can see it. and if the vein is healthy but crossing it, and you press on it from all sides, it will not hurt at all;
and do not go too deep because the nerves are completely stripped of flesh underneath; then put the hand back in hot water if the blood has congealed in the wound and it cannot come out.
And when you have finished treating the blood as necessary, put oil and silk on the vein to seal it temporarily, and do the same for each vein.
The bleeding in the left hand is beneficial for the disease of the mouse, and do everything as I have told you about the right.
The salve of the soporific plant is good for all diseases beneath the body, such as diseases of the brain, and retention of fluids, and diseases of the kidneys, and of the hips and legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of this treatment is that the patient should put his foot in hot water and rub the vein until it breaks, and then press on the joint of the foot; and if the vein is at the ankle, and going up the foot there are many veins;
then treat the largest vein, either at the ankle or on the foot, whichever is easier to access.
And if you heal it on the foot, then guard against the nerves that are underneath, and heal it across as well as up and down.
Let the flames be anesthetized.
And if the blood cannot flow out, then immerse the foot in water and let the vein drain well.
And if the healing doesn't work the first time, then try again a second time from above a little bit, because the place is salty.
Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and similarly do the same for the other foot equally.
The location of the sciatic vein is at the ankle, and its pulsation relates to the pain in the hip when there is hot blood.
And the nature of its healing is that the patient enters into the bath, and twists above the ankle three times in twisting, for otherwise the vein will not open;
and if it opens, then heal it in all ways that you can, and by crossing over; and it is better that you cup her, for the place is safe, and she is very susceptible to many people.
and it is better that you cup her, for the place is safe, and she is very susceptible to many people. And if you do not believe me, heal a vein on his back or front towards the small intestine, and be careful of the nerves.
and let blood flow until you see it, then loosen the ligature and put cotton on it and compress it. It is now healed.
Cupping glasses are made from horns, or brass, or glass;
and cupping is done in two ways: either by cutting and drawing blood, or without cutting.
And this cupping without cutting is done in two ways:l’une est par le feu et l’autra par la main. one is with fire and the other without fire;
and cupping which is done by cutting and drawing blood is done in 14 places on the body, of which one is on the head; and the others are in the neck; and two more on either side of the neck; and a cupping glass under the chin; and a cupping glass on both shoulders; and a cupping glass above the hips; and the cupping glasses in between the two arms; and the cupping glasses on both legs; and the cupping glasses at the ankles;
and bloodletting does not treat blood, unless it is from small veins that are scattered throughout the body, and because of this it does not weaken at all, as is done with bloodletting; and it should not be administered, nor with all heat or without heat, in any disease that comes from fullness, until the whole body is emptied.
And if, due to necessity or habit, one must bloodlet, then we should do so every hour at the beginning and end of the month, and in between and at all times;
for there are some who, when they need to belch, have a heavy head;
and some who experience bloating and redness in their face, head, and neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and some who spit up a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongues, and bleed; and there are those who dream, and see through blood and pain and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, especially if it is during the month, we command them to fast after the third hour of the day.
The bleeding from the nose helps with headaches ... that comes to the eyes, and should not happen after evacuating the whole body;
and this venting is in the place of bleeding from the head, and should not be used by those who are of a cold complexion, or who have catarrh, for it does them great harm;et si i a de telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;
and for this reason the elderly should not use it, nor those with serious illnesses.
And those who heal themselves frequently, become oblate, and because of this, one should place the leech lower down for fear of oblate.
The wind-treatment on the neck is located where the sinus of the head and the basilic vein are, and for this reason it is good for constriction of the feet, and fissures in the canal of the lungs, and for puffiness and distension;
and one should not push it too hard, because if it is held too tightly, it injures the oesophagus or stomach and heart.
The wind-treatments at the side of the neck are good for headaches, and eye pain and migraine, and strangulation, and toothache, and are located where the sinus of the basilic vein is;
and you should instruct the patient to express his hand when putting it on so that he does not compress the artery and cause blood to flow.
The venting below the chin is good for mouth diseases, and gum decay, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and is where there are sores on the two lips.
The windings on the shoulders are good for diseases that come from heat and fullness.
The venting of the armpits is just as good as three veins in the arm, because it draws blood from these large veins;
Instruct the bloodletter to not cut too deeply, because the area is bare of flesh and contains nerves and arteries underneath;
The cupping glass placed on the buttocks is good for hemorrhoids in the anus, and for illnesses underneath, and it should be a large cupping glass made of iron, which needs to be well applied; And if they are thin, they will break;Li ventosations desoz les cotés si vaut aux maladies de l’estomach et de la mesentere, et a les maux dou fond and cause great wounds.
Leg cupping heals quickly and openly, because it draws blood from the entire body, and is effective for old pains in the kidneys, and the bladder, and restores the flow;
They are located at the two ankles and knees, and they weaken the entire body after long use, and bring on paralysis in many cases.
The way to apply the cupping is to first place it empty, and suck gently, and then press firmly, and move evenly, and not cease doing this until you see the area red and swollen, and the blood flows.
Then wait, and replace the cupping, and take heed of the condition of the body, for there are some who have such thin skin, and clear pores: it is necessary to cut only once, and it must be a wide wound, and not too deep.li dolors de la piere se traittent as l’autrier fu dit, si avient plusors fois que li membres son defformez and suck gently.
And if the vein is thick, it is necessary to pierce twice: the first time to make the way for the thick blood.
And if the vein is very thick, it must be pierced a third time;
and when we want to draw blood little by little, we only need to pierce once. And if we want a lot of blood, we should do it frequently;
and if the vein is thick, pierce it deeply, and let the ends be such that the skin is pierced suddenly, and it is necessary to anoint the places of the cupping-glasses with an opening and dissolving oil for those who have tough and hard skin, and who have narrow pores: if it is on the head, use violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or squash seed oil;
and if it is on an eye, use oil of watercress, or lily, or chamomile, or something similar.
And if the excess is thick and cold, take oil of amarant, or of balsam, or dill oil, and the like.
And if the one we heal has tender flesh and wide pores, no oil should be applied, but it must be washed after cupping with rosewater, or cold water, or mulberry water, or pumpkin water, or porcelain water, or similar.
And those who have a lot of moisture, if they rise from parsley, or myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
And those with large growths are cured by old wine, or dried water, or a potion of fennel or chamomile, or similar things;
and it is not good to bleed with a cupping glass before the bath or in the bath, but an hour or two after the bath;
and he should not sleep after cupping, and it is necessary that he should stay awake when he is being bled and after he has been bled.
And watch if the person being bled is choleric, and if the blood is too thin and inflamed; if he should eat cool things, such as pomegranates, endive, lettuce with garlic, and similar things; and eat little, and charcoal from a brazier, and moist meat.
and eat little, and charcoal from a brazier, and moist meat. And those of a cold complexion should drink syrup of honey and moderate-aged fragrant wine, and eat little, and charcoal from a brazier, and moist meat;
and on the day that he vomits, he should drink more than he eats;
and it is necessary to give some men teliakle or musk before or after vomiting, to comfort the principal members; and dilute the wine, but those who are hot-tempered should not drink it.
The leeches that are placed without bleeding are those placed on the liver, and on the mouse, and podagra, and on the belly and the throat and the rains and the hip, because these members do not bear bleeding on their own, and it is only done to draw blood from one member to another, as we put them on breasts when nipples are sore.
to reduce the viscosity in the limb, as we place cupping glasses on the belly and buttocks to make the limb smaller
and removes pain; when there is obstruction or stone, it removes the obstruction by its attractive power, or drives out the stone from its place;
and it does the same when placed on the liver and on the abdomen when there is retained wind; these cupping glasses are administered empty in order to suck only slightly; and sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water, as in diseases of the pleurisy; and in such a way one fills the cupping glass with warm water, or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
The form of the fire cupping is as follows:
And it has a diameter of two digits and a half palm in depth, and on the side around the middle there is a small hole, as large as to pass a needle, and it is made of brass, smooth in front so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb;
and has in the middle a crossbar of iron or steel, to hold a candle, and they are both large and small according to the illnesses and age of those who take them;
for the cupping glasses of children are different from those of the elderly, and of the thin from the fat.
And one must thus place this cupping glass upon the limb:
take the candle of wax or tallow, and place it inside the cupping glass at the crossbar in the middle of the cupping glass, so that the flame is at the bottom of the cupping glass and does not burn the patient;
and then place it upon the limb, and your fingers must be over the hole that we have described, so that when one wishes, the vapors go out, and one removes the cupping glass;
and they take the tallow as before, and repeat it often if necessary.
In the cupping glass therefore which is administered for disease of pleurisy, with all acute illnesses, has no tube or opening, and is not removed until it is full of fluid, and is placed on the limb only by itself.
and this is its form:
Leeches are not removed until in members where one cannot place cupping glasses due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and in bare flesh, such as breast or nose, and others similar;
and the quality of its use is such that when you find leeches that are in clean, sweet water without mud, then take them;
and put one into clean, sweet water, until they become familiar and have nothing in their bellies; and then cleanse with a vein opening and cupping, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on the leeches;
and when they are flat and swelling, if it is possible to put a cupping glass on them, then one should do so, for this is much better.
If not, then raise the area with a pillow, and then with water, very well, and then squeeze it out.
and if the bite is too far from the body of the snake, then wet a linen cloth in cold water and place it over the bite until the swelling goes down;
and if there are many bites, then apply ground vitriol or gall, and similar things, until the swelling goes down;
or you can place half a handful of peeled peas over the bite and leave them until they warm the area, which will stop the bleeding immediately;
and if you need more, then catch other snakes.
And if the snakes do not want to be caught, then rub the bite with fresh blood or stab it with a needle so that the snake's venom comes out, and then place them over the bite, and as soon as they smell the blood, they will warm up.
and when you see them defecating, then powder on a little aloe and ash, or charcoal, they will stop immediately.
Here begins the book of fractures. This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is a remedy for fractures and dislocations.
Know, dear reader, that the fools mock this chapter, which they have never seen in any ancient book nor read any letter of it;
and for this reason knowledge is strange in our land, for I have never found any good ones;
and I know nothing about it except through the knowledge of ancient books, from which I have studied so much that I have attained to its science, and through experimentation, and through the habit of my life;
and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained therein, and abbreviated at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, just as I have done in these two chapters above.
Therefore, we should say in the prologue of this book the sums of the matter and the chapters in which the sage places his understanding, and dwells upon their truth, so that those who have experience know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or bruising befalls someone, you must hurry to heal the patient from one side and the other, if any part does not heal him completely, as in weakness of the body, or children, or the elderly. or if the weather is very hot, or too cold;
and eat cold foods, namely cold meats and meat from young animals, and drink no wine, nor eat any fatty foods, and do not eat too much meat that fills the veins with blood, until you have reason to suspect a hot abscess or inflammation in the limb;
if the illness returns under its first treatment.
When the broken bone begins to heal, the patient should be nourished with foods that promote swelling or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, testicles, pigs' feet, pig's belly, eggs, fresh fish, and full-bodied wine, and similar things. Because with such nourishing the swelling will subside and the break will heal more quickly.
And know that broken bones of the old and the weak cannot heal well or knit together according to their nature due to the dryness of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, such as the bones of small children;
but have no concern, reset on the broken bone The thick tendons that pierce and join the limb together, so that it enforces as it was before; and do not stop there, but also tend to the surrounding broken bones, and for this one needs to feed thick meats as we have said.
And you should know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different than the fracture of the foot, or of the leg; and in this chapter I will tell you about all types of fractures. For there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another that is only skin deep, like the cut of a quill pen for writing.
For there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another that is only skin deep, like the cut of a quill pen for writing. And there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture that is just a small crack.
And in each manner has its own technique, and a unique instrument for restoration, according to the memory that comes to mind;
and one can tell if the bone is broken by how it feels twisted, and clearly appears deformed when pressed with the hand;
and when there is no twisting or deformity to touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no break;
but it can still have twisting, or fracturing, or a minor break. It is not advisable to move it by hand, but apply remedies that come later, and then hold it firmly but gently now.
And know that breaks that occur in the arm, where the two parts are separated, they must now be put back into place evenly so that abscesses will heal;
and if hot abscesses come, then let them remain for a day, until the abscesses are soothed;
then set it even with the others as quickly and smoothly as you can, knowing that the restoration of this one is easier than the restoration of those that have pieces;
then stretch it, as appropriate afterwards.
And if there are broken pieces of bone, if it is in two parts, whether it is an arm or a leg, or to the hand if it is a small member, or to two cords, or to one cord and to the hand;
and set the member according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the member are brought together, you bring them by all means into their places as smoothly as you can, and be careful that your action does not cause injury or pain to the patient;
and adjust the two heads of the bone according to the best forms.
And feel it with your hand if it seems to you that it is not well:
if you set it well, and do not pull too hard, nor press as those who cause hot abscesses and contractions in the limb by their work, as we have seen many times.
And when the limb is healed, take care that the patient does not move it, whether waking or sleeping, turning or in any other way; and be sure that the limb is so secure that he feels no pain.Et s’il y a grant dolor, et ne peut demorer en tel estat, si le covient esprouver par autre maniere For when he feels no pain, then it is not yet healed, and you should put him in such a position that he feels no pain;Et s’il y a grant dolor, et ne peut demorer en tel estat, si le covient esprouver par autre maniere.
and be sure that the limb is so secure that he feels no pain.Et s’il y a grant dolor, et ne peut demorer en tel estat, si le covient esprouver par autre maniere For when he feels no pain, then it is not yet healed, and you should put him in such a position that he feels no pain;Et s’il y a grant dolor, et ne peut demorer en tel estat, si le covient esprouver par autre maniere. and make sure it is put back correctly so that no crookedness comes to it when it is restored.
and the qualities of the broken member are according to what I tell you.
Know that broken limbs vary in size, shape, and appearance.
For there are small members like arms and fingers and similar things: then one should wrap them in soft and delicate linen; and those that are large, like thighs and legs;
then one should wrap them in a wide and firm bandage, for the wide bandages embrace the whole large member and constrict it evenly all around so that no crookedness remains;
then tie around it with light sponges, 3 or 4 times depending on the member, and tighten your hand all around the bandage, then go above the dislocation and tighten less so that the dislocation is pushed out a little;
and soften the ligament little by little, until you grip a large part of the healthy tissue, then take another ligament, and return around the broken area;
then go to the part underneath the break, and grip gently, not too hard or too softly, as we have said in the first hour above;
then place between the ligaments, stuffing with linen or cloth until it is all even, then tie it all together above with a bandage, and then place your splints well-fitted above, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, then place something hot above to reduce the swelling, and leave it thus for a few days;
then grip above your splints, and let them be of a mid-sized cane split lengthwise, or of wood used for making oars, or of palm branches, and let them be shaped thus:
but it is necessary for the star that one puts on the break to be a little bigger and wider than the others;
and also as long as it is convenient for the limb, small or large; then bind on the stars as you did at first, then tie a thread properly, just as in the first instance of the dislocation; the tighter it is, the better; less so, afterwards;
and the thread should be medium thickness, not too thick nor too thin, and made of soft flax;
because if the thread is thick, as I have seen foolish people make their ligatures with twisted cords, and that is a great error, for the ligature cannot be even if it is too thin, and there should not be less than two threads between each star.
And if the patient is nervous because of the stars after the pressing in their healthy areas, then put under them flaxen lint or linen rags so that it does not hurt.
When the wound is accompanied by a fracture, and the bone is broken, I will describe the treatment below.
And you should know that it is not advisable to manipulate all broken bones on the first day. For when the member is swollen, it is not advisable to apply a poultice for more than five or seven days, or longer depending on the heat of the abscess.
And now here is the manner of ancient poultices to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists:
And you should take flour from the walls of the mill and mix it with plenty of egg, and apply this mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it. This is the common manner of the poultice that restores fractures in various conditions, especially in women and small children, because it is not too hot or too cold.
Another manner of poultice that restores fractures, dislocations, and twists:Prend les veines de lie, et le blanc d’uef, et met la veine de lie et le blanc d’ Take the veins of bran, and the white of an egg, and put the bran vein and the white, and the adder's tongue and daniel, and myrrh, and assafetida, and gum arabic, each 5 scrip. myrrh and aloes, each 5 drachms; galangal root 1 ounce; and make into powder, and mix with egg white; if the person's complexion is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition and restores broken bones quickly, and benefits many people.
Another recipe for a plaster that helps with twisting injuries: take mallow leaves and violets, bruised, with oil of roses, apply this three times. myrrh and aloes, mix together, nine parts. cinnamomom six parts; armenian bole ten parts, and grind well, and cook with egg white or vinegar, and administer it.
Another method of plaster for joints and bones separated from their sockets, and it relieves pain, and wears away the bone, and breaks it:pren mirre et zibeth, ana XII З.; take new lamb’s wool, moisten it in garlic and oil, and apply it to the affected area.pren saindore, et aloes, ana XII З.;
This plaster does not restore, but it is good for soothing a hot abscess, and it removes pain cleanly.
Another method of plaster which restores broken bones: take myrrh and civet, mix together, twelve parts;take mallow leaves, bruised, and violets, and oil of take fig leaves dried, and leaves of ground ivy, and grind them together, and make a plaster.pren saindore, et mirre, ana XII З.;
Another method of plaster to restore the fracture of the bone, and to reduce the remaining abscess: take new linen, and soak it in vinegar and cooked oil, and apply it to the affected area. Take the root of marshmallow, chamomile, violets, and wheat flour, one part each.
Grind them and make into an ointment with wine, and if the member is burning, make it with moist coriander water, or water, and use it.
Another stronger method of plaster, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the member.Take the juice of leeks and onions, and mix with vinegar, and apply it to the affected area until restored. Take marshmallow roots, and flax seeds, borage, milkweed, and violet and chamomile flowers, one part each. Grind them and make into an ointment with salt water, or sweet water, or wine, depending on the heat of the member and its condition.
Hyposurgeon writes in his book that one should not put anything on a broken limb to heal it except for a cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and that it should be between soft and too hard.Et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs. Et s’il adveint qu’il soit trop sec, metez y oile; et s’il est trop moli, metez y cire; et si la brisure est grande, qu’on ne puet restorer, qu’on fasse cerote de cire et d’oile, et qu’on le broie tres fins, et qu’on y mette poudres d’armonie et de sante, et de violete, et qu’on le met sus la brisure, et qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.
And it seems that Galen says that one should put on the broken limb, for healing, dry things that are slightly warm, such as myrrh, aloe, incense, and similar things, as we have said.Et dist galien qu’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit. Et s’il adveint que la brisure soit granz et profont, dist galien qu’on doit mettre sus la brisure cerote de cire et d’oile, et qu’on le broie tres fins, et qu’on y mette poudres d’armonie et de sante, et de violete, et qu’on le met sus la brisure.
Another recipe for an ointment that is good for injury and pain:Pren radice de vismalve, camomille, flors de violetes, farine de vez Take mugwort and human hair cut in pieces, or bird feathers, and marshmallow, and mix them together, and grind them and make an ointment from it.
Then loosen it a little after, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor move the bone from its place. if you do not loosen it by hand for several days. And if pain comes to the site, or itching, loss of appetite, or swelling, then hurry and loosen it, and remove the plaster immediately.
and take a light cloth, and a sponge of sea moss soaked in water, and apply it to the site until the itching stops and the pain is relieved. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply cool linen, moistened in water or rose oil, and bind it up with a bandage, until you are sure there is no hot abscess.
Let the inflammation of the limb subside, and the pain be relieved, then begin gently again with a little more plaster, and do not hold it as tightly as before. and gently until it heals.
And if you see that the abscess is closed and red and painful and swollen all over, and you need ointment and bandages, then resume it, just as you did at first.
And if nothing of what we have said comes to the member, do not dislocate it until after 3 or 4 or 5 or 7 days. And sometimes leave it for 20 days, depending on what one sees, until the fracture heals and the flesh comes close to the bone.
then restrain it more than before, and increase its food intake, as I have said before.
And if you see the area drier than necessary, know that infection cannot come. Then wash it with warm water when you dislocate it, and do so every third day, and loosen the bandage a little.
Through this process, infection will leave the limb, and it will quickly heal what the foolish do, who twist the limb.
It is wicked, and so are the works of cowards; I see no other way than to leave it and do it properly.
There are many types of fractures, with various shapes and distinct causes;
for there are fractures that are made by the impact of a sword, and the collar bone breaks all the way to the sinfist which is under the bone, just like an ax or a pole; and for this reason, this type of fracture is called "haichure".
Or the sword cuts through the bone from above without piercing it, and this type of fracture is called "absolute";
and the wound of these two fractures are large or small.Apres doit l’om medecin porver si li os est sanz espas, ou il y a
And if there is a strike with the flat of the sword, or a cut, or from the collar bone, or from falling on stone, or from other similar causes.
And if there is a fracture that penetrates, which approaches the membrane beneath the bone, or is on top of the bone; this wound is either large or small.
Then the doctor must determine if the bone is without space, or if there is
and if the wound is made by a stone or by falling, or by similar things, and the bone goes in below, and the place is shaved smooth as the blacksmiths do when they work on pots. if the stone goes inside.
And this happens more to those who have soft bone at the top, as in the head of an infant;
and it happens with all these types of fractures where small pieces are dislocated, like tiles; and I will speak about this in detail.
And we know all kinds of fractures by their deformity, and by the inquiry into the tent, and by the corruption of the flesh that is above it.
The hairline fracture is known because when the bone is uncovered and rubbed on top, the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of a fracture, pay attention to the accidents of the illness; and if you see no malicious accident, such as vomiting of phlegm, loss of consciousness, extension, paralysis, fever, eyes popping out and turning red, and other similar things in various dispositions, then it can heal without a doubt.
And if you see no shocking accident, and you expect recovery, then begin the treatment.
And when the baby comes to you first, and it is in winter, you should remove the foreskin before the fourteenth day when you can.
And if it is in the summer, you should hasten to remove the foreskin before the seventh day, so that the skin under the foreskin does not become corrupted, and so that the accidents we have mentioned do not occur.
And if the fracture of the bone reaches the membrane that covers the brain, then you must split the fractured part thus:
and you must grip the head of the wounded person firmly and expose the bone in every way that you can, and according to the shape of the wound as much as possible, and if blood comes out when you expose the bone, or an abscess forms, then aid him with what is appropriate, and you must fill the area with dampened pieces of cloth in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the abscess is drained and there is no more bleeding. then begin around the bone to remove it, and this can be done in two ways:
one way is to cut closely in front, and that is the shape:
And then make another cut larger than the first.
and the other way is to have diverse cuts, some narrow and some wide, pointed, and made of iron:
and work gently, so that you do not cut the head.
And if the bone is thick and hard, you must pierce around it, so that you apply cuts with chisels, not deep enough to penetrate through the bone, and it should have a rim or circle on top, preventing the point from going through the bone;
and you should have several of these, so that each one comes in its place in the thickness of the bone, so that you have chisels for all parts of the skull;
and there are three types of cautery:
The qualities for piercing around the broken bone are that you must place the cautery on the bone and move it with your fingers until you feel the bone is pierced;
then move the cautery elsewhere a little later, and do this all around, then cut into the space between the bone fragments with the incision, and do this as skillfully and gently as you can, as we have said, until you pull out the bone with your hand or with one of the instruments you have, such as tweezers;
Be careful not to touch the brain or the dura mater.
And when you have pierced and pulled out the bone, it is necessary to remove the membrane that remains attached to the bone with another instrument similar to a scalpel, but it must be more flexible and thinner than the other scalpel;
and if it remains stuck in the small bones or any scales, then gently dislodge them with instruments. then treat the wound with tenting and poultices as we have described.
And the other method of treatment is that which Galen describes, which is safer: and he highly recommends it, and his word is law. First, you must uncover a part of the bone where the fracture is open and moving. Once you have uncovered that part, place under it the cutting edge of this lens-shaped instrument, which is its shape:
And do not cut from one side only, as the wound will be deeper on the bone side;
then gently strike with a small mallet all around so that you slightly move the bone all around, taking care not to damage the membrane underneath;
if it is attached to the bone, then gently move the bone, for it can be moved without harm or fear.
And if the fracture does not penetrate through to the membrane, and the bone is cut only slightly from above, with small pieces, then one must remove this roughness, and take away the scales with a very fine rasp of which you should have various sizes, in order to smooth each part according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
If you use a large razor at first, and then a finer one afterwards, and do not stop doing this until it is done well.
For all other hairline and subtle fractures, you must treat according to the specifics of the case;
and this is something that has not been answered for one who has dedicated their study to this art.
And if the wound is exposed, one should press a linen bandage according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it over the wound; Then take another bandage doubled into two or three, moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first bandage; and do this as gently as you can so that you don't burden the wound, then administer another bandage on top, and don't tighten it more than necessary so that it only presses the wound;
and let it be like this for one or two days, until the abscess is soothed, then loosen it, and administer remedies such as lily roots, and flour of beans, and incense powder, and aristologus, and similar things;
and from these things make a powder, and apply it to the wound, and then administer other medicine without biting;
and ensure that the wound is clean, so that you do not leave any oil or allow any pus to gather, for when pus gathers on the brain's membrane, it will corrupt and cause great harm to the patient;
for when one applies something biting to a wound, it numbs from above. Take care therefore, if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, that it is without doubt.
And if blackness does not disappear but only becomes worse due to the medicine applied, one should mix a portion of honey with three portions of rose oil and apply this mixture to the wound using a bandage. Then, treat it in the usual ways until it heals.
You should know that sometimes both parts of the nose's bridge are broken, or just one part, because there are two bones there;
and those below are cartilaginous, and do not break, unless they are bent or twisted, and then heal.
And if one of the two parts is broken, you should press your little finger or hole of the nail, and place the break inside your index finger, and hold it in place with your thumb until the nail returns to its natural shape. And do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
If the fracture is above the nose, and the bones cannot be aligned, then you must place it evenly at the end of a rather thick thread.
And if the break is in two parts, do the same, and hurry to restore it on the first day, if you can;for si li malaide demore longuement, li brisure ne velt selonc sa figure natureil, mai est contors a la figure del membre, et aler se contors en
But if the patient lingers long, the break will not return to its natural shape but distort the shape of the limb; and it will remain distorted unless, on the seventh or tenth day, when the abscesses have healed, you press the head of the nail with tent-like pieces of linen cloth, if the break is in one part.
Or you sew him up elsewhere, if the wound is there. and the stitches should be so large that they fill the holes in the nipples.
And some restorers say that one must moisten the tents with butter, and change them every day. I do not think this is good, but it is necessary that they be moistened with an egg yolk and flour; then leave the stitch in place until the bone is healed and the cartilage hardened.
And sometimes we sew in goose feathers instead of stitches, and wrap it with a thin cloth, and the dislocation is held in place, and the patient breathes among them; or do what you want.
And if hot abscesses come to the nose while you are working on it, then put cerate or cotton moistened in rose oil, or in a little diaquilon.
And if a wound comes to the nipples, put on a poultice, made from flour of vetches, and incense powder, mixed with egg yolk, then put on top light lint, and do not tie it to the nipple;
and if the fracture of the nose is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then extract them with instruments suitable for this purpose, then close the wound, and treat things that are out of joint, and mend, as with plasters and ointments suitable for this purpose.
and if there is no wound inside the nose, then treat it with tenting and put in canes of lead until it is healed.
When the jaw is broken underneath and there is no open wound, and the break is only on the surface and not broken in two, one can know it easily.
It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, that you put your index finger into the mouth of the patient: and if the fracture is in the left jaw, then put your index finger of the right hand and put pressure on the fracture gently and pull it with the other hand equally.
And if the fracture of the jaw is displaced in .ii., then you must administer an extension of .i. parts, so that it is equalized.
And if there is movement of the teeth, or dislocation, then hold them in place with a thread of gold, silver, or silk, and then put over the broken jaw a cerote, and put over that a double cloth; and place on top of the wound a well-made bandage, or a piece of leather equal in size, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it as tightly as possible; and instruct the patient to rest and eat light foods.
And if you see that the jaw is changing shape, then loosen it for three days, and then reset it to its original position. and apply a poultice on top of that, made from ground powder of egg or flour of millet, after you have removed the kerchief.
and apply a light bandage on top of the poultice, and if the poultices become soaked through, and the patient's condition does not change, then leave it until it heals. It often heals within three weeks.
And if a hot abscess comes, then administer what we have said many times before.
And if there is a break and wound together, examine it to see if any bone is missing; So skillfully hide from them the implements needed for this procedure.
And if the wound is narrow, dilate it with flame according to your necessity.
And when you have removed all these pieces, and there remains none, then close the wound, if it is wide, and place upon it suitable poultices to promote healing.
The bone is broken in several places in front of the shoulder, and the fracture occurs in three ways:
1. it is broken and separated into two pieces, which is the easiest to heal;
where there is a break with a wound.
And the procedure is the same when the break is without a wound: you must have two assistants so that one can hold the shoulder where the collarbone is broken, and the other stretches the neck towards the affected side;
Then put the broken bone back into place with your fingers, so that it is set correctly and there is no displacement or gap.
And if you need to extend it further, place a round pillow of cloth or wool underneath the shoulder, as thick as needed; and stretch and gently pull on the collarbone, while pushing the pillow away with your hand, so that you reset the bone in its proper place.
And if you cannot pull out the head of the dislocated shoulder, because it comes up very tightly, then the patient should lie on his back, and put something under the shoulder, an ear, and the assistant pushes the shoulder down while pulling the arm upward, until the bone of the shoulder is dislodged.
Then press the bones together with your fingers, and if you find them loose, then you must split them;
and gently pull on the pieces, and if the bone cannot be joined due to any swelling, then cut at one of the incisions that you have made. but you must put under pressure this instrument, in order to push out the pus:
and it should be shaped like a spoon, and not sharp, and as wide as is necessary, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the action;
and it has two heads, as you can see, and one is wide and the other narrow, according to the nature of the wound that you have made when you pulled on the bones.
And when you are sure that there is a hot abscess, then cut the wound, and if the opening is small, or if you doubt there is a hot abscess, then dress the wound with bandages and bandages, according to its size.
And if hot abscesses appear, moisten a cloth in rose oil and garlic and wine, and place it on top.
The stretching of the bone, when it is without wounds and without fracturing, is to place on the bone the plaster made from mill dust and egg white, and put light bandages on top, and place a sphere underneath the splint, if you need one. Then take a very large bandage, one palm wide, then put the double drape on top of the bandages and plaster; Then take a subtle needle three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage so that the head of the bandage hangs down. And place the needle on the fracture, and wrap the bandage around the neck, and under the healthy scapula, and under the injured scapula. And reset it from each part, and when you see that the ligament holds the fracture in place satisfactorily, and you clearly see that the needle does not move over the broken bone, then release it a little, and when the ligature slackens, constrain it again.
and let the patient lie on his back, and put a small pillow under his shoulder to raise the shoulder joint; if it eases the fracture of the collarbone by aligning the shoulder, then tie his arm to his neck and do not untie it unless an evil accident happens, for up to 20 days;
then renew the poultice, if you see that he needs it, and keep him so, until he is healed;and let him not wear a garment over the shoulder, but rather have the arm bare, to see how it goes;et s’il li vemme de la pluit ou del puais, et qu’il velt le taster, faiz le coger ou un chas o si
and if pus or blood comes out and he wants to taste it, let him catch it on his finger;if the wound is healed within 28 days, it is restored in less time for some people.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
It sometimes happens that the shoulder dislocates or breaks, and they do not feel any pain except through touch;and if he feels pain in his shoulder, it is because of a wound made by fire or cold, or a fall, or a blow.And if the wound is deep, it is necessary to open it,
then set it according to the shape of the fracture, and reset it according to its natural form, in every way that you can.
then put on the site powdered flour with egg white, and light dressings, and place over it a doubled-over cloth; then place a wide and thin board, slightly wider than the shoulder, on top, and if there is swelling beneath the board at any point on the shoulder, stuff that area with linen dressings so that the board lies flat and even. Then;
and then tighten it with a large bandage firmly, so that the board does not move from its place, and check the dressing every day. Then;
and whenever it softens, tighten it again and reset the board if it has moved out of place. Then have the patient lie on his side.
and the shoulder is restored in 20 days or 25.
And when this time is completed, he releases it and is sure, because it is not an easy bone to set.
And if a part of the bone protrudes forward, and not beneath the heart, they should push it up, and the bone, and do as we said in the breaking of the forceps to soothe the hot abscess.
of the breaking of the foot
The penis is sometimes broken in the middle, but that rarely happens; but it often breaks at the tip.
And when it is broken in the middle, it bends downward, and the patient feels great pain and weakness throughout his body, and sometimes vomits blood, and there are open wounds in the broken bone, which he feels with his fingers.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, and he puts a pillow between his shoulders, then presses his shoulders, and brings together the sides of the two ribs with his hands, and carefully ensures they are even in all ways he can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be;
then he applies plasters and poultices on top of the splint made from light wood, and wraps it in a cloth, and ties it onto the broken bone so that it does not move; and turn the bandage smoothly to the back, and tighten it skillfully, and check every hour that the wound is not softening, and if it softens, tighten it.
and if it needs to be loosened because of corrosion or itching at the site, or pain or an abscess, then hurry and loosen it, and scrape off the ointment, and address what has come about in various ways.
Then reset the ointment, and tighten it until it heals.
of the fracture of the ribs
Know that the fracture of the ribs only occurs above the back, and in the chest, and they only bend because they are slippery. and you will feel it well on examination in those places.Et s’il adonques arrive qu’ele soit brisee, il cov
And the treatment is to set the break evenly, as it should be. Then apply the ointment, and bind it with a cloth, if necessary.
And if the fracture of the ribs is inward-leaning, then the patient feels great pain and piercing, just as with pleurisy, because the bone punctures the membrane.Et si li brisure des costes est vers le dos, il sent pointure et dolor, car li os deffend la toile; and has pain in his fingernails, and feels nauseous and vomits a great quantity of blood, this is a serious illness, and the physicians have given him strong medicine.
And if there are those who say that one should administer foods that swell the belly, to push the fracture out.
We do not do this, unless hot abscesses come to it, if they have not come to it already. And if it has come to it, then heal it.
And some say that cupping glasses should be placed over the area to draw out the poison, and this is reasonable advice: However, there is a doubt that the cupping glass will attract the excess fluids due to the weakness of the patient.
And some say that one should cover the area with soft lamb's wool soaked in hot oil, and place a tent between the ribs to ensure even pressure all around, then it should be bandaged with bandages of pleurisy, meat and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot endure through the bone that punctures the skin, and there is doubt about the patient, then one should split open the ribcage over the site of the broken bone, and place a instrument underneath to push out the infection;
and then split the bone, and gently pull it out, and then sew up the two lips of the wound if it is large, and treat it with poultices until it heals.
And if swollen abscesses come, then put wet cloths in rose oil, and put them on the affected area;
and treat the area around the abscess as needed, and let the patient lie on his side where it is, until he is healed.
and also in the spine of the back.
And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will recover or not, take note if their hands are soft and swollen and numb, and they cannot move or straighten them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Know that it is deadly in many ways, and if they are numb and feel pain when you stretch or pinch them, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the illness is healed, if proper care is given.And si li mains ne sont pas mollifiiez ne enflees ne mortes, et les sent bien quant on les estraint, sache que li maux est de la chair ou de la peau et qu’il n’est pas de l’os; et si tu le mets en cure, il sera sain.
And if something similar happens to the spine in the back, and you want to know if he is healthy or not, then see if his feet are numb, and if the senses are in his hands, and in his back there are wind and urination without will;
and when he lies on his stomach, there is urination without will. And when he is placed on his back and he wants to sit up, he cannot. Know that it is fatal: if there is no improvement in the treatment.
And if these effects do not occur, then the condition is less severe.
And the cure is that you must examine if there is a hot abscess, and put rosy oil or hen's egg yolk on the spine until it is soothed.
then apply one of the comforting and drying poultices, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest. and not to sleep on the painful part until it is healed.
And if any bone is dislocated, it must be put back in place; remove the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with one stitch, then the doctor should treat it with ointment and bandages until it is healed;
and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the cow", put your left hand over it and your right hand underneath it, then apply the poultice and bandage it if necessary.
then they bind it, and if there is bone exposed, they cover it with skin and then the wound is healed until it is cured.
of the fracture of the hip bone
It rarely happens that the hip bone is broken, and if it does, there will be little thinning at the head. And they make it long, and decline towards the buttocks, and comes to the patient's pain in the area, and piercing, and swelling where it is broken.
And its restoration is that you extend your hand over it, as far as you can reach the break; and know which is the break and its shape;
and if the break is only at the head, put it in place so that the break is even and the joint is in its natural shape.
If the fracture is long, or if it slopes downward, have the patient lie on his stomach until the healing of that fracture is prepared for. And when you have put it in place, apply the ointment, then put on a splint of wood or horn and bind the break so that it does not move;
and employ the cautery underneath the ribs, until the skin is even. And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side, or on his back.
And if a boil comes, do not touch it, until the boil has subsided, and apply what we have mentioned before; and then return to healing, and restrain it as appropriate, if there is no bad incident;
of the dislocation of the shoulder
The shoulder joint is what is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, and if it is dislocated, it should be restored according to one of two methods:
one of which is to take a plain staff of medium thickness, according to this form:
And tie the two ends together, and hold them upright, and seat the patient on a bench;
then let him swing his broken arm over the staff, until he reaches the bottom, and have a curve in the staff, then lean over some heavy object or have the minister hold it down below;
then place the splint on the fracture evenly with his hands together, until the fracture returns as it should.
And the other method is to have the patient lean on his elbow, and tie his hand to his neck; then have one minister hold what is above the dislocation in their hands, and the other minister hold beneath the dislocation, at each end of the rod, and stretch each end in opposite directions.
And if you want the extraction to be more thorough, then tighten the ligature below the fracture, and above it as well, and each assistant must do their part.
And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, you should place one strap underneath the armpit and the other towards the neck, underneath the fracture.
And if the fracture is towards the neck, then one strap should be placed lightly and gently, without labor, so that the fracture is aligned with its place, and with the neck.
Then align the fracture as it should be, and bind it, if no abscess comes of it.
And if a swollen abscess comes of it, then do not bind it for 7 days, but place soft wool in vinegar and rose oil on the swollen abscess until it is soothed.
then you must restrain it, and the way to restrain it is to apply the ointment to the fracture, then assemble the arm onto the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or the chest;
and apply the bandage, and restrain it onto the shoulder and arm, so that the arm is held in place, unless something dislocates it or the bones move.
And if you fear that the bones will move, use splints, and place a larger and stronger splint over the fracture, and have two inches of space between each splint, and make each splint large enough so that it extends three inches on each side of the fracture;
then restrain over the splints, as I said at the beginning of the chapter about the fracture, more strongly and less widely.
And if you see the position of the stars and the constriction, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the hot abscess, then let it be bound until the seventh day, as we have said.
Then examine the bandages every three days to ensure no itching or swelling occurs, and that no pus can reach the member due to it being too tight. If the abscess, as we have said.
And if no such accidents occur, then remove the bandages after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, with his hands on his stomach;
and place underneath the shoulder a plain woolen pillow evenly, and examine every hour of the day or night that the broken member does not move, nor the bandages become soft.
if he is treated with medicine, and is given the food we have previously mentioned, in such a way that the food reaches the subtlest parts. and when he begins to recover, then it should be thick.
And it is customary for the shoulder and leg to take forty days to heal completely; and then one should loosen and administer baths and medicated oils to help it heal.
And if the dislocation is severe and stuck, it remains to be released for 50 days or two months.
of the breaking of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two "foscile", one of which is small and is the one that follows the armpit;
and the other is large, and is the one that is underneath, towards the little finger;
by chance, only the large foscile may be broken, or only the small one, or both together.Si li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i
When the small bones are broken, their restoration is easy, and so is their healing.
And when the large bones are broken, their healing is difficult, and more painful than when they are broken all at once.
If it is only a small bone that is broken, then one must extend it slightly and put it in place.And if a large bone is broken, one should not extend it too much, but put it in its place with a little extension.
And if it is a large bone, one must pull harder;
and stretch him out on a pillow, and raise the pouch of his hand higher than the others, and the little fingers lower than the other fingers, and have the patient cross himself over his chest, and the pillow in front of him higher so that the patient does not suffer any strain;
Then extend the minister's right arm to the part below his hand, or to the armpit, and another minister to the other side above.
And then put the bandages on evenly, according to its best form.
And if the bone has broken into pieces, place each one in its proper position; and if any have become dislocated, and you cannot restore them to their places, then cut through the bone, as we have described earlier.
And if with the break there is a wound, I have spoken about it in a particular chapter; if one takes the remedy.
And if in the beginning of the restoration, abscesses occur, then apply a plaster made from rosin oil and white wax, not too hard or too soft. and apply the plaster gently, until the abscesses are soothed.
Then remove the plaster, and apply the ointment made from mill powder with egg white, then put on the bandages, and let the bandage of the fracture be a bit stronger, and a little larger than the others;
and know that he must have six bandages on his arm in various places: whether the fracture is in one or two bones;
and tighten more over the fracture than elsewhere, and always lessen it as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bandages which are on the broken bone be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough;
and let the bandages which are on the broken bone be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough; and let the thread, with which it is bound, be of flax, neither too thick nor too fine, as we have said.
And re-examine the limb and the joint after a few days. And if any bad accident comes to the limb, such as itching coming to the limb, then you must moisten the limb with warm water until those itches are relieved;
and let the limb not be bound tightly so that it can rest.
And then renew the binding, and if the ligaments are relaxed and the bones dislocated, and similar things, then correct it.
And if one must guard against the nutrients not being able to reach the member because it is too bound up, then one must loosen it a little and leave it thus for some days, until the nutrients flow to it, and then bind it again.
And if none of these things that we have said happens to the patient, then do not loosen it for 20 days.
or twist around, then he can hold his hands to his neck, and let his neck be straight, and guard against movement and dislocation, and sleep on his back;
and know that this dislocation is restored in 30 days or 35, and perhaps in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexes of the virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
Know that in the back of the hand and on the fingers there are few fractures, and they only come from many foldings.
And when the palm of the hand is broken or bent, then the patient should cut a cross in it and sit upright in front of him evenly.
then put his hand on the extended towel, and extend the broken bones, and make them equal with the other bones, so that they are well-joined.
and put on a poultice and bandages, if an abscess does not come, then he puts on a plaster according to the quantity of the wound. and it should be wrapped in a linen cloth.
And if the break is around the palm, towards the belly, then make a ball of cloth, and instruct the patient to press it against the broken palm. And then he pulls on a long cloth, and the splint should be of cured pig's skin as large as the palm of the hand, and he applies it, as it should be.
And if the fracture is in the forearm, you must put a splint on top and another underneath the plant, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind it all around the hand, and stop the bleeding between the two.
And if the dislocation comes to us on one of our arms, if it is the shoulder, then we set it straight, as it should be. and hold it with your palm, and if you see [it], put a small, straight splint to raise the dislocation, and do not move it;
and if the dislocation is in the other arms, such as in the index or one of the others, then we set it straight and bind it with the healthy arm that is next to it; or you bind them both in the same way, holding them still, or you put a splint on it, as on the shoulder;
and take care in the restoration and the preparation of a hot abscess, and treat that which comes to it, as I have said.
The thigh bone is often broken, and one can easily see this when it turns forward and backward;
and the restoration is to tie one above the fracture, and the other below. And the patient lies on his face, then each minister stretches their band to their part equally;
and that is when the fracture is in the bone.
And if the fracture is close to the root of the thigh, let one ligature be towards the armpit, and the other ligatures below the fracture.
And also if it is close to the knee, then the band should be below the knee, and the extension should be upwards;
then put the splint on the bone evenly with his two hands, so that it is in its natural position, and then apply the ointment and the bandage, unless pus comes out.If the fracture is in the arm near the elbow: then put one band above the elbow, and the other below, and extend upwards; then put the splint on the bone evenly with his two hands, so that it is in its natural position, and then apply the ointment and the bandage, unless pus comes out.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it calm down first, then return to your work and treatment; It is made in this way.
You must wrap the broken bone with a long strip of thick linen, and tie it tightly, then bring the leg so that the heel touches the root of the thigh, and push a long needle between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and let the end of the thread come out at the top;
then wrap the bandage around the leg and thigh, then place splints over the fracture, and put a splint on the shinbone of the leg;
then fill the space between the leg and thigh with soft cloth to even out the pressure, then begin by tying three or four knots over the fracture; and as you go higher above the fracture, tighten it less;
then tighten the two ends of the thread that you pushed between the leg and thigh, and tie three splints that are above it, then go back down to the end of the thread, until you reach the foot;
and hold it so that it does not move from its place, then let it be thus, until no abscess or swelling or similar occurs. And if something happens, dislocate and address what is happening, as we have said many times;
and if there are pieces of bone that prick, they should be removed, if possible; and if not, the place should be split and the bone pulled out; and the wound treated as we have said, until it is healed.
And sometimes the thigh is dislocated thus when a staff is placed against it, as in the shoulder and arm;
Nevertheless, this restoration does not help the ailment.Et li remede de cest chapistre est de le deslieer et de le retreire, et de l’estrecier
And you shall know that the neck is restored in one day, or a little less or more, according to the variety of complexions.
Know that in the bend of the knee there is little breaking, but it bends many times.
And if it breaks, then there is only a crack or an opening, and it happens to everyone, with or without pain, and it feels good to all.
And the restoration is to dislocate and draw it out, and hold it tightly until it is set in place, as one puts fingers together, as far as one can;
then apply the plaster, and place a round pad on top if necessary, and hold it in place as needed. Then follow all the instructions we have given for other fractures, such as hot abscesses and similar conditions. he should use whatever is appropriate for each condition until the patient is healed.
of the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is properly called the "mustel" and the other the "foscile";
and all other fractures occur in the leg as they do in the arm, and the treatment is the same. If both bones are broken at the same time, then the leg turns completely inside out.
And if only the small bones are broken, it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain and it can be seen clearly; and it turns inside out.
Therefore, apply traction and make it even, and tie the bandages evenly.
However, if the fracture is ugly, and there are several pieces, then the traction should be milder and gentler. and apply it according to your ability.
And when you have finished your work, take two bundles of wood shavings that reach from one side of the leg to the other, and let them be as long as the leg from the knee down to just below it.
Then wrap two bands around it above and below, and tie it in the middle as well. At this point, the leg will not be able to decline to the right or left, and thus it is good.
And some use a bed as long as the leg, and it is made of wood, and they put the leg in it to guard against movement, and they carefully do this at the site of the injury.
and move the leg each day to see if there is a hot abscess or other incident; until it is healed.
of the break of the bones of the foot
At the ankle there is no break, but sometimes there is a break in the bones of the foot and in both feet, and there is only bruising in various ways.
And if it happens that there is a break in the bone of the foot, and you see the bones sticking out, then put the patient's foot on the ground, as if he wanted to walk, and then put your foot on his, where the bones are protruding, and then press until they return to their place;
then apply the ointment and bandages on top, and place a small wooden board with two flat sides underneath the foot's belly, then tighten it to the foot comfortably, then wrap cloth around it, and other things that you need.
And after three or four days have passed, loosen the bandage, for you will find that the bones are healed, whether broken or dislocated.
And if any of the fingers are broken, restore them as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then put a splint on the broken bone according to the length of the bone, and make it a little wider, then put under the foot that table which I have said, and tighten it conveniently;
and if there are two or three, or more, broken, then put on each bone a splint according to its quantity, wrapped in a linen cloth, and tighten the table under the foot; and let there be a projection on the top of the table to press against the belly of the foot, so that it holds it well.
And you must not forget the other things which I have said about other fractures, from what we have already said; and treat each accident as it should be treated.
of the fracture of the bone of the finger
When the bones of the woman's nature are broken, then make her sit upright, then lean her towards the side of the back, and hold her from behind;
then fill the ball with the nature of the cotton disease, and put in it as much as a thumb;
then stand the woman up, and gently poke her back a little bit, and then the cotton will jump, until it comes to the entrance of the nature, and the bone will return with the thumb;
and when she wants to urinate, take out the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back in, and do this for 7 days or so; then the fracture will be restored, and if you wish, take a sheep's bladder, and tie it at the opening with a string, and fill the entire bladder into the nature; then blow into the string until the bladder is inflated inside; the nature will then restore the fracture;
then it should be filled with cotton and left like that for a few days until it is healed.
And when the bone of the man's or woman's elbow is broken, restore it as we have said for the bone of the hip;
and these breaks are not concealed from those who devote themselves to its study and practice, and understand my book.
For the breaks indicate in many ways the correct path to restoration: Understand them therefore.
In a bone that is broken, take a goose's throat and insert it into the bone; then wrap cloth around it, and leave it for three days or more, and it will be healed quickly.
of fracture with wound
It is necessary for one who has a fracture with wound, especially if it is large, such as the thigh or shoulder bone or similar, that he be bled immediately, in accordance with the bleeding we have described earlier.
And if the wound bleeds, then add vitriol again, if you have nothing else; then reset the fracture in that same hour or day, if no abscesses form.
And if abscesses form, then wait until the third day to reset the fracture, as long as the abscesses are subsiding; do not touch them on the second or fourth day, for you would cause a dangerous accident.
And if the broken bone is visible beneath the uncovered chest, you should gently place it in its proper position with your hands, with a slight extension.
And if the dislocation does not appear to you in order to put it equal to your hands, then reset it with this instrument made of iron, which is seven or eight inches long, and its width depends on the size of the wound; and therefore it is necessary for the surgeon to take three or four stitches, depending on what he needs in each case of fracture.
Let it be round and slightly thick, so that it does not bend when you press on the limb while doing your work, and let it be sharp at the end, and thick from the middle towards the front, thus:
It is called a 'splint', so that it is necessary to put the curved side on top of the protruding bone. And when you wrap it once around, do so until it fits tightly, and let one end be even with the other. And if the break is small and the instrument cannot well grasp the bone, you must pare the head of the bone so that the instrument can hold it firmly.Et se li os ne vout point demorer a son leu, si convint que tu l’estrenges tant qu’il soit en son leu et en sa possance; car en ce cas ne peuit li membres valer.
And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, then use an appropriate tool, either a knife or a saw, at your discretion;
then remove what remains in the bone of splinters and small fragments.Et si li os sont trop fenduers ou trop rompus, si convenable est que tu les brises, et si li estres de l’un et l’autre ne s’entrecongnissent mie
And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place.
Do this until it is in its place, then moisten the cloth with black wine vinegar, and cleanse if necessary. and do not put ointment or anything else on the wound that would cause pus and corruption;
then administer bandages when you have reset the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and wrap the covering all around according to the size of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not restricted by the dressing;
and many times they have done this with foolishness, causing corruption or death in some cases; and it is the most delicate and soft of all dislocations.
And if the wound is large and you doubt that a bad accident may occur as we have said, and you find pain in the area, then you should not put bandages on it; but wrap around, instead of a pillow, hard, folded cloths, and tie them.
And when you see after one or two days that the wound is puffed up, then remove what you have put on it and apply healing ointment, such as tetrapharmacon and similar.
And you should loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is healed and closed.
And it is necessary for the limb to be prepared in such a way that the bowstring runs downhill easily.
And if they remain for many days, and it cannot be souded but keeps returning apart, know that there are small pieces of bone causing this, so you should probe the wound with a probe and remove all these displaced pieces that cause the pain.
And if a fistula comes to the surface, or any other kind of corruption, then you should treat it according to what he said in his chapter above.
And when the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, as in the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not draw it out, but leave it alone until it can be pulled out;
perhaps it will fall out after 20 or 30 days, then cure the wound if you can;et s’il ne puet chiere, si trais li os entor qu’il soit apertes, et metes entor
and if it cannot be pulled out, then cut the bone around so that it is exposed, and put in
Many times after the healing of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and an ugly sight is the shape of the limb;et quant li os traie sus li membre, si metes entor de l’erbe c’est-a-savoir, sanz rime ne mesure, car il est hardi et n’est pas de nature. and sometimes cannot perform its natural functions.
So take care then, if we are wise: if the minister gives constipating medicines, such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and sarcocolla, acacia, and similar others, so that you can prepare some of these things, or all together, and mix them with stinting wine, or with the yolk of an egg, or with garlic; and apply it to the navel as a poultice, and tie it on tightly, and don't untie it for several days;
and apply it to the navel as a poultice, and tie it on tightly, and don't untie it for several days; and then untie it, and do another one, until the swelling is gone;
or you can strain it onto a well-made piece of linen; because the property of linen is that it removes all swellings from the limbs;
and if the swelling has turned into hardness like stone, and it needs to be removed, then cut it away, and scrape off the excess; or have it removed by a barber, until it is healed.
of the limb which is weakened after the healing
When the fracture of the bone is restored and remains afterwards in the weak and delicate members, this happens for many reasons: one reason is that it was bound too tightly and not as it should have been; or because there were too many ligatures, and the member could not receive nourishment; or because of too much bandaging; or because of excessive movement, and not at the right time; or because there is little blood in his body, and it is weak.
And the treatment is that you should feed the patient and make the body soft, so that the blood is multiplied within him; and give him a bath, and bring him joy and leisure;
then apply pitch to the limb so that it draws out the great putrefaction, and often wash with cold water until the putrefaction is gone from the limb; and returns to its natural shape.
until the limb is straightened after recovery When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bones are open, and the form of the limb is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural function:
if you do not believe the fools who say that one must break the limb completely anew, and many fools have done this in our land;
and these practices are blamed, and great harm often comes from them, and sometimes death;
yet if the dislocations and injuries are fresh, then they should be washed with hot water, or herbs that soften should be boiled, such as leaves of marshmallow, and roots, and melilot, and similar things;
and apply a soothing ointment, such as well-prepared diaquillon, and take the mustard plant's mucilage and confit it with goose fat or sesame oil, and apply it on top.
or you can take fatty figs and crush them with colon's hay, and similar medicines that soften quickly.
And sometimes the joint is dislocated by constantly rubbing with moist hands. And movement must be applied to the limb every hour.
And if the tortuousness is withered and hardened like stone, and needs to be removed with iron, then it should be cut carefully and gently up to the bone. and apply a poultice and bandage in the treatment.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs in someone, one should immediately bring it back into alignment without delay.
For if one delays, the area will swell, and perhaps it will be reset in place with pain.
Therefore, it is not good to move it when it is swollen: many times it brings on spasms and other pains;
nevertheless, when this happens, let the patient bleed, then leave him until the abscess is drained.
then warm the limb with hot water and oil, then reset it gently, and dress each wound as it comes to the surface.
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocation from the head to the feet.
There are two ways that dislocations can occur: either the jaw is dislocated and both mandibles are affected, or just one mandible is affected. or they are slightly displaced from their joints and softened a little. or they are completely displaced and hang down towards the feet, and saliva drips from their mouth which they cannot hold closed, nor can they close their lips around their tongue to speak.
When the dislocation is small, it returns by itself in various ways.
And if the dislocation is complete and finished, then you must reset it quickly and not delay.
And in such a way that the assistant grabs the head of the patient and pushes his fingers of one hand into the root of the mandible's joint within the mouth if it is a two-part dislocation. and the other two fingers of the hand be forced, to make them even;
and instruct the patient to soften his jaws, and move them from all sides. And he holds the mirror steady, until it returns to its place.
And if they are stuck together, especially if both jaws are stuck, then treat them with hot water and oil, until you can move them slightly;
do not stop trying to reset it, as we have said.
And when they are reset evenly, and the mouth of the patient is closed well without softening, then place wet pieces of cloth in rosin ointment made from rose oil and wax, and then bind it lightly with soft bands;
and let the patient sleep on his back, and let his head be between two pillows, so that he does not move it to the right or left, nor try to speak, but take light food, until the pains are relieved, and his jaws are bound;
and then eat what he wants lightly, and do not worry about opening his mouth to eat and drink, as long as the jaw is well-bound and healed.
And if the two mandibles cannot be put back into place within an hour, and are not converted to their place, then fever and usual sodden come, and sometimes stomach problems, and sometimes vomiting of clear fluid.
And when you see this, then you know that it is a sign of death. and many times, the person dies within seven days.
The shoulder joint cannot be dislocated from within the chest or armpit; it is sometimes dislocated by force, and one feels it strongly.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms; and then press the area firmly with your palm, and it will return to its place;
then put on the ointment and bandage, and tie it tightly;
and the jaw that is towards the ear cannot be dislocated; if not, and if it dislocates even once, then reset it to its place, as we have said;
then put on the ointment and bandage, and tie it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed;
and so it is with the head of the shoulder when it is dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
You should know that the shoulder can be dislocated in three ways:
one is when it dislocates at the part of the acromion process below; and the second is at the part of the scapula; and sometimes it dislocates at the part above, and that doesn't happen often.
It doesn't dislocate behind from the shoulder, and not within from the nerves;and it never dislocates in front or to the sides.
And sometimes it dislocates below towards the acromion process, especially in those who have little flesh, because in them it is very easy to dislocate.and it often dislocates to the side of the acromion process, but not directly behind it.
In those who have plenty of flesh, it only dislocates to the sides and returns to the sides.It never goes directly behind or directly in front.
And by chance it happens to some men that they get a concussion or fracture, and the shoulder swells from a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of that.
You must therefore test it until you are certain of it; and then begin the treatment.
And you will know that there is a dislocation when it is lower towards the armpit, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a manifest difference between them; and you will find in the head of the shoulder a pit, and under the armpit at the top of the shoulder, as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move in any way;
and also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you will find it clearly at the top;
and this type of dislocation can only be reset when it is new, or if the child is sick.
And the way to do it is for the assistant to lift the hand of the patient up, then place your fingers under the socket, and forcefully lift the joint up into place. and the assistant lifts the hand and extends it upward, then brings it back down; it will quickly come back into place.
And if it does not come back as we have said after several days, then the patient should be bathed in hot water; and the assistant should apply softening and soothing poultices, such as a decoction of alder and fenugreek and milfoil in water, and let it be applied;
then the patient should be laid on his back, and a layer of equally soft but not too soft or too hard woolen cloth placed under the socket, then the assistant places their heel on the cloth and lifts the head of the shoulder gently but firmly, and pulls the hand of the patient;
and another minister dyes the head of the patient so that it does not move downward; this shoulder will return immediately, and if you see that it is reset according to this manner:
and you should have a man present who is larger than the patient; and stand straight towards the shoulder, and press the shoulder underneath the armpit of the patient, and lift the armpit upwards so that the patient hangs in the air; and another minister pulls the hand of the patient downward towards the belly. If the dislocation is too slight, one can weigh it down with something heavy, and it will return immediately.
And it is reset in another manner:
and one should stick a long thin stick into the ground so that its top is as high as the shoulder, and not too thick or too thin; then it should be placed underneath the patient, but with a soft cloth over it, and the patient should be upright against the stick;
then extend his hand downward on the other side, and the joint will return to its place gradually.
and if it does not want to return despite all that we have said, then do this treatment: take a log of wood two feet in length and four fingers in width, which has been split on one side so that it can be inserted deeply under the shoulder, according to this shape:
then bind it with cloth below so that the log does not hurt the patient, then place it under the shoulder of the patient;
and extend his arm above the log, and bind the shoulder to the log, and the arm to the head of the hand, then place the arm on a wooden block two fingers in width, and let the hand hang down, and let the body dangle on the other side; the joint will heal now.
And when it is in place, however it may be, you should place under the joint a round pillow of wool, then apply the plaster prepared from flour with incense and egg white over the entire shoulder and around it; then tighten it under the joint gradually, and tie the string over the plaster, and embrace the hand to his neck, and let the hand remain thus.
And one must eat little, until the member is healed, for it will heal faster that way;
and then eat more after a few days, and move it; and if it is stiff and not柔軟, then it is healed.
And if the joint has moved out of place due to moisture or any other cause, you should administer cautery at three places, as described in the chapter on cautery.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot lift his arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Dislocations which are towards the foot, and the breasts, or behind, are made by pushing, and stretching with hands, and one administers another remedy;
and treat until it is healed.
And if after healing the limb becomes swollen and tender to the touch, and with movement, then the patient should use the bath many times until the swelling goes down and the limb returns to its original state.
on the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the joint of the neck is dislocated by the nails, and by the nails it returns.
and it is dislocated throughout, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not reduced, for one can see and feel it; and dislocate according to each figure. And when you join the sick neck with the healthy one, then you can see it clearly. Because the joint is crooked and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder at all.
And you should reset it as soon as the abscess forms, for if an abscess forms, then it will be harmful to reset it;
and indeed it cannot be reset at all, especially when it is at the back; it is worse than other dislocations and is more painful, and often death ensues.
And the restoration, when it can be reset, is to extend your left hand with your right hand; and the arms should be spread out, and the hands held according to the nape of the neck, from behind and underneath, and the joint pressed at its root, or the root of the palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is at the front, it will return when he bends his hand to his hand, and he stretches from the root of the palm the joint which is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, then apply strong extension;
and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and are stretched by two ministers, so that it does not move during extension;
then turn the arm from each side, after you have wrapped a long, wide cloth around it;
and when the minister has joined the joint of his hand, he should smear some oil to loosen the joint, then tightly bind the joint so that it heals;
and when it is in place, put on a dry poultice with egg white, and tightly bind it, and keep the arm still at the neck of the patient for some days, then loosen it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, loosen the binding and leave it;
and if you see that the joint is not fitting well, then restart the poultice and the binding, and leave it in this way for some days until it is firmly in place; then loosen it.
And if there is great pain after the joint is reset and it moves, then bathe and rub it well, and press until the pain subsides. Or you can put a fat sheep's knuckle on the joint, then leave it for a day and night, then remove it and let him enter the bath; and when he sweats, gently rub the joint, then put the knuckle back on, then enter the bath again; and so do this twice or thrice until he is healed;
and if you see that you put warm moist cow's dung with butter on it and press it onto the joint;
it will return to its natural state.
dislocations of the hand
The joints of the hand heal more easily and quickly than other joints. Nevertheless, it must be reset to its place gently, at the same time as when it was dislocated, otherwise the joint will become swollen or a hot abscess will form.
And for the dislocation, if you put the patient's hand on a table, and extend the minister's hand, and look at it to make it even, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and bends it until it comes back.
However, you should check if it is in the right place; then put the patient's back of his hand on a table, extending and bending it. If the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then the patient should lie on his back with his hand flat on a table, and the surgeon should place his hand over the appearance of the joint.
If it comes back now, that's good. If not, then strain with soothing poultices, and let it be without re-encombing.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it in place after several days, then the joint remains crooked;
and it does not harm the patient unless that as long as his hand is swollen, and he cannot strain anything at all; then you will know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries;
if there is nothing else to do except to constrict by fire next to the wound, and by chance nothing else works.
And when the hand is in place, then apply the plaster that we have mentioned, then hold it and leave it for .v. days, then loosen it and leave it like that.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is any swelling, then moisten it with warm water, and rub it until it heals.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Sometimes it dislocates the knuckles of the hand on either side, sometimes on the back of the palm or the palm;
then you must pull on the fingers, and put back in place with your thumbs as far as it will go, then hold the head of the finger, and push towards the part that is dislocated;
and leave for two days, and then reset it straight that day;
and bandage it as we have said, and loosen it during the day, and move it, and relive it at night;
and do this often until it is healed, and do the same if it dislocates in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed;
and do the same when it is dislocated from another direction.
from the dislocation of the sciatic nerve from the back
When the sciatic nerve in the back or neck is dislocated, there is no cure, for death hastens the ailment.
And the signs are that the bowels move without voluntary effort, and he cannot hold it in, and many times a limb is relaxed, or both thighs or two arms or one.
And often the skin splits in four parts;
that which splits at the back is called "dislocation":
the treatment, if the dislocation occurs in children, is to: if there is no healing, then it will never heal.
And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient methods of treatment are given in great detail, but they do not always bring great benefit;
but I have abbreviated them according to my understanding and created instruments in diverse ways.
I say that there is no healing or health in the dislocation that comes from the toe facing forward;
and also those who come straight to both sides, and no one can cure except for those who properly come from the back, as I said;
and it is that the patient be stretched out on his face in one place equally, and has a restraint underneath him, so that he does not bend;
then insert the brand into the ground at the head, and another under the feet, and tie a string under the armpits of the patient, and another at the hips, and knees, and ankles;
and two assistants handle the strings, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the brands;
and they are well secured, the brand as we have said, and the healer places his palms on the spine, until it is straightened out.
And if it does not return by this treatment, take a table three yards long, and bend it under the wall, and the patient is on his side, and place the head of the table under the wall, then put the middle of the table on the spine; and put his feet on the other end of the table, and press hard until it goes back into place.
and if you see that it turns towards the hand. And you should put two fires on the head of the sick person's arm, and two more on their feet, with a palm-width of space in between each fire, both above and below.
And in each fire there should be a hole where the joint turns, and the fires should be firmly planted in the ground so that they don't move.
And between each pair of fires there should be a turning fire, above which the joint turns, and there should be two small fires on top of the turning fire, about a palm-width long, to turn the joint.
Then tie the string that is between the fires to the joint at the head, and the other string to the joint at the foot, and each of the assistants turns their joint all along the string, and the master puts the spine in evenly as we have said.
And when it is even, then apply a desiccant poultice with an egg-yolk, and then the towels, and then the carpet of a tablet three inches long, which purples the area of the hernia and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a bandage, as we have said, and use the subtle remedy for fainting until he is healed.
and if nothing comes of it in the end, then soft and soothing remedies must be administered with the carpet we mentioned earlier. sometimes a lump appears at the back of the spine in the lumbar region, and people think it is a dislocation. and it is the bone that has appeared, so one should not be presumptuous about it: for it might bring death.
Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder do not become dislocated except through dislocation alone, nor do they become so like other joints.
and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, and forward and backward;
and more within chalks, and slightly dislocated in front and behind.
And the knowledge of its dislocation within is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the diseased knee appears larger than the healthy one, and the diseased person cannot bend their knee to the fire. and is the place that is swollen with hot abscess due to the head of the thigh coming there.
And the sign of him to whom it comes from disuse, is that these accidents are contrary to those before.
And the signs of those who have it in front are that they are well-built according to their height; Nevertheless, they cannot bend their knee without pain, and if one tries to make them walk, they cannot, and they retain their urine, and the anus swells, and when they go to the toilet, they pass it over the heel.And if the disease is in the back:
And the signs of him who has it behind, are that he cannot bend or double his knee, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the veins are softened, and the head of the thigh is at the place below the ribs.
The understanding of this kind of dislocation is that you examine whether the dislocation is old and it persists according to its nature, then there is no treatment for it. and he must not have any presumptuousness.
And for those with a fresh dislocation, there are four types of dislocations; you should quickly turn the joint, stretch it inwards and outwards, and move it to the right and left. It may return on its own without needing any other treatment.
And if it does not return in this way, you must use a strong remedy and stretch the leg firmly with two hands, or with one hand tied to the knee; and someone else stretches his hand above in such a way that he pushes his hands under his armpits, then pulls with a strong cord on his thigh; and someone else pulls on the head with a cord;
and they stretch him upwards and downwards all at once until the patient is lifted off the ground once, and then he hangs limp.
This method of stretching is common to all four appearances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
If not, then you must take care of its appearance.
When the dislocation is in the hip, you must lead the patient up his healthy side, then place the ligature at the root of the thigh, and the place below the groin, then let the ligature ascend towards the groin, and towards the armpit.
Then have another assistant grab his arms, and embrace the large part of the ill thigh, and stretch it forcefully in a proper manner. And if it doesn't return to its place immediately;
and this kind of dislocation is easier than others.Et s’il ne retourne, tu peesche l’esgarnir et le raser: car
And if you cannot tie it in the manner we have described, then you must bind the sick man's two feet together with a strong silk thread below the two heels, and above the two knees, with the sick leg stretched out two fingers more than the other;
then let him be hung from the top of a pole, and let him be above the ground by two arms' length;
then instruct the minister to embrace the head of the thigh, and let another minister hanging with the patient embrace the thigh firmly, for the joint will return quickly.
And when the dislocation is healed, then let the patient lie down as we have said in that which has gout, and tightly bind the leg of the affected limb, and also above it on the thigh;
then put two firebrands, one at the head and another at the foot, then insert the firebrand between the thighs of the patient in the groin; and have moist bandages placed around him so that he does not blink, then each minister should stretch out towards him, and the patient should hold the area of the dislocation with his hand.
If it returns, that is good.
If not, put him on the table and press him as we have said in the gilet [a garment with straps that could be used to restrain a patient], and lay the patient on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is forward, then it is necessary to stretch the affected leg gently, and according to what I have said; and place his weight on the sore joint, then press with the other hand, and stretch it down towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is outward, then the affected person should not stretch downward or lift himself up from the ground, but he should be as if his hip were dislocated outward, just as we have said about lying on one's side on both hips; and lie on his face, and the limb be stretched as we have said before, and one should press upon the joint while he is on the table; and it will be easily done when the affected person extends his legs, and they will become even; then adjust the thighs, and apply the ointment, and bind it with a bandage so that the hip does not move; and rest for three or four days, then loosen it, and apply the ointment.
And if you see that they are even, then strain them as before, and leave them for three days;
then loosen it, and let it walk comfortably until the limb is healed.
dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inside and outside, and behind;
and it does not dislocate in front.
And the sign is that you command the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not straighten at the thigh, then you know it is dislocated;
and the restoration of all of them is that you make the patient sit upright and extend his leg if he can, and put your back on his face, and put his foot on your feet;
then take his knee in your palms, and pull it between your fingers, then bend both sides of the knee smoothly. and another assistant stretches his foot so that the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he straightens his leg slightly;
and apply the plaster, and straighten the leg at the thigh, and bind them together tightly for three or four days, then loosen it.
and do not make the patient move until the limb is healed.
And if the member is not at all, then administer very strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
of dislocation of the heel
Heels are sometimes crushed, and sometimes fully dislocated, both internally and externally.
And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and feels tender in the affected part;
the range of motion should be slight, and one should gently straighten it with their hands when it is dislocated.Et li cheville qui est desaluée, si convient mettre sur une poutre, ou un trescot, et le pied de la cuisse au bas pendent;
And when it is fully healed, you should make the patient stand upright, and have one assistant hold him firmly by the leg, above the ankle;Et les II autres ministre par la cuisse, desus li genous; si doit il tenir droit et fort I jors entiers, quant il ne se traint mie soulement;
then draw up your foot to your right hand, then to your left hand twice, then stretch it upwards and pull the foot up firmly;
and do this twice as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot;
if it works, that's good;
if not, then start the operation again, for it will work;
and if it still doesn't work, then have the patient lie on his back on the ground, and push the passel firmly into the ground between his thighs, and wind cloth around him, so that he does not move the sick person;
then the ministers hold his thigh, and another minister stretches the foot to his hands or to his knees, so that he binds it onto the neck of the foot; then each minister stretches equally, and the passels are then between the sick person's thighs to restrain him when he is stretched;
then have the patient hold the dislocation steady with his hands, and another assistant hold the healthy leg from below, and the dislocation will return to its place gradually.
And when it is in place, then apply the plaster and padding on top, and stretch it firmly, and bind the foot to the leg, and be careful of the nerves that are on the ankle at the back, that the ligatures are not too tight.
Then leave it for two or three days, and if the bandages loosen, then tighten them;
then release it on the third or fourth day, and the patient should walk slowly for four days; and if he goes before that time, it is not safe that he will not relapse.
And if a deep abscess occurs, you must calm it down as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
you must When the arms are dislocated, they should be stretched gently without force, and this is a minor matter.
And if the dislocation is in the back of the foot, then you should have the patient sit upright on a flat surface or a table, and put your foot on what is visible from the joints, then press your foot firmly, until it returns to place;
and when it is even, and there is no opening, then place a board with two legs under the sole of the foot, then stretch it forcefully, and leave it for three days, then release it. and let him rest until he is healed.
of wounds and dislocations together
When there is an injury with the dislocation and one wishes to restore it, many times the patient dies.
if you are not confident in the treatment, unless you are wise in the craft and have practiced it for a long time, and if you are not patient and merciful and slow to anger;
and use at the beginning of things soothing hot poultices, and let the patient remain in God's hand if you see no hope of healing; and when you see hope, then reset the member to its place, so that the hot poultices may work.
and when the limb is exposed, then administer hot poultices to soothe the abscess and treat the wound, as appropriate, with drying ointments;
and if there is a fracture with the dislocation, and small bones are displaced, then set the bones and follow the instructions given in simple diseases;
and beware of going down the path of fear, according to what I have said, for it will bring you closer to your Creator, and for the sake of your soul and your body.
