O you, very dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine together with its fulfillment, and I have made an end through its explanations and by its declarations. And in a vision it came to me that I would complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of the hands, namely 'surgery'.
And because the work of the hands is neglected in our region and is unfamiliar to all, it has been lost, and nothing remains of the ancient knowledge except for small descriptions in books that have been handled by hand.Et quanque li fuers ne puet estre prescheve par les livres ne par les uers, et n’est riens quere demore, si convient que le corps soit traittre en la cirurgie, et li fuers estorbes par les mains, s’il poait estre. And from this has come error and vanity, closed intentions, and alienated knowledge.
Now it seems to me that I want to enliven it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the instruments of cautery, and other tools of the work with the adjustment of their declaration and preparation as it is necessary.
And because no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected. And one who undertakes this must surpass in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, as far as he knows the judgment of members, and forms and conjunctions and separations of veins, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and sinews and the number of teeth, and the movement and of their veins both moving and resting, and from where they originate.
And for this reason Hypocras says that the name with the name is much, and with the work is little; and especially in the art of surgery.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that anyone who is not familiar with the things mentioned above, be careful that he does not make a mistake and harm people;
so that I have many times encountered several of those who intervene in this science and abandon it without knowledge or experience.Et qui conisse la science, il doit la garder et la conserver;
For I saw a foolish man who cupped an abscess of scrofula on a woman's neck, and cupped the arteries in her neck; so much blood issued forth that the woman died between his hands.
And I saw another man who treated a stone in a man's groin; the stone was large; he carried away with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I saw another who lanced a vein in the breast of a woman and gave her all the blood that was in the vein, so that the woman died then. And I had already been called to treat her, and I saw the nature of the disease and the size of the stone, and if they cut it out she would have died then.
And I saw another fool who treated the Duke of our land, who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound;
and the foolish doctor bound the break above the wound with strong ligatures, and did not leave any wadding at the wound, and left it like that;
and he commanded that he must not remove it;
and it remained thus, the leg swollen and the foot, until it came to ruin.And I saw another fool who treated an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and cupped the arteries in her neck;
I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come and loosen his leg; and when I had loosened it, he was at ease and felt no pain.
However, the corruption in the limb was already confirmed, and I could not heal it;
and the corruption did not cease from going through the limb until the member was completely destroyed.
And I saw another doctor who lanced an abscess that had become infected due to the negligence of his lord.
Because a ulcer, when it is pure of melancholy humor, one should not touch it with iron unless it is in such a place that one can completely remove all that is corrupted.
And so, dear son, you should know that the work of medicine is divided into two parts: that is, there is danger in many conditions;
and I will show in each chapter of this book where there is doubt and fear.
And so it is necessary that you be careful, so that foolish people do not speak badly about you.Car maintes fois il arrive que leu li corps est en tel cas qui n’est pas a leur pouvoir de le guérir, si que il
If you take up your arms in battle, and embark on your campaigns lightly and resolutely, and follow the best course so that by the grace of God you attain victory and are praised;
and leave behind the terrible diseases of the body;
and lay aside your arms so that you may be delivered from what makes you hesitate, and have faith in yourselves so that you may pass from this world to the next with glory.
Galen says in one of his warnings: Do not neglect a serious illness, lest you be called a foolish doctor."Si l’om medecine ne peut la guérir, querrez la divine provence qui nule chose ne laisse de ce
I have arranged this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cauteries and medical cauteries, and it is an ordered chapter from the head to the feet.
It includes the forms of instruments, and the application of cauteries, and all that is necessary for the procedure.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cupping, and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things.
And this chapter includes instructions and the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about resetting dislocations and twists, and similar things.
And it includes instructions for the head down to the feet, and the forms of instruments.
Thus, as we remember the work, it is fitting that I describe the nature of aid and the harm of each complexion.
I say that the quality of aid, and the cause of harm, are the most lengthy subjects and subtle sciences, and the secret remedies;
And about this, many wise men have spoken and agreed upon it;
And I am content with their words, for I desire brevity.
I say that cautery aids universally in all conditions, provided there is matter present, except in two conditions; that is to say, hot condition without matter, and dry condition without matter.Car si li cauteres trove la matere, li cauteres li destroeit li matere et li mal, por ce ke
In a complex hot and dry nature together with matter, some people have devised and said that cautery is of great help. and others say the contrary: that cautery does not benefit illness that comes from heat and dryness. Because the nature of fire is hot, it should not be treated with heat or dryness in a hot disease; and in a cold and moist nature, cautery is an aid.
and those who say the contrary argue that cautery helps greatly with hot and dry diseases that originate in the bodies of men. Because when you compare the human body and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find the body is cold.
And I agree with this opinion. For I have found this to be true through experience.
And nevertheless, one should not undertake it if he has not experienced it, and who knows through long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of men's complexions, and their dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and their outcomes and the season.
We have no fear of other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the physicians agreed and concurred about the use of cauteries.
And know, my son, that a cautery combines fire with the secrets of healing, and is of greater benefit than a burning cautery.
Because fire is simple, and does not harm except the member which is burned, and does no harm to any other part if properly applied.
Burning medicines pass from one limb to another by moving away, and bring great sickness to the limbs through poor healing. and sometimes they kill the patient.
Fire, because of its height and the goodness of its substance, does not do this if there is no excess.
And I have discovered this through experimentation and through the length of service and study that I have devoted to the craft; and I have considered the truth of things;
and because of this I will excuse myself from the length of my speech, for I do not wish to take away the secret that is reserved for fire, and the quality of its work, describing how it cures the illnesses of the body, as the philosopher explains in his demonstration. Now receive this into your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed on which days cauteries should be performed, and chose a suitable time.
And I say that cautery is suitable at all times because the harmful humors are drawn out by the help of cautery; and likewise if the cautery is for painful and urgent conditions that cannot wait until a more serious evil afflicts the limb.
And never think, dear son, as fools do; for the disease that is healed by cautery does not return; and thus they hold it:
and thus they hold it: but it is not as they believe, for cauteries are not what they think, since cautery is a medicine that moves the complexions, dries up the humors that cause pain, and is superior to other medicines due to its swiftness, its virtue, and its lordly power.
And it is possible that the disease may sometimes come according to the complexions of the patient, the site of the disease, and its power;
and the excesses are gathered in him through the digestion of foods and similar things, unless cautery is administered to dry up the excess moisture in the place where there is little superfluity and moisture, as with tooth cauteries for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but this rarely happens.
And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine, and that is because:
they believe that cauterization should only be used after other medical treatments have failed, but their understanding is flawed. Cauterization is the last resort of medicine because when we have tried various treatment methods for a disease and they don't work, then we turn to cauterization, and it does work.
Therefore, it is clear that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish people.
The ancient scholars said that cauterization with a gold instrument is gentler than with iron, and they said so because of the quality of gold and the highness of its substance.
They also said that the heat of the cautery does not cause blisters, but this is not true, as I have experimented and found it to be true in some people:
and cauterization with gold is better than with iron, just as they said. And yet when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools down immediately;
and if it is heated too much; if they are made in the fire; and so there is enough difficulty.
Now I have arranged this chapter from the head to the feet so that the way is easier to find.
This cautery is useful for moisture and coldness on the head, and there are two reasons for it being used in a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and for many diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged with a cleansing, purgative medicine for 3 or 4 days, depending on what the strength, age, and condition of the patient can bear; and then make the head of the cautery.
And then have him sit cross-legged between your hands and place his hands on top of his knees;
afterwards, place the palm of your hand between his two eyes; and let it come to your two middle fingers, and then bleed from there and heat the cautery which is called "olive", of which this is the form: And place it over the spot marked with ink, and while lowering and drawing your hand back and forth, gently twist it; then slowly raise your hand, and return to the spot if you see a little hole in the bone; and if you don't see it, repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you;
afterwards, take a bit of salt and place it in soft cotton, put it over the spot, and leave it for three days;
afterwards, put dampened cotton on top; and let it stay until the blister is gone; afterwards, treat the wound with the ointment called 'tetrafarmaçon' until it is healed.
And the elders say that the more a wound stays open, the more it drains; and for this reason, movement helps.
And some say that one must leave the cautery in place until part of the bone is burnt, and then have the burnt portion of bone removed and the wound healed.
And the others say that one must let the cautery burn so high, and press so hard that they lower the bone as widely as a woman's thimble, so that the humors can flow out.
and one must leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards, one must clean and sutured it.
And these two methods of cauterization do not seem good to me in any way, except in some people where there is fear;
and I think that I should let it be;
because the head is weakened by continued dissolutions of nature, as we testify in other members;
and likewise, when the shoulder of the sick person is weakened by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is milder for me, and with this I work together for salvation.
When chronic headache comes and lasts a long time, the patient should use herbs and pills called "cochie", and purgatives for the head, and oils and plasters. And if they perform the cautery we mentioned before and it doesn't work, Take care that the head of the patient is not of a cold nature, and is not too cold; then cauterize him under that cautery a little bit as we said above. Et s’il ne wert pas amendoin, et se li cauteres par les oiles qui qu’il ait, et And if it is not better and the cauteries with the oils he has do not help, then cauterize each horn of the head to the bone, as we said before, and cauterize in the place called "vessel". et s’il ne wert pas amendoin, si fai li cautere sus l’esgouttoir dou chief, qui est apelez «vasselz», si com nous avons dit desus. and are used to treat wounds. and lighten your hand so that you do not touch the bone: the patient feels much more pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere;
and the cauteries for horns should be more delicate than those used to cauterize the middle of the head, and this is how it is done:
of the cautery of the head When sudden pain arises in the head and the disease extends to the eye, and the shoulder is purged with cleansing medicines, and all other remedies I have described in the section on diseases have been tried without success: then you must perform cauterization in two ways, that is, with hot iron and with fire.
For the cauterization with hot iron, take a small piece of alder wood, remove the bark and apply it to the shoulder in such a way that you can place the wood under the skin;
and when it is bound, tie it well and leave it thus for twelve hours; then untie it and apply a poultice of garlic, leaving the wound like that for two or three days; then put on linen soaked in butter until pus comes out.
After the wound has healed, treat it with ointment until it is completely healed;
and if you see any of the burning medicines I have written about in the twelfth treatment of burning medicines.
The iron cautery is done in this way. Heat the cautery until it is hot enough to use.
And it is called 'close' because the head is formed in the shape of a lid or has a small protuberance, and in the middle there is a small appearance;
and place it on the painful area, and hold your hand and gently turn the fire a little bit so that half of the thickness of the skin is burned;
and hold your hand over the artery until it stops pulsating and flows with an abundance of blood.
After this, put cotton in the wound and apply a poultice for three days; then wet cotton with butter, and then dress the wound with ointment until it heals;
and if you wish to cauterize this wound with the instrument called a 'knife', do so at the very tip, and be careful not to touch the artery in this wound which is not old.
of a hemorrhoid
When you are dressing a wound as we have described above in the sections on diseases, and it is not helped, and you see that neither of the cauteries mentioned earlier with medicine or with fire help, then you must heat the instrument called a  'knife' until it turns white;
and sign the wound with one line of about half a finger's length, and move your hand once, and cut deep enough that you do not hit the artery and reach the bone;
and beware of the mandible that mute when one chews, and the nerve should not be affected so that it mutes and so that no spasm comes to the patient, and beware of bleeding from the artery when it is cut, for cutting causes great fear especially in those who are unfamiliar with it and who are not experienced and practiced. and leave the work halfway through;
but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when an artery is cut, and I will show you in this book where it opens.
And if you see that this cautery is not sufficient for the disease and the patient suffers, cauterize him again on the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals.
and if you see, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter on extracting an artery, using the cautery with two knives; and this cautery is better and more helpful.
of the pain in the ears from coldness
When there is pain in the ear from cold, and one has applied dissolving medicines and other remedies that we have mentioned in the previous chapter, and the pain does not go away, then heat this cautery, which is called 'the point', whose composition is as follows:
After pointing to all around the affected ear, or both ears if the pain is in both, move slightly above the root of the ear after you have marked the spot. and make 6 points around each ear;
then clean the area until it is healed.
of mouth torture
Wounds that should be cauterized are only those that cause bleeding, as we have said in the division of diseases;
and do not cauterize those that appear to come from dryness and nerve spasm.
When you treat this type of wound that causes bleeding from fluids and discharges from the head, and gargling does not help, then you must cauterize the patient with 3 cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and the other a little way from the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips;
and apply the cautery to the part that appears healthy, and cauterize the top of the ear above a little below the horn of the head, and another on the temple as long as a finger; and leave the cautery on until half of the heart is burned;
and this is the form of the cautery:
And the appearance of the scalpel that we have placed earlier, but it is a little more subtle and the knife should be a little thicker;
After curing the site as I have said before, until it is healed.Et li chief de l’oreille metes un pic en la partie qui est entre les II levres et li nez;
If the apoplexy is old and you cure it as we have said, but it does not help, and the patient has a fever, then do three cauterizations:l’un en la racine dou col, et l’autre sus la nuque entre le col et la teste;et li tier entre les II mamelles; II on the two horns of the head, and I in the middle of the head, and I in the place called "vessels", as we have said before, and the other cautery on the mouth of the stomach;
and let it be treated as we have said before.
of litharge
For this illness, one must give the patient large herbs and purging pills to cleanse the brain;
after washing the head of the patient thoroughly, and put on the ointment of mustard which is written in the treatise on ointments;
and this is how the cautery is done: if you do as I have said.
If he is healed like this, it is good; and if he is not healed, then make three cauteries in the middle of the head going down to the neck, and space between each cautery two fingers wide;
and treat it like the others, and if you see it fitting, and the patient is enduring, then do the cautery in the middle. and if necessary, do the others on the two horns, and treat it until it heals.
and let the cautery be what is called "olive", as I have said before.
The head should be cleansed of hair and of what we have said before,
after washing the head of the patient, then do the cautery in the middle of the head and on each horn, and behind and three times on the spine of the neck;
and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is enduring, and the disease is strong, then do four cauteries on the spine of the back; and let it be until the most of the heat has left, then lift your hand; after the wound has healed, and then use the cautery called "olive oil" which we have mentioned earlier.
of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use cautery except for those who are phlegmatic; it is necessary first to cleanse the brain of hair and other remedies that we have discussed in the division when the patient is great and suffering from taking medicine.
And if it is a child who cannot endure it, make a gargle and a mouthwash that purifies the brain often with good foods;
after the king has eaten, and then use the cautery as we have said before, and the cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is external and suffering, make a cautery as I have said for paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cautery be olive oil according to the manner that I have described.
If the disease is in a child, make him  .i. delicate cautery according to this manner:
When through the cause of melancholy there are corrupt humours and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with part cauteries as we said for the one who has paralysis.
And if through the cause of melancholy the superfluities are declining towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him something to drink that purifies the brain, according to what has been described before in the division.
After the king has eaten; Then make a well-made linen bandage, like a circle, and put it around his head;
and let the patient cross his legs, and keep them well held from all sides;
then bring forward the linen, and cut off the hair of an old bearded goat; and heat it gently over the fire so that the patient can withstand the heat when he drinks from the bottle; then empty the bladder within through the neck, and let it cool;
and do this to the patient once every week with good management until he is healed.
Or, if you want to cauterize it all over, make several small points on the end of the cautery tool.
This cautery moistens the brain greatly;
and then put on cotton wet with goat's milk and wax.
of their eyes When awesomeness first comes to the eyes due to the signs I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient drink that cleanses the head, and guard it from all moisture, and make them sweat in a bath several times while fasting.
Then he instructs the patient to lower his head, and he applies the cautery on his head, and performs 2 cauteries on the 2 temples if the decline of the eye is in both, or just one if it's only in one;
and cover all the veins and arteries below the heart with the cautery, and let the cautery be as long as the width of the temple;
and beware of bleeding, and if you see too much blood issue, then stop it with some clay powder as you have.
And I will teach you in the extraction of the arteries and the incision cautery how you should stop it;
and sometimes they make cauterization or incision under the two bones behind.
and it is seen that these are cold phlegmatic excesses, then you must do the cautery I mentioned earlier in the descending awl into the eyes: I cauterize inside the head, and 2 cauteries on the 2 temples, and 2 cauteries under the 2 bones; and if there is more need, then cauterize the eye socket above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
When you have treated him according to what we have said in the section, and he does not improve, then give the patient three nights of bleeding; afterwards bleed the head, and cauterize it with a cautery of olive oil; and make two cauteries with a cautery called "clavis" above the two eye sockets, a little below the hairline;
and be careful of the artery that you do not pierce it.
And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
When the membrane of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with the tool called "olive". It should be shaped in the following way:
And if you see fit, make two cauteries above the eye sockets as long as the eyebrows are;
and do not remove your hand until the third part of the paper is burnt, according to the manner I have described.
the hair that pokes the eye At times the hair of the eyelids turns white, pricking the eye, and cauterization is performed in two ways: that is, with fire or with burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne,
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein;and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die. When they grow and are even, then put the patient in water; after that, draw on paper the shape of an eyeball, as well as the beginning of the sign from among the hairs;Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i
then I wet cotton with egg white and fennel seed paste on the eye, then heat the cautery so that it is the right shape:
After that, cauterize little by little over the shape you have marked, a little bit at a time, until the ulcer is burned in that place;
and the sign of health is when you see the papery skin retracted, and the hairs standing up at the edge of the eye;
then take your hand away, and leave it like that for three days; then wet cotton with butter to cool the burn. After that, treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if afterwards the hairs come back, and the papery skin is soft again, then start the cautery process over from the beginning, just as you did before.
and if the hairs are broken off, cauterize it so that the paper lifts to its natural level, and is even, and does not prick the eye.
The burning cautery of medicine is what you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf;
then take French soap and quicklime, of each one part, and grind them well together; and make it into a paste quickly so that it does not cool, then spread it over the parchment in the shape of the myrtle leaf, and place the hairs on top; and if the disease is only in one eye, then operate on that one, and if it is in both, then operate on both; and place under the eye moistened cotton in egg white;
and the head of the sick person is in great pain and puts his hand on the medicine, and presses it and moves it every time the patient feels biting from the medicine, because he feels the biting as much as fire.
When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your hand. And when the biting is passed, raise the area, and look if you see the paper raised as it was raised by the constraint of fire or by incision; and if so, it is good.
If not, then apply more medicine to the area where the medicine did not take effect, until your work is even and the eyes are in their proper place;
Then put on wet cotton dipped in butter until the wound heals, after cleaning the area of the ointment which is called 'diaphenes' and others, until it is healed.
And if you need to take care of your work very carefully so that it does not leak into the eyes.
And if the paper becomes soft afterward, and the hair pricks in the eye, then restart the medicine on that area which has been softened by the paper properly, just as you did before. after the cure until it is healed;
and this is the shape of the blister:
And know that men's eyes are diverse in size and smallness, and according to that are your constraints;
and the true way is not known to him whose study this art is.
on the treatment of fistula with cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have described in the sections on diseases, and your treatments are not effective, then you should use cautery according to the following method:
Instruct the patient to put his head in your lap; and let the surgeon hold his head between his hands in such a way that he does not move or drop his head;
afterwards, put wet cotton in egg white or in parsley juice on the eye;
then heat the cautery which is made thus:
is shaved at the top so that it is shaped like a quill, along with which the cautery is held;
if you see it pointed from one end to the other, and if you see it as flat as a tent;
but nonetheless, the one that is shaved is best for your work.
Afterwards, press the fistula if it is open, and treat the pus, and dry it; and if it is closed, open it and treat the bowels;
afterwards, put on the hot cautery, and hold your hand at the cautery near the corner of the eye, so that your hand does not make a mistake; and place the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of cautery up to the bone, that would be good. If not, then use the cautery again, and if you need another one, leave it for 3 days;
after moistening cotton in butter, and the poultice of a drying ointment until it is healed, and if 40 days pass without healing, then apply the medicine of corrosive water until the bone is uncovered; and treat according to how it behaves in its own chapter.
And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that some of the ancients spoke of. When treating a fistula, locate and open the passage; afterwards, insert into the slit one-sixth of a bean of what it was formed from; and make it the size of a pea; and hold your hand on the bean firmly so that the patient does not move, and so that the pus does not flow to the eye;
and one should moisten cotton in wine or water and place it on the eye of the patient;
the bean then opens the passage of the fistula, and heals by a marvellous health.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery we mentioned, that is good.Si li fistule ne fuist saine, et met en la fendure un pafre de fer de coi li fistule est venuz, et le met tant que li pafre soit en la fistule. If the fistula is not healed, insert an iron probe into the opening from which the fistula has emerged, and push it in until the probe is inside the fistula. If that doesn't work, you must administer an enema to the nose, and bring the fistula back towards the nose according to where it should be in its proper location.
of cracks in the lips Many times, cracks occur on the lips which are called "hair", and especially on the lips of children.
When you treat these cracks as we have described in the sections, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small scalpel according to this form:
And he applies cauterization to these fissures until it reaches the bone;
afterwards, treat the area with ointment until it heals.
When an abscess forms at the root of the gum or uvula, or palate, or tooth roots, it causes swelling and suppuration, and becomes ulcerated and turns into a fistula. and you treat it as we have described in the section on incisions, but it does not help: therefore, you must use cauterization according to the size of the fistula. afterwards, heat the iron and apply it to the opening of the fistula, holding your hand steady so that the hot iron touches the bottom of the wound.
and do this once or twice, afterwards treating it as we have described for healing wounds, until it is healed.
and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if not, then one must uncover the area and remove the corrupted bone, according to how you find it in its joint.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it does not help, then put the head of the patient in your lap: after heat up the cautery which will be described below in such a way that you place a candle on top of the tooth;
and hold the hot cautery in your hand until the patient feels the heat going to the root of the tooth;
then lift your hand and repeat the cautery as you wish;
then fill the patient's mouth with salt water and let it sit for an hour and spit often.
And in this way, the tooth which was loose is made firm, and the soft gums restrained, and the corrupted moisture dried up.
of toothache
When toothache comes from cold, or there is coldness or paleness, and medical treatments don't work, then cautery is needed in two ways: and butter cautery and fire cautery.
Butter cautery is such that you heat butter from a cow, and the tip in a spoon made of iron or bronze; Afterwards, take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent pole, and moisten it in the butter, and place it on the aching tooth until it is cool;
And in this way, do it often until its power reaches the root of the tooth; and if you see the butter-soaked wool and cotton getting cold, and place it on the aching tooth, and hold the hot iron close to the gum of the tooth.
The fire cautery together is such that you take an iron or bronze rod, and it should be thick so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient;
After heating the cautery, from which the form will come, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools.
Do this often, for the pain will be relieved that day or the next.
And it is necessary for the patient to fill his mouth with good butter quickly after this cautery, and then rinse it out.
And here is the form of the cautery:
And make a cautery of whatever you like, according to what you have power over;
and this is the form of the dog's tooth:
of scrofula When scrofula is of phlegmatic and cold moisture, and does not respond to digestion through medicine, then heat the cautery blade, as shown in the illustration, with two openings for the smoke to emerge from the other side of the cautery;
and place the hot cautery blade once on the abscess where it is needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess;
and if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess and leave it for three days; and place wet cotton in butter over the burn until the burn is healed;
then treat the area with ointments and bandages until it is completely healed.
When moisture prevails over the channels of the stomach, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient should be purged first with medicines that loosen the bowels.
After this, make a cautery at the root of the throat, and be careful not to go too far into the throat, but only burn it lightly near the heart.
After this, make another cautery at the joint of the neck at the head of the spine, and use the cautery called 'clavicle' as described earlier.
And treat the area until it is healed, as described earlier.Quant li chief de l’espinee est mal adjoigniez a la base dou chief, et li membres li plus ne se muevent
When the top of the spine is misaligned with the base of the head and the limbs do not move freely, and all diseases of the stomach are due to cold moisture, and the patient does not have a fever or dryness, and it is an old disease, then make the cauteries on the nerves as described earlier. and another cautery in between the two breasts;
and let the cautery, which is called "clavicle," be according to the form that has been described earlier.
And if you see fit, make a cautery on the spot with the cautery, which is called "pinpoint," according to the form described earlier in the ailment of the ears;
and let there be 30 points or more around it.
Afterwards heal the place according to what was said before, and let the cauteries be in three lines according to this form:
And for this reason, cauteries are gentler when you do them three times.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, the patient should be bled on their back and ribs;et li sang qui venoit de lor costeit entor et li col, qu’il soit retre and the blood that comes from their ribs around their neck and throat, let it be gently pressed after gently lifting the sternum with your left hand's fingers;et soit li sang qui venoit de lor costeit entor et li col,
and if the joint is dislocated inside, scorch the cautery which has the nerves of the eyes, and here is the form:et soit li sang qui venoit de lor costeit entor et li col, qu’il soit retre
and cauterize the vein until it is completely cut, and the figure of the cautery comes out together with four cauteries;
and for this reason cautery is made with the cautery that has three strings, so that the figures of cauterization are six cauteries;
and the nerves follow the subtlety of a tent and this is the shape of the cautery that has three strings:
And sometimes it is adjusted above this one nerve, so that there are eight cauteries.
After, put on the cautery small pieces of silk; Afterwards, let the patient rest, and do not move the limb for a long time until it is well healed.
And if it is dislocated above, which happens rarely, then make cautery on the thick part of the cautery-clavicle, or many cauteries in points.
For the joint is closed, and moisture is eliminated and the illness is healed.
When coldness and moisture come into the stomach, causing pain to its nature, and there are many catarrhs in him, and he does not benefit from customary treatments, then you must pour water on his back, and stretch out his legs and arms.And if he vomits with difficulty, do the same. After that, do three cauteries under the nail of the big toe, one cautery in the middle and two cauteries on either side so that the figures of the cauteries are at three angles, with an equal space between them so they do not touch when they bend due to pus;
and the cautery marks are so deep that they mark both parts of the chest, and the shape of the cauteries follows this form without adjustment:
And if you want to cauterize a large area in the stomach according to this form;
and whoever fears this cautery, cauterize a small area and sign on the stomach with one dot according to how much you want to do; then cauterize it with what is called a 'point'.
After the treatment of the wound we have described above, once it has healed.
When the liver hurts from cold and moisture and excess flatulence, so much that it is out of its natural condition; and the disease is cured by what we have said in divisions, and if it does not help, the patient must be bled on his vein; and sign three cauteries according to this form and shape and quantity on the liver, avoiding the hypochondrium, where the ribs of man come;
and there must be a space between each cautery equal to the thickness of two fingers; and the cauteries should be held lightly on the body, and do not press hard with your hand on the entire cautery;
and only the half of the cautery should be burned, and the patient should be laid straight on his back;
and if he cannot lie flat, then let him lie on his side, and stretch out his legs and lift up his hips;
And if you wish, cauterize these cauteries of the cupping glass, if you are skillful and wise in the art, and be careful not to burn all over the body, for then you would dry out the whole body; and do not go too deep, because the skin is very delicate there, and you can tell by looking.
When he has an abscess in his liver, and you want to know whether it is in the meat of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the meat, the patient feels pain not too strongly;
and if it is in the membrane, he feels intense pain.
And then when this treatment has been applied to the abscesses, the patient should be laid on his back;
and then sign with your finger on the spot where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which is similar to a reed, so that it is red hot; and cauterize with the cautery until the abscess is burnt, and goes as far as the membrane, until all the pus is driven out;
after the treatment, dress the wound until it is healed;
and no one should ever use this cautery except someone who has studied the art of medicine for a long time, and through whose hands these diseases have sometimes been cured.
Therefore he can work boldly, and nevertheless it seems to me that it is better to leave it.
of a cautery of phlegmon
The ancients said that one must do cauterizations to the warts with roots of aristolochia, and in such a manner: take a root of aristolochia that is long, the largest one you can find, and dried, and as thick and long as your finger. and moisten it in oil, and heat it over a fire, and do the cautery between the forehead and neck, and two smaller cauteries a little lower down on the part that is under the beard.
and two cauteries between the fifth and sixth ribs, slightly tilted backwards; and one cautery between the buttocks, and one over the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two on the sides of the buttocks opposite the cautery between the shoulders.
and do not press your hand, but do it smoothly as in perfumery.
And some ancients said that a person should use a fire cautery similar to a razor, and heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches that abscess; and then jump out of pain, as we have said in the liver abscess.
But in this work there is fear for the patient, who may die or develop a fistula that cannot be healed.
of the mouth
When you treat the illness of the moon with what we have said in the divisions of treatment, and it does not help at all, then there are three methods of cauterization that are all good.
Of these, one method is to make 3 or 4 cauteries, by marking according to the length of the vein, following the shape of the liver cautery which we described earlier;
and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, but let the patient be careful on his back;
and another way of cauterizing is to heat the cautery which has 2 prongs, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
and gently lift the skin where the vein is, or the side of the patient's body, and elevate it according to the shape of the body; the cautery should follow the shape of the body.
Afterward I place the two burning wires so that their tips pierce through to the other side, and then I draw them quickly out, and in this way there will be four wounds.
And if you see that cautery is needed for all three nerves, cauterize with the full cautery.
After the cautery when it has healed for a long time, and this one is better than the other cauteries mentioned before.
Cauterization is not good for hydropsy, except in the way that is called "asclytes.
When you have treated it according to the methods we have described in the sections, and your treatment does not help, then you must make four cauteries around the navel, one over the stomach, one over the liver, one over the abdomen, two behind the back on the spine, and one between the buttocks; and the cautery should be close to the center of the heart.
Afterward leave the cautery open to drain pus for a long time, and do not abandon the treatment of the patient after the cautery; and healing would hasten, and the two intentions would come together with God's help.
The form of the cautery for the belly is the key that we have shown you before: and those for the back should be olive-shaped, as shown here.
When the feet are swollen in one who is dropical, and are filled with yellow water, you must cauterize on the sole of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger; and move your hand with the cautery without turning it.
And do not go in too deeply, thus you will avoid the yellow awl, and the cautery should be according to this form:
After that, make two cauteries on each leg at the tip of the shank bone; and let the cauteries be long, one below the knee in front and the other above, in the middle of the leg;
and leave the cauteries to heal slowly without bandaging, until the water comes out;
after the treatment of other wounds that we have discussed.
When diarrhea comes from cold or moisture, and the retaining and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by other remedies; and you see the patient suffering greatly and in great need of help, then make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been said before about the cautery on the stomach, using the circulating cautery; and four small cauteries around the navel for each cautery with a thin needle, and two cauteries on the hips;
And if you see an abundance of moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the shoulder, and one cautery on each elbow, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good support.
on the treatment of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are in the anus, one or more of them, and are old and consist of thick cold and moist corruption, and they have been treated by division as we have described, but to no avail, then make cauteries: III on the spine of the back, that which is all defused underneath, little by little in a triangular shape, and I cauterize underneath the armpit II times;
and if you think his stomach is cold, and the meat is not cooking, and one sees the face swollen, then on the face with I great cautery on the stomach, as it is before said, and I another on the liver, and I another on the mouse all cauterized with a clave; and let the cautery remain open for a long time. After curing the site until it heals.
When you cup the thumb, if it burns the cautery which seems like the razor, and then put it all burning on that thumb cupped; and let your hand remain so that the cauteries come to the beginning of the vein, from which the blood flows;
do this once or twice, and if there is much of the thumb, cauterize each one as we have said;et se li cautere ne viegne pas ou sans cort, si met le cautere sus la voine et li estraint tant qu’il ne se muege. after the treatment of wounds is beneficial as long as they are healed.
and if you cauterize with a large cautery made from alchorum, it will have greater effect.
When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will discuss in its place, then such a disease comes that it cannot be healed except by cautery.
When there is a fistula and it has a pus discharge and corrupt moisture, then you must probe it with a thin rod and be careful to feel how deep the rod goes.
After heating the cautery until it is as hot as a razor, insert it into the fistula according to the amount that the tent has entered it, and repeat the cautery until the diseased and rotten flesh is burned, once or twice or three times, depending on the amount that is needed.
and be careful not to burn the nerves that are nearby, and large veins.
if the fistula goes to the bladder and intestines, be careful of these places, and do not make that fire too strong, and think that it is not sensible.
after curing the place until it is healed, and if the wound is salted, and the matter has been discharged for a long time, then you can be sure that the wound is completely healed.
and if the matters are not removed, know that the place is pierced, and the bones at the bottom are corrupted; and thus, as one of those we will discuss in its place.
When a cold pain comes with heavy rainfall and strong winds, and it does not lessen in a woman, then you should cauterize her on the rainy side of the body using the hot iron we mentioned earlier;
and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will do more good.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then you should cauterize in the lower part above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic hair start, and on the right and left, and each cautery should be as long as a finger;
and make the fire cautery on his back, or wherever you need to;
and the cautery should be made according to the previously described shape.
When the wound is cold and moist, and does not allow for healing, and the flowers are腐 and their seasons are late; and when they do come, there is great pain; therefore, one must make three cauteries around the wound, as we have said in the bladder cautery, and two fire cauteries on the back;
and the cautery should be made according to the previously described shape.
When the viscous moisture descends to the box of the hip, and because of this it dislocates from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when one measures them together;
and if the place is found hollow, then one must cauterize the patient on the hip at the first cautery similar to a circle, and draw before the place around the hip as it turns, so that the hip is within the circle;
and if it is such cautery as they use to cauterize the stomach.
And if this cautery is not available, make three large cauteries of the olive oil, and let the cauteries be as deep as all the others;
and heal until it is healthy.
of the hip pain When there is pain in the hip joint, and it is due to coldness and moisture, and the disease is cured by what we have said in the section on dislocations but the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then you should purge the patient of the gross humors with stinking pills, or other good smelling pills similar to them.Et si li maux vient de la moelle, et qu’il se traveille par grant froidor, adonc covient il que tu le chaleures tout a l’ent After that make him a cautery;and if the pain comes from the marrow, and it travels
and the way of the cautery is according to two ways:la I. est que tu le fai cauteres sus la teste et sus les costes de l this is to know together burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Fire cautery has many ways, one of which is as follows:
that you cauterize on the hip III cauteries triangularly according to this shape, and make them deep and wide, and between each cautery there is a space the thickness of a thumb, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped;
sometimes cautery is done in the middle on the head of the hip, so that there are IV according to this shape:
And if you wish, cauterize with a round cautery as we mentioned before in the dislocation of the hip;
but do it so that the circles contain all of the hip, and all of the thickness of the heart is burned.
This is the method used for sciatica, when the pain is located in the hip and does not travel down to the thigh or leg.
And if it comes to the thigh and leg, make II cauteries where the patient says the pain is, and above the ankle IV inches, a little on the left side;
and let the cautery be with a scalpel, and burn away the thickness of the skin.
And if the pain extends to the toe or near there, cauterize where he feels the pain three times or four with the cautery that is called a "point. And if it's necessary, do more.
And if he feels that the pain is under his knee toward his thigh, cauterize with a scalpel or circular cautery, and be careful in all your cauteries that you do not leave the cautery on so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient more harm and contraction.
And I myself have seen many who had cautery applied to the ankle of the foot, and they left it until the leg was completely swollen, and the foot too, and it became pierced and corrupted throughout the foot. After a stomachache which caused his death.
And if the pain is in two parts together, apply cautery to one and then the other, according to this method.Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.
And the wise men say about cautery to the hip, and here is how it's done: make a rod as thick as a thumb or a little less at one end and between the joints and from one joint to another in space the quantity of a finger nail.
and let the tongs be of two parts, and also like noses, and have one handle of well-made iron.
And this is the shape:
And let it be heated until it is all red and dripping with grease, and then place it over the box of the affected hip, and turn it over to the sound side. And then:
And cauterize it once with the cautery and leave it for three days; and then make an ointment of butter, and let the wound remain open for a long time. after the application of ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we use this cautery sparingly due to the fear of its appearance, and those who see it used sparingly.
Nevertheless, it is a good cautery for those who can endure it, and it lies where it afflicts them.
The medicine cautery burns if you make the instrument in between the joints so that it descends the edge of the door, and it is made of brass or iron with a long surface, and in its height it has 2 inches, and between each one there is the thickness of a thumb; and they are open below and above, and join together according to this form:
After placing the box of the hip on the patient lying on his healthy side, and pressing your hand hard on the box of the hip; After pouring between the two circles of the hot wax which is heated in the fire for a moment, and the patient endures the heat and burning of it.
For there is biting as well as from fire;
And when the biting is passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the hip gently, and leave it so for three days, and place butter on it until what is black from the scorching is removed; and let him leave it for three days until the pus drains out;
and that would be the final treatment after the poultice until he is healed.
And if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make the instrument that colors like salt according to what you did in the hip dislocation;
and this is the way of making the hot plaster, and I have written it in the treatise on rectifications of medicine. Take alkaline and quicklime, as much of each, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot. there should be a small hole so that the point of a hairpin can enter it;
there should be a small hole so that the point of a hairpin can enter it; and put on top of it another pot well-plumbed, and put on top alkali and chalk and the hot plaster on top, until there is two fingers of powder above what you have well mixed in your hand;
and let it be so until the powder drips down into the plumbed pot, then take all that powder and pour it on top of the chalk and alkali as before.
And then there will be a great deal of fever, and it is administered with many types of medical treatments and cauteries on other limbs.
For it does the same work as fire, and there are other medicines with which one can cauterize the hip just like this: theriac, and honey from the anhard tree, and chalk with soap; mix all these things together.
And Galen tells us of a cure whereby a man was cured of the pain in his hip and sciatic nerve, and he praised it highly, saying that nothing else was done to him, but that he was cured at one time when this treatment was carried out, and that he then took a bath as instructed below.
And take the litharge in this way: crush it with a little grease, and put it on the hip and thigh and leg where the pain is, and leave it there.
Let it stay for three hours until the patient no longer feels the burning.Et si li dolour se retent en autre lieu por le quel il ne peut demourer a son lit, dist en telle maniere qu’il soit asez
And then let him enter the bath until his body is a little aroused, and let him enter the bed, and the pain will leave completely and he will be healed.
And know that no one should use such medicine after an evacuation of the body.
And when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's dung, it helps a lot, says Dioscorides.et quant li dolour se retent en la cheville et en la cuisse et en la jambe et ne peut demourer a son lit, dist en telle maniere que il soit asez
and the cautery must be performed in such a way. Take lamb's wool and grease it with old oil, and place it in the socket between the big toe and the one next to it, which is called the sciatic socket.
Take dry goat's hair, and heat it in fire until it is charred, then place it on wool, and leave it until it turns to ash.
And do this again, and keep doing so until you feel it reach the hip and the pain stops.
This method of cautery is called "goat's hair cautery.
of back pain
When back pain comes from sitting or impact or excessive evacuation, or due to cold matter spreading, in none of these cases is cautery beneficial except for that which comes from the infusing of cold matter.
After that, the patient must be purged of foul pills or similar things, by making lines on his back, where the pain is, three lines marked in, and in each line make V cauteries or more depending on the strength and quantity the patient can endure.
And the cautery must be performed according to the cautery called "point."et si li mals son gres, tu li faices en chescune ligne X ou XII cauteres; et s
and if you see, do three cauteries or four with the key cautery tool according to this form:
This disease often affects young children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a tight neck when they wake up, and fear. and you will find it in the last vertebrae of the spine and in the appearance of the others that come above them.
When you see this and cure it, cauterize it with the hot iron according to this form. So that the cautery purples each part of the spine evenly.
And if you see, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery two or three lines apart, and have the points close to each other.
Afterwards heal the site until it is healthy according to what we have said, and be careful not to apply cautery in gangrenous areas that are in a nerve ganglion.
The vertebrae of the neck are at the base of the skull. And when you want to cure the spine, if you cannot get the spine to be healthy according to what we have said, then cure the area where the strain is and do not put the cautery on it, because the nerves are close to the head.
When joint pain is from moistors that are expanded in each part of the body, and when it comes in the feet, which the doctor properly calls «podagra», and when it is from a cold cause and does not heal with treatment and medicine, then it is healed by cautery in such a way:
make the mouth of the cautery tool around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery tool be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if there is a need to prick the sole of the foot, then do cauterization all over with the "point" cautery. And if the pains come to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then make cautery on each knee with three cauteries or four of each part, all of it olive cautery.
and if you need more, then do more, but do not hold your hand against it longer than until the surface of the heart is burned.
And if the pains descend to the knee and back, administer the cautery that we have described in this chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the wrist two lines;
and if there remains no pain in the fingers, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
and if the pains come to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize each part and treat the patient well and take medicine.
For if you give him good treatment and purge the phlegm, he will be healed with God's help.
When diarrhea comes in anger, and the bowels descend to the anus and it is new, then when you see him healed, he should not eat that day; and that he uses things that leave the belly slack, so that the bowels descend from his belly;
Afterwards, let him sit on his back between your hands, and command that he tightens his belly until the bowels are pushed back in, and draw them up to your fingers, and sign with oil underneath the wound on the bone of the elbow, and all over a sign that is similar to half a circle above the body;
then heat the cautery with which this form is made:
until it is white and it oozes pus. Then put the bowels back in their place; And the assistant tightens his hand so that they do not return;
And well squeeze the thighs for the patient, and put a pillow and a servant under the thighs, and another on the foot that squeezes his hands;
Then put the cautery on the sign all around your hand, and hold it straight and hold it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, do it again until you reach the bone; and guard carefully that the boil does not burst when you perform the cautery; so that you do not burn yourself; and so that the patient does not die, or suffer other ills.
And you should know that when you do not come to the bone with the cautery, your work is worthless.
And it is necessary that children's cauteries be smaller according to their size, and those of large people also larger according to their size;
after 3 days treat the site of the cautery with butter until the scorching is healed;
afterwards treat with other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for 40 days so that the wound heals well;
and it is necessary to let his bandages be loose for a long time so that the boil does not burst when he tries to move around.
And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, if a well-made bandage is provided for him, and he wears it for another 40 days;
and has good rest, works little, and avoids too much drinking and eating, and too loud a voice.
And when he follows this instruction, he will be completely healed.
And I will now describe the treatment for cutting on his shoulder.
When ulcers come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they are not growing any more, then make the cautery according to its quantity, and burn the third of the skin. After the cauterization, according to what we have said;
And some of the ancients say that one should cauterize with a three-pointed cautery according to this form:
but first mark the place of entry and draw a line across the width above the ulcer, and one from side to side, and hold your hand steady throughout the cauterization.
But the first cautery is lighter and gentler.
of old pain in any limb When pain comes in a limb, from falling or from injury, and the pain lasts a long time, and medical treatment does not help, then it must be cauterized with the iron that is called "point", and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb, its thinness and weakness, and its distortion and pain.
If it is healed by the first cauterization, that is good;« Si la plaie ne guérit pas avec le premier cautère, répétez l'opération
If it does not heal with the first cauterization, repeat the operation on that one, because such is the custom that it should change in the member nearest to it, so you must perform the cauterizations until the patient is healed.
The ulcers are sometimes helped by cautery with great difficulty, especially those that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
But if you see cauterization, take care that the disease is in its early stages, and it has been cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not progress or remain, and you doubt that the corruption will spread throughout the illness; then do five cauteries on the head: one in the middle of the forehead, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hairline; and two on the two horns, and one behind on the nape of the neck;De quoy que li cauteres fuit faits sus le chief, qu’il soit en son comencement, car
and let the cauteries on the head be done in their early stages, and let your hand remain so that the cauteries reach the bone, and as long as the blisters come out so that the vapors of the thick humors can emerge;Et se li maladie est de longue duree et granz escorces en issent, qu’il fuit tant qu’el escorce fuie crever, ou fuie s’escorce crever adessous, et ne
and cauterize the mole according to what it is in front of you.
And if the hair is sparse everywhere; and it is losing hair obviously, then you must cauterize it with these cauteries that we have mentioned on the head, and 1 cautery on the nape of the neck, and 2 cauteries on the spine of the neck, and 6 cauteries on the spine of the back, and 1 large one on the croup and another one next to it, and 2 ones on both shoulders; and 2 cauteries on the elbows, and 2 cauteries on the tendons of the feet, and 1 cautery on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands;
and be careful with the nerves that are on the lower back, so that you do not burn them;
sometimes they make 1 cautery on the bone of the wrist, and 1 cautery on the bone of the stomach, and 1 cautery on the liver.
And you should know that the more cauterization is done, the more help it provides, and movement benefits.
and you should know that the patient does not feel pain from cauterization as a healthy person would, because their body is already entirely corrupted.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the members and the joints, according to what you will find in the ways of the irons.
Afterwards, clean the site with flour from wheat with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
When swelling comes to a limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but it is not healed, then you should apply cauterization on the limb according to its size.
And let the cautery be slightly inserted into the thickness of the skin; then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
And sometimes cauterization is done on the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that numbs the limb, and thus the swelling is removed;
and nevertheless, no one should perform this unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the nerves that move the body.
When the disease called "albaras" is awake, and the skills of medicine are worthless, then cauterize with a cautery tool slightly deeply, according to the quantity of the thickness of the skin, so that the whiteness is removed, and its color is changed.
then treat with a poultice of wheat flour and lentils, with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood from the gut and blood from almond stones, each one part. and mix everything together, and bind it with a cloth, and let it air in the sun until it is healed.
the treatment of cancer by cautery
When cancer appears at its beginning, and you see it stopping, then cauterize it with a cautery that looks like a circle, all around the edge of the cancer.
And yet, the wise say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the ulcer:
and yet I do not think that is good, because I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen that happen more than once;
and a straighter thing is that it be cauterized around, with the cautery which is called 'circle', as we have said in many cauteries.
When someone has a disease called 'adubelati', and it delays death due to excesses it causes or due to the age of the illness when it is decrepit (that is, too old) and they have little blood, or because of the time; and you see her hastening to die: then cauterize it all around with many small cauteries by pricking; afterwards, leave it like that. For it will hasten to death.
And if you see it piercing all the way through, then heat the cautery with which it was formed:
And put your hand in the middle of that disease called "adubelati" until the cauteries have pierced the heart, and let the cauteries be such that the patient feels them driving out in such a way that the course of the illness is alleviated.
Afterwards, treat it until it is completely healed.
There is another type of disease that is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a corruption of a limb, for it corrodes the limbs just as fire burns dry wood.Si tu vois qu’ele est corroyssans, et li membres ne fuent pas troz lons, si covient qu’il soit treffez entor de la maladie par cauteres petis en tel maniere que li cauteres s’entrecongnast en la porriture, si com il adouce la maladie.
If you see this disease in a place which can withstand fire cautery, then heat the cauteries, both small and large, according to what is needed for the location of the illness;et s’il est en leu ou il ne soffre point de cautere a feu, adonques tu tiens les cauteres claviles en la main si que ele soit chaufees, et li malade soit en leu ou il ne fust pas moult eschaude, et embreint les cauteres sur
after you have cauterized it all over until you reach all the corruption and nothing of it remains, so that everything that is corrupted is removed.
And then leave it for three days, and apply soft bandages with oil on the cauterized areas until the burns from the fire are healed, and all the corruption is removed.
After that, treat it with ointments that generate warmth.
And if you see after 3 days that healthy flesh does not grow, that is good;
and if not, then restart the cautery on what has remained of the corrupted tissue.
And this ulcer is sometimes cured with medicine instead of fire cautery;
but nevertheless, fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already discussed the cure for medicine ague in the division: take it when you need it.
of warts that appear on the feet Many times it happens that from the feet a disease arises which is called in our language "clot", and it is a large diseased mass that blocks the foot.
And the cautery for this disease has two methods: That is to say, fire cautery and hot water cautery.Or cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulx qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
Fire cautery is what you heat up until the cautery tool becomes as hot as a feather and is made of good iron to the size that it can pierce the nail from all sides, and it has fine edges;
Afterwards, place it all hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail. And let it be thus for three days until it begins to produce pus; Then make a poultice of wild mallows bruised with salt, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall off and be uprooted from its roots.
Then treat the area with an ointment that promotes healing until it is cured.
And if they turn inward into the body, and many times they occur in hands and feet, then you must treat them with hot water cautery; And it is in such a way: Take an iron or bronze rod, or a wire of vulture, and place it on the nail and the warts, that is to say, calluses; And place the rod on it so that it wraps around, then put a little hot water on it, and hold your hand steady, and press your hand as you turn so that the edge of the rod reaches the root of the nail, and thus the hot water can find its way deeply to the root;
and let the patient endure the biting of hot water for a little while. then leave it thus, and it will tear out all at its roots.
Thus do one after another, until you draw out all those who are in the body, then heal them of the wounds that cause pus.
When someone trembles from coldness of the nerves, or from quartan fever or other, then you should make 4 cauteries on the spine in the back, one cautery between each vertebrae: and one cautery on the penis and one over the stomach with an olive-sized cautery;
this will cease the trembling and hasten the healing of the cold illness.Si li ners le faict trembler, il covient que tu prennes un poil de l’espece du mala
Sometimes they appear as sores on the skin, or as foul pustules, which come from putrid humors.
If it's the nerves that cause the trembling, then one must take a hair from the species of the patient and cauterize each head of the pustule with it:et si li poil ne fuert de l’espece du malaide, il cov and if the hair is not from the species of the patient, then a slender stick of myrtle wood should be used, with its tip taken to the fire, or a long root of aristologist, or with a lenticular cautery.Quant la pustule est rompue, si covient que li cauteres soit apaisiez, et les cauteres soient de fust de
And sometimes they cauterize them at the beginning when they appear, according to this method, and they cannot grow from thereforth, but the excess from which they come is disrupted, and they are healed.
But it should be done after the evacuation of blood.
Many times there are great flows of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound, or at the incision of an abscess, or with the cautery on the limb, and in similar things; and it is a very grieving thing to staunch.
And yet, when this happens to someone, you must hurry to place your index finger over the wound of the vein, and hold it very tightly until the blood is subdued underneath your finger, and no drop comes out;
then put into the fire the olive-oil cauteries, some small and some large, until they are all red;
Take the cautery, whether large or small depending on the wound and where the artery is located, and apply it to that vein in your hand you are holding, and hold the cautery there until the blood is stopped.
And if it bleeds afresh when you lift your finger from the wound, and the cautery has cooled, then quickly take another of the cauteries which are in the fire.
And do not stop doing this one after another until the blood is stanched.
And be careful not to burn the nerve which is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient;
And know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be stanched easily if the artery is large, except by one of the four methods we have described: either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by tightly binding with a thread, or by medicines applied that have the power to stanch blood. And it should be bound and constrained skillfully.
Whoever administers a tight binding with cloth or placing hot objects on it, or other similar treatments, will not benefit if only a little.
And if this happens to someone and they have no mirror or medicine at hand, then they should put their index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and press hard until it is stopped above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the finger, but moisten it with cold water often so that it is very cold until the blood is congealed and thickened and stopped.
and ask around for what they need in terms of cauteries and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases that need fire cauteries, or burning medicines, and their properties and causes, and the instruments and forms of the cauteries;
and have placed this chapter from the head to the feet, and I will go through this same path in this chapter so that one can more easily find what they want.
And so that I begin this, my dear son, you must learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauteries, and therefore greater caution is needed.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and making an incision over an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to attempt foolishness.Car li sang est en nos corporeux, et ne puet on que li corps soit en vie, si li sang ne soit en lui: car il li sustent et le meintient. For there are many types of people who come for treatment. if they come from such who have changed so little with their illness that it is easily dispelled by the treatment they receive for their illness, and because of the severity of its nature;Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques cov and from these one should fear.Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu,
And of these there are those who give their senses and say:Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor Wait, I am wounded. and the illness is devastating.
You should not indulge those who come to you with such behavior, but place greater importance on your honor than your desires. Do not act foolishly but wisely in what you know and can obtain, and:
use prophecy and diagnosis in curing your illnesses so that salvation may be achieved.
and this will help you achieve a good reputation, glory, and memories of praise.
Very dear son, may Our Lord give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Now I have arranged this chapter in a conversational manner, according to what is before the chapter on cauteries, which I have discussed for you from the head to the feet, so that you can find more easily whatever you need.
Know that this disease often occurs in children when the head is compressed too strongly during childbirth; and:et alergeance du baille, ou il est mort.
and sometimes it comes from an unknown cause that no one knows about.And sometimes it comes from a cause that is not understood.Et parfois, il vient de la mère qui ne
I have never seen this disease except in children, and in all cases that I have witnessed, death was swift.And sometimes it comes from the mother not:wanting to breastfeed her child; and for this reason I think it is better to divide the treatment into several parts.
And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and his neck swelled every day so that he could not support it;
and believed that the moisture was so great that it killed him, and this moisture had gathered under the bone above the throat, between the brain and the bone;
and the treatment is such that if the moisture is between the brain and the bone, and the abscess is small, you should make a large incision in the head;
and it should be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture flows out;
and here is the form of the spatchcock:
If the moisture is deeper, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see the edges of the head are open in every part, and water sprays out when you press it with your hand from inside, and this does not stop: if you must split open the head, make three slits in this manner:
After the incision, remove all moisture with force. After closing the slits with cloth and powder, pour wine and oil into them, and leave it for five days.
Then loosen the wound with tenting and poultices, and let the head hang freely, giving the patient dry food to eat until the limb is healed.
And another way of cutting is that you observe where the abscess is opening, and the gathering of pus:
because sometimes it opens in front, sometimes behind; sometimes on the right side; and sometimes on the left.
So cut where the abscess is opening and the pus gathering, and make the slit according to your ability;
and be careful not to cover the artery; and let blood flow, so that the patient dies from the loss of blood and the release of moisture.
When someone has a disease called "cataract" in their eyes or feet, and the disease is old, and medical treatment does not help, then the best treatment is cauterization with which one will cut the two arteries.
Therefore, when you see them covered, have the patient lean back; then rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries show through, then press the patient's neck hard against the cloth; then look where the vein beats, and the spots on both sides are after the ears, and they are pushed back;
then sign the spots inwards, then cover one and the other with a sharp spatula, two parts wide, so that the spatula comes up to the bone, and this should be done from the side of the head.
And if you see it, push the spatule under the artery and cut it from above, cutting also as deep as two parts across.
And when the vein is cut, the blood will continue to spurt upwards.
And if the artery does not open to the touch, then you must measure the thickness of three beans, then sign inwards and cut up to the bone;
and the amount of blood to be let will vary, depending on the case, usually around six ounces, but sometimes a little more or less, depending on what the patient can tolerate and the repletion of the artery.
then examine the wound: if there is a punctured bone without pus, and the wound is closed, then open it up and clean it out, treating it with ointment until it heals.
of emetic When old-age dementia comes, and the catarrh is acute, due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and ancient madness and similar things, and it is treated by various methods of medicine and all that does not help him, then we should extract the arteries in the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
The method of extraction is to have the patient push back his hair from his temples, and listen to the artery that opens at the temple, for it can be felt beating strongly in some people with a very weak pulse.
If the pulse is weak, then have the patient press his neck with a cloth, and then rub the area with some rough cloth, and wash it with warm water until the artery beats strongly. then take the spathe of which this is the shape: then skin the flesh lightly until you reach the artery, then pull it upward with tweezers, and separate it well from the tissues that are underneath it in each part;
and if the artery is thin, then return to the hook's point, and cut off that part according to the quantity of the two parts. For if it is not cut, then the sickness will not leave his body at all.
And draw out the blood from the sixth part up to the third;
and if the artery is large, then it is necessary to tie it in two places with a strong double thread of silk so that pus does not come before the wound heals, and that blood comes out smoothly;
then cut off the excess between the two ligatures in that same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with a hot blade up to the bone until the shoulder is cut through;
and it is a bad disease if the patient has fever and he is of a hot temperament. For cautery helps to end moisture: therefore it is of greater help for moistness.
Or, one should, for the extraction of an artery, fill the area with old cotton and place it under a well-made tent;
and when one removes them, use dry medicines that cause the birth of flesh, and of tents, until they are healed;
and if, without cutting of the artery as much as you operate, you hasten to cover by cautery, then employ the area with vitriol and constrict it with your hand so that the blood is stanched; and if you do not have that at hand, then put your finger on the area until the blood congeals, and wet the area with cold water until the bleeding stops, and constrict as is appropriate;
And it should have between the two knives one finger's width of space, and then when you've marked both places, place the hot iron on until it reaches the bone, and close the vein in two places. And they should be distanced between the two shoulders because it is not souded by this cautery all over all over;
and this is the shape of the cautery:
and that which is easier and lighter in the extraction of the artery is to cauterize the vein with this cutting cautery of two parts, but the cutting parts should be well spaced to distribute their heat over a longer period. For when the instrument is too thin, it holds its heat less firmly.
of tears When the tears of the eyes are descending from the veins that are on the forehead of the head, and it does not benefit from any medicine that is applied, and you see the face of the patient turn red, and feels in the forehead movement as if of trembling; and if they are painful and moist so that the hairs of the eyelids have fallen out, and the eyelids are swollen and scalded by the heat of tears, then this treatment is necessary. And the ancient called it "cured by a blow", and it is that you do to the patient who has this disease, the hairs on his forehead, then make III incisions on his forehead evenly according to the length of his forehead;
And the ancient called it "cured by a blow", and it is that you do to the patient who has this disease, the hairs on his forehead, then make III incisions on his forehead evenly according to the length of his forehead; and one of the incisions as deep as two fingers right in the middle of the forehead going down, and the other two on either side above the eyelids, and be careful not to cut into the arteries that are on either side above the eyelids;
and keep your hand away from the jaw, and let each incision be as deep as three fingers across the joints;
and have ready a piece of sponge and a lot of linen to wipe up the blood, then insert the spatulum, split into two parts as shown in the figure:
from the incision which is cut from the temple all the way to the second incision; and scrape all the flesh which is between the two cuts all the way to the sinus that is over the bone, then do likewise from the middle cut all the way to the other second one, and then pull out this spatulum. Then insert into the first incision the instrument that is called  "cultellary", and it is very sharp on one side, and not at all sharp on the other, and this is its shape:
And cut the coat according to the shape of the chest, and the lower part towards the bone, and bring it together until it reaches the middle slit.
And cut all the vessels that descend from the head into the eye socket until the incision is continuous all the way to the sinus, and then likewise do in the middle cut all the way to the other one outside;
and then draw out the blood equally, and express the place where the blood is taken from;Et s’il avint qu’en l’un des II cotés il soit si grant dolor que li malsens ne
then put into each wound a tent of old cotton, and place over it wet cloths soaked in wine, oil, and garlic, and be careful that hot abscesses do not develop.
On the third day, loosen the bandage and give him a large drink of cold water, then treat the wound with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, and other remedies used for wounds, until it is healed.
When someone has a catarrh and you see their eyes are sunken and small, and their vision is weakened, and the eyelids are burned: and the hair falls out, and they feel pain in the head, and the sick person sneezes; then you may know from these signs that those materials and this catarrh come from many veins, and the mother's milk is what it is, and so it is cured.
And you must instruct the patient to look straight ahead, then make a large slit in the forehead, and another one from the corner of the eye. And begin from the left temple to the right temple, and make the incision all the way to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves in the temples that control swallowing;
and when the bone is exposed, wipe away all the blood with a sponge, and then pack between the two lips of the incision cotton wool and linen bandages; then apply dampened fabrics in wine and oil, and beware of a hot abscess;
when it is removed, you should rub the bone until it begins to form a callus, then treat it with drying agents that promote the hardening of new bone.
In this way: take two parts of flour of wheat, and four parts of colofoint, and make a poultice of it; and administer it to these wounds to promote healing throughout.
of the treatment of ears
All that which falls out from the ears is one of four things: or beans, or a beast, or a stone from a mine, or something similar like iron; or seeds such as peas, beans, and lentils; or flowing substances such as water, oil, and vinegar, and similar things.
When it falls into the ear, whether a pebble or something else that does not adhere to the ear nor grow in it, one must hold the ear towards the sun.
If you see a stone, then distil some violet oil or oil of mastic, and then apply an extractant;Si est beste, s’il li traveist la piere, si distille l’oile sus l’enduit, ou si li traveit la beste, si dist If it is a beast, if the stone pierces through, then distil the oil on the wound, or if the beast bites him, distil and cause sneezing with a condiment, and stop the nostrils when the sneezing comes, and put a piece of cloth or wool around the ear;Si est semence, si enduit li pueilz de l’oreille et met l’espece de la sem If it is a seed, anoint the lobes of the ear and put the species of the seed on top.
Many times comes out by this cure;
and if it does not come out, then administer extraction with delicate tweezers, of which there is the form:
If it pops out with the tweezers, that's good;
if not, then administer extraction with a small, thin needle;
and if it does not come out with that, then make a small needle of bronze and push the tip of the needle into the ear canal firmly, and pack around the needle with soft wax so that air cannot enter with the needle; then pull it out gently, because many times it comes out as we have said;
and if it does not come out in such a way, then take tweezers and grab the object, and place some instrument that is suitable for doing so, and put a little cotton around it; then press the buttocks against the stone or whatever it is, and pull out.
If it does not come out from all these things we have said, then quickly split the ear so that the abscess, callus, and spasm can come out;
and the way to make the split is that you first bleed the patient from the head, and draw blood according to its strength, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn his ear upwards, and cut a small opening at the root of the ear into the fat where it depends; and the incision should be like a moon, as you go to the stone, then suck it energetically with your mouth;
treat until it is healed.
And if it is a graze that is in and it swells, then administer extraction;
and if it cannot emerge, then administer Spatula tenui subtilis according to this form: and make an incision on that grain.
But do not do this when you think the graze is moist due to moisture from the ear, until you have made many pieces;
then extract it with tweezers and with a suction device, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.
In the water that drains from the ear, the patient should first sneeze with snuff, and plug the ear with cotton wool. Let him lie on the same side as the ear ache is. if it jumps out by itself, that's good.
if not, then take many small stones according to the length of your finger, thin and light, and heat them slightly in the fire; and I put a hole in the patient's ear, and pierce it from another part of his foot, and pierce another stone on the stone that is in the ear; and do not stop piercing stone with stone until all the pus flows out, and so it will flow out completely;
and if you see that they take a straw and insert one end into the ear, and the other end is held to the fire until the most painful part of the straw is burned;
then do the same with other straws until all the pus flows out, as we have said for the stone.
In removing a foreign object from an animal, if it is of a small body, such as a flea and similar objects, remove it as we have said in the division;
but if it is of a large body that can be felt, then use tweezers to extract it;et s’il est si petit qu’il ne soit nule part senti, si prend asche, et frotte li chiés and it is the easiest thing to remove from the ear.
In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the section on distillations, and the treatment is ineffective, then you should examine the ear in the sunlight: if no worms appear, then pinch the ear lobes gently; if none emerge, then take a small needle and pierce where the shape of the worm is visible:
And it is narrow below and broad above. and insert the thinnest end into the ear according to the amount of pain the patient is experiencing, then suck firmly on the needle; do this repeatedly until all the worms emerge.
And if they do not come out, then stop up the ear with cotton as I have said regarding stones;
and if they do not emerge as described, then administer the distillations that the ancients have experimented with for worm removal, and you will find them in the section on distillations;
and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all this apparatus, from which is the shape as you see it: And whether it is of silver or bronze, there should be a small hole underneath and a larger hole above for distillation;
and to press the distillation into the apparatus, made of well-crafted bronze, and if you see fit, take a razor and wrap it around the point with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever you desire from your medicines into the canal, and the canal should be in the ear;
then put the razor wrapped in cotton inside, and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled into the ear canal; and let the patient feel it inside, and let the distillation be heated over fire so that it may be distilled into the ear; and be sure it is not too cold, for the medicine would not then be so good.
of the treatment of ears
No child is born without ears;
and the same thing happens in adults through punctures of the ear, or by a boil forming inside the ear, and sometimes this swelling goes right into the ear, so that it cannot be seen;
and sometimes there is only slight damage to the eardrum, which can be seen quite clearly.
When the eardrum is punctured and cannot be seen, it is a serious condition in many cases, and when one can see it, you should expose the ear of the patient to the sun; and look inside: if you see the membrane exposed, then treat it in the following way:
And it should be sharp and smooth all around so that it does not pierce the ear;
if the operation is on the skin of the ear, hold it with fine pincers and lift gently until the skin is completely removed.
And if the obstructions are deep in the ear, then take a thin, light scalpel and heat it gently in the fire, then place it on the body of the ear.
If you feel the operation on the skin, pierce it gently and be careful not to cut into the nerves of the ear;
then put in the ear a tent according to the size of the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment. Do this for several days until the wound is healed, or take a tent and moisten it with rose water, and dust with ground vitriol;
and if you see swelling in the ear, it is necessary to remove the tent and replace it with another tent moistened with cerotic ointment made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then dress the wound until it is healed.
And if there is bleeding, take a sponge and cloth dipped in cold water and apply it to the ear, and use other remedies that stop the bleeding that are used for distilling.
This treatment comes from papers made of them when they are moist and dry; you should extend them with tweezers and pincers, and the edge of a spatula from its roots. Then place powdered vitriol over the area.
And if there is skin in it, then cauterize with a delicate lens-shaped cautery instrument, and the cauterizer after the incision is worth a mouse.
And many times they return, as long as nothing remains of their roots. And when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
of hail Many times there come from the papers things that look like gravel in form and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "gout", and it is a gathering of thick moisture above and below the paper. such are the tasks:
such are the tasks: take care that the warts do not move from one place to another, and this is an easy thing to know;
then make a deep cut in it, then scrape each part lightly with a knife, and then grab it with tweezers and pull it out.
if you cannot pull it out without piercing the skin a little, do not worry about hurting the patient;
and if the wound is large, then sew it up and treat it until it heals;
and if it is small, do not use force, as the oil will restore it immediately and heal it.
And if the wart is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, turn it over and grab the wart with tweezers, and then pull it out while pressing from both sides;
and if the paper is removed by the incision, it does not matter.
and when the wound is healed, wash with salt water and treat the area around the eye until the patient is cured.
of the fat of the eyes Exinach is a fat that collects in the membranes above the eyelids, and this happens most often to children, and it causes them great pain, and in the mornings they have catarrh, and they cannot bear to look at sunlight because their tears flow into their eyes.
And because of this they lie down and sleep with their faces covered, and their eyelids become moist and puffy, and the appearance is concealed by the exinach that protrudes into the eye. And when you press the eye with your fingers and feel the exinach between them.
And the manner of the operation is for the patient to put his head on the operator's lap;
and then take a linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains out-pushing from each part, then put it on him; and press with your fingers on either side so that the out-pushing is gathered within the circle;
then cut in the middle of the moisture with the spatula a slit as wide as the wound that is made when opening a vein;
and cut through the skin to the depth until you reach the out-pushing; and in many cases out-pushing comes from the slit according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Pull it out then with tweezers between your fingers, turning your hand to the right and left until it is stretched;
and be careful not to push into the slit so that you do not touch the spatula to the eye and harm it.
And if the wound does not open at the beginning of the incision, then increase the incision slightly until it opens.
Then extract as we have said, then moisten bandages in vinegar and water, and place them on the wound, and use bandages to hold it in place.
And if there are such men who grind sesame seeds and place them on top to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Then treat the eye until it is healed.
And if there is a hot abscess in the eye, treat it with soothing poultices until it is healed.
And if a cold abscess comes to the area, apply a hot poultice until it is warm; then apply warm oil, and treat it with bandages. When hairs grow on paper, different from their natural state, and they are damaged, it harms them, and causes various diseases, like tears, and softening of the paper and the skin, until it becomes the cause of their destruction.
And there are three ways to treat this: Either by fire cautery, or by using a medicine according to what is in the chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching, or by splints, according to what I will say.Et la cause de la destruction des poilz est par le feu ou par medicine de cautere, selonc ce qu’il avient en la nature de la maladie:
You should place the patient's head on your lap, then turn the paper over their eye to your left hand.
If it is converted, that is good; if not, then put an needle on the thread above it. and let him hold the margin of the paper where the hairs grow next to these hairs, and draw the thread above it all the way up to the paper, then turn it back to the razor.
Then he should cut under the paper, under the hair, all along the spatulum, from the large to the small.
Then pull out the thread and place a small piece of cotton and linen under the paper, then draw an inch-long figure on the paper in the shape of a mirtle leaf, and according to the amount that you see the paper rising, you should make it longer or shorter.
And if it has a great quantity of paper according to how the paper is softened;
then do the whole spatula-like on the two lines you have signed, and start from the large to the small; and be one of the slits close to the natural hair in the thickness of a root, then insert the needle into one of the two corners of the heart, then scrape it all;
then assemble the two lips with a stitch of a fine woolen thread, and draw out the blood, and dry the excess of the threads above the two eyelids with any sticky thing, if you want to do this;
and if not, then don't worry about it, then leave the stitch and threads for three or four days;
then cure the wound without stitches with dry and compressing things, for the paper rises to the soudainness of the wound and its gathering, but the stitch is painful (as the ancients say), and it is work without fear; and if there is another way:
and if there is another way: and you should draw the paper in the shape of a leaf of myrtle, as we have described, with three lobes evenly spaced according to the form that is here:
then cut out what is above with small scissors evenly according to the shape which is here:
And if you cannot hold the tweezers and the object is not even, then take a needle and thread and sew it into the figure: And sew another thread through the large eyelet, and the second thread through the small one, and bring the threads together evenly between your fingers:
Then lift your hand evenly, and lift up all the skin above which you have sewn, as we have described, then bring together the two lips of the wound by stitching, and heal it until it is healthy:
And if an abscess comes from your incision, then soothe it with cerots and similar soothing ointments:
and sometimes the hairs of the paper are converted:
if you should use that which we have said about the incision;
but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
The cure of bones is as follows: and you should convert the paper and insert it according to what I have said, and then make two bones by art, and two thin ligaments as long as the paper and the broadness of the spleen is; and cut into two parts where you hold the threads;
then assemble one and the other sutilly above what stands out from the paper of the eye, and draw out the two bones from the two formed parts; and let it be thus for a few days, and the skin that is stretched will die and shrivel and fall off as it drops off by itself.
If it is delayed, then treat it with cautery until it is healed.
and when the wound is sutured and the skin raised, then the hairs will no longer prick.
And this is the form of the two cans that you shall make according to this figure and this quantity of length and width:
The tools are such that you thread a thin needle with fine silk; then bring the heads together and tie them subtly together, and the length of the threads should be a palm long;
then place in the hollow another fine thread of silk, and tie the heads of the thread;
then put the patient's head into the hole;
and it should be done under the sun so that the procedure is visible, for it is a subtle and small procedure; then push the needle all the way into the root of the hair, piercing the skin gently until you reach the natural hair;
then pull out the hair up to the root, and put into the socket that hair, if there are one or two or three or more;
then pull your hand back so that the hairs grow straight into the socket with the natural hair.
And if the socket is treated and the hair does not grow out with it, then you shall pull the socket from below to the very end of the thread that you tied to it, until the socket comes out through the hole above, and you see it through your eye.
then you shall pull on the socket and the thread, closing your eye for two or three days, until the hair grows back in its place and the flesh grows over it;Et si la chasse est trop foible que tu ne puisses la traire ains se rompt le fil, si mettrais la cheville de l’un costat et la cheville de l’auter en celui auter costat qu’il soit leu, tant
and if the hairs are short, then accompany it with a long hair from the tail of a horse, and let it grow along with it until it is elongated, and then release it.
of the eye's pus When this disease called "aleacrati" or warts comes on the eye, there are two ways in which it occurs:
One is natural and the other unnatural.
And it happens suddenly from a wound, or cutting or cauterization, and by similar means.
And the manner of the treatment for this is to split the wart, and separate its lips, and place in it flax threads, and let it stay until it heals.
And one must not use in its treatment anything that dries and constricts.Et si li porriture est innatureil, si tu les esprenges a l’huile d’olives et a l’huile d’am For if you do that, the disease will return worse than before;And s’el est en la paume de la main ou de la pie, si covient qu’
but treat with softening things, such as fenugreek; and use rosewater or water heated and seeded with flax, and apply a poultice of softened pig fat, and treat the area with ointments made from a variety of oils, and cover it with a tent, and apply a hot compress to the area.
And in your treatment, be sure that you do not allow it to heal according to its previous shape;
and the treatments we have described are for this condition alone, so that it does not return to its previous shape.
This disease, which is beneath what is truly called "the brain", is both natural and accidental.
Accidents come from wounds, incisions, cauterization, and similar things;
and the way to treat it is to take a needle and thread it with a double strand of thread, then insert the needle into the flesh and pass it through from one side of the wound to the other, so that the thread passes through both sides of the wound;
then they are sewn up at the top all along the needle, and the cone is made wide at the spatulate end. And if the shape of the parchment returns as it should, that is good;
if not, then take a razor and put it in the slit, and turn the parchment over, and make two slits along the inside of the parchment;
and the head of the two slits are at the two angles of the incision that you have cut, and an angle is made so that when they are put together, the shape is like that of a letter which has the form «I griesche»;
then remove this thread, according to the amount that its sides are stretched below, from that which follows the parchment, then join the two severed parts and sew them together with a thread of wool;
then treat with what we have said about softening medications and bandages until he is healed.
And if the illness comes from a tear or a cut or cautery, then you must make a clean cut under the hair of the scalp, and according to what is said above: then separate the two lips of the tent as I have said;
then separate the two lips of the tent as I have said; and the treatment should be according to the form of the disease, for it is very different in form, and the wise master doctor prepares an instrument with all his skill so that the form returns to its natural shape;
and the illness itself, according to what it needs in terms of treatment and instruments, in many different ways.
When this soudure happens to adult men in such a way that the scalp above is separated from the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must stick the tip of a razor under the scalp and lift it upward;
and they stretch them as far as they can withstand the subtle spatulum, neither too sharp nor too blunt, so that the patient cannot endure the pain of a spatulum that is too sharp or cuts the eye;
and your incision, by which you scrape that union, should be light, so that the membrane returns according to its natural shape;
and all that union is cleaned, and sometimes in the eye there is salty pus, and it is raised with fresh water and collarets;
then place a piece of linen between the membrane and the eye, and place over the eye wool moistened in egg white; and after three days use collarets and sudoric things until it is healed.
You should know that the nail has two manners: one is nervous and resembles a hard wart, and the other is not nervous but resembles frozen white moisture; when touched with iron, it feels numb to the fingers, yet no one can feel it.the first manner is when there is a vein beneath it; the second manner is when it has no vein beneath it, but is flat like a membrane.
and both the appearance begins towards the great tear duct, and grows little by little until it covers all the view and all the light and the movement of the eye.
And the manner of the incision is such that the patient puts his head in the air, then he works them; and lightly take the paper in your hand, then curl it with your nails as pincers of small doublet, and hold them on top; then take a needle, and put on it a horse's hair, or cow's, or ox's, and strong thread; and double the point of the needle a little and push it into the nail, and pierce all the way through the needle, and tie the nail with thread and hold them on top, and scrape along the side of the nail which follows the tear duct to the edge of the eyelid and attach the thread to the hair just above the tear duct, then cut off the remainder at the root of the tear duct all the way to the tear gland gently and with small forces, and leave the natural skin on the tear duct so that through the incision doesn't come the accustomed flesh;
and sometimes the nails are affected at the nailbed only, and along the nail, as we have said; then they scrape away all of the scaly skin that is the cause of this condition.
And be careful that the scaly skin does not touch and break the delicate flesh, and that the fingernail is not pierced;
and after making the incision, pour a little quicksilver into the wound, and apply a collar made of litharge, leaving it on until the next day; then treat it as needed until it is healed.
And if the nail is not sensitive and you cannot push in a needle, and the nailbed will not allow entry, many times this kind of nail has been cured by medicines;
and they grow back as I have described in the section on division; and if you see it covering up again, treat the nailbed according to the illness, taking the scaly skin gently with a sharp tool according to this method: And raise the nail gently, and if you see that it does not lessen and the pus is forced out, then distil from your mouth into the eye a collar made of litharge and red copper dust, and seal the eye until the next day.
If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then milk it, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then begin the work again as before, until it is healed.
Then restart the other treatment according to this same method, until it is completely removed.
And if the appearance of the flesh around the eye damages it greatly, then suspend it at the eyelid, and scrape away a part of it but not all, so that no body of tears comes to it.
Then distil into the eye a red collar made from litharge.
In some men's eyes, a red vein sometimes emerges and covers the pupil and constricts it, and then retreats into the back of the eye, resembling a rose made of brass.
and the work is such that the patient puts his head on yours, then he works them, and pulls all that flesh to hooks suitable for this, and holds it with strength;
then shave the first part of the flesh, and go all along shaving to the end, and be careful not to cut the eye during the operation;
and let the incision be from the spleen to that which we have said in the incision of the fingernail, and with small forces from which one removes the stone, as the form after this chapter demonstrates;
and when the incision is complete and all the flesh removed, then apply the eye of silk thread in which you distil red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines, and place over it cotton wool soaked in egg white, so that it is secured from hot abscesses;
and if nothing remains there, and the cold blood flows over it, and you doubt a hot abscess, then leave the eye and treat the abscess with things that soothe hot abscesses;
then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do as much as is adjusted in the eye by this appearance.
However, you should still lighten the treatment of each weak eye through the natural way; and of the accidental way, in the work of iron;
and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this member can bear that work.
Veins are red lines that cover the eye, they hinder vision and weaken the eye every day.
So it is necessary for the first thing you look at the eye, in which way it is, and out of which there is no other disease but the evil; then treat it in such a way:
instruct the patient to put his head down, then open those veins gently according to his wisdom, and let the veins be subtle and double according to this form:
And let two edges be gradual in one body according to this form:
then open those veins strongly, and draw out the blood hour after another, until you see those veins removed from the eye;
and be careful not to hurt the eye with the points of the spatulas, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very cautious in your work so that you do not miss any veins.
And when you have finished, distill into the eye a green and red collyrium to corrupt what is remaining of the infection.
And if you are unable to draw out everything in that hour, then apply an ointment to the eye of things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave it for a few days until the pain is eased and the abscess is secured with a hot poultice, then begin again according to the method described above until it is healed.
And this is the formula of the forces:
The physician called "Arisati" treated a fistula:
when you have treated it with cautery and medicine of fire according to what I have said above, and it is not healed, then there is an infection in it that you must cut open over the abscess, where it should be, and draw out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see the decay and blackness, then take all the tools with which this is formed;
and it is called 'asparagus', and it should be made of iron into a small head, and pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
And put on the location of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a little bit until you know that the corruption is gone;
and do this several times, then restore the place with drying medicines.
if the place is sewn up, and the flesh grows together, and the body of the wound is sewn up, and remains like this for 40 days, and it does not open again and no evil accident comes, then you may know that it is healed;
If not, there is no other remedy but to bring the fistula back to the opening of the ear according to this form: And it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron and with sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered, he takes the forest according to this form, and the head of the iron should be three-pointed, and the shaft should be thinned down to its tip as you see here:
Then he places it on the bone near the eardrum, and he removes his hand from the ear, then he returns to pushing the iron in until it pierces the bone, and the patient feels it through his eardrum if he keeps his hand over his ear.
And then it is healed with dry remedies as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows and hardens, he checks the matter in the ear. if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
When the eyes are fully open all around and there is no disturbance or diminution, then you must ligature the patient;
then cleanse the eye, then apply leeches or a hot poultice without burning to suck out the humor, then place on the eye an ointment made of acacia, aloe, incense, and myrrh, and then bind it up with bandages and cloths; and if it is a child,
and the manner of the cloths is that you fold soft cloths in half, and double each one in four, and then place them one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eye needs; and if it is a child,
then bind it firmly from above with a hard bandage, and reapply the leeches to suck without burning;and if there is still humor,then take a needle and pierce the eye at its upper corner,and apply the leeches again to suck out the humor.Then, place on the eye an ointment made
then remove the cupping glasses and leave the eye stretched day and night, and if the ligatures loosen, you must stretch it a lot.
then remove the bandage after a day and a night, and if you see the eye healing, that's good;
if not; then restart the poultice and bandages and the ligature and cupping glasses until it is healed.
from the rupture of a woven fabric When a disruption occurs in the woven web, then it opens up, and something like a grain of resin comes out, and it is terrible to see;
then, if you see it covering up, the treatment is such that you push a needle into the root of the part below up to the part above, then push another needle where there is a double thread on the eyelid; and have it pierced, and leave the first needle in place according to its position;
Then cut the thread of a double-threaded needle and tie one end around the eye, and tighten it well, then pull out the needle and place the moistened other eye on top.
and let it be until the thread breaks with the eye, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed;
and sometimes the wound is restrained by the eye on each side of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
And if the eyes appear large, then pierce them with a fine spatulum which comes from the depth of the eye, and scrape away the white moisture and lower the eyes, and enter immediately;
then pull it out until it is healed.
This disease called 'alkunati' has no cure except by removing the film that gathers in the eye, resembling descending water, but it is not water;
and the way to perform this operation is as follows: make the patient sit on a chair that is prepared and straight, then take the head in your hands from both sides, and move it until you see the jaw coming up to your eyes. then be quiet, and lower the light, and look at the patient's face as usual;
and if it does not go away, you know it is acute, and if the jaw' going down is not as we have described.
make the patient sit between your hands, then take the spatula and gently press on the membrane above the corner of the eye with the conjunctiva and the membrane, until the jaw releases.
and when it is released, put in the eye hot water mixed with honey, or boiling water or fenugreek and honey, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
of the eye waters We have already described the appearances of diseases in their various forms, and what is necessary to know about them. act according to the instructions regarding health.
You should make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light and towards the sun, and then close his healthy eye and squeeze it firmly.
Then place the paper on the eye with your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or with your right hand if they are on the right;
Then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand if they are on the right;
Then place the tip of the instrument below the white part of the eye near the inner corner, and then push the "almagda" gently and twist your hand so that it pierces the white of the eye, feeling for the empty space;
and the measure of the path of the alchemy should be at the bottom of the measure of the space which is from the prunelle to the end of the darkness; and it is the crown of the eye;
if you see the bone in that paper because of the clarity of the horned tissue, then put the instrument in the place where the water is, and then express it under one path after another.
if he sees the water now, let the patient see it before him and the instrument in his eye.
After a little rest, if the water rises up the second path, put it back with the instrument, and when it is stuck in and no longer rising, gently draw out the alchemy by turning your hand a little bit at a time;
and then put in a little gem oil, and remove that eye from inside. Then put by force into the eye cotton wool or linen moistened in rose oil and an abundance of egg white, and bind it with clean cloth.Si li aigue ne vout point remonier, si leve la fuer de dedans la vierne et de l’oil avec un picquet de fer ou d’oile de paume et legierement avec un puitier de fer; puis li lie avec l’oil sain.
If the water does not want to rise again, then lift the force from within the vein and eye with an iron rod or palm oil and gently with an iron spoon; then bind it with clean cloth. We, and those who are of our time, put on ground cumin mixed with an abundance of egg white.
And if  'almagda' cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some people whose eyes are too hard, then you should take the instrument called  'alberit', which has this shape:
And so pierce the conjunctiva only, and do not go too deep, but make the place subtle, then put in the alchemy as we have said;
and at the completion of the work, prepare for the patient by bringing to him a bed in a dark place where he can sleep on his back.
and let him abstain from all movement and eat light foods, and not move his head or to the right or left, and let him be bound according to his condition for three days.
Then release him in that same dark house and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then remove the bandage by the seventh day.
And you should not do this during the hour of the treatment or after an incision is made, but you should alleviate it, because the water rises rapidly.
If a hot abscess comes, release the eye before the seventh day, and use that which soothes an abscess;
and when it is appeased, he looses the bandage and puts a blindfold over his eyes to cover them, and then he is led into that dark room.
Then he leaves the house little by little, and returns to his senses;
and know that no student should interfere in this case. And one came to us from the Land of Israel, who told us that in his land they make almond milk, which is sucked out by a tube, but I have never seen any in our land, nor have I ever read about it in ancient books; and perhaps it is a new thing.Et je vis de la mesme aigue fere un pou monia, si que
And these are the similarities of the forms of almonds, so that those who do not know them may see them;
and they are properly of bronze: And the heads of the needles have this same subtlety, and the hindmost are pointed in three angles.
There are times when children are born with various deformities, and among them there are some who look like scorpions with feet.
and if they have a wound of flesh-colored hue, and if they have a sore of boney color. For those who have sores and not wounds, you should make the patient sit in your hands facing the sun;
For those who have sores and not wounds, you should make the patient sit in your hands facing the sun; open his nose, and pour oil on the sores, and draw it out; then hold what you can sustain with a thin, sharp spatula on one side, until you know that the sore is completely removed.
And if anything remains that cannot be scraped away, then open it with a thin, sharp instrument lightly, so that nothing is left behind; and if pus emerges, dry the wound as necessary;
and if they are malignant abscesses, then hasten and cauterize them until the pus is drained and all the corruption is removed; then drop honey or vinegar or wine on it. If the nose bleeds, and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is healthy;
and if moisture does not pass through as it should, know that there is corruption in the bone above, and so the instruments will not work to cut it out:
therefore you must insert a piece of thick linen thread, and it must be greased with lard, and there should be between each knot the width of a finger or less; and place one end of the thread in the patient's mouth at the tip of his tongue, and pull it through until it comes out the nose;
and many children do this at school, and it is an easy thing for anyone who wants to do it;
then hold the head that comes from the nose in one hand, and the other head that comes from the mouth in the other hand, and pull them one after the other while being careful like those who are on a thread.
Do this until you know that the night has corrupted the flesh. Then pull out the thread, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment before putting it back in the nose as before.
Do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of the flesh;
and then put in the nose a plug of cotton for several days until it is healed. If medicine is needed to dry it out, then use it.
And this is the shape of the instrument for purging the head, through which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
And it can be of silver or bronze, resembling an open lamp, like a candle, and lead them likewise;
and if you see fit, make a closed candle, and fill the instrument with medicine to cleanse the head;
and have someone hold the head when heating the oil or any other liquid.
of the heart through the nose
Many times a disease arises in the brain called "tuberculosis", which grows and becomes large, until it is visible to the eye;
and for this reason you must open it at the beginning, and cut out all that is rotten, then place on it the cautery or burning medicine;
and if one delays in opening it until it has grown large, then be careful that it is not hard, a bad colour, and lacking in feeling:
nor touch it with iron for it is an encrusted abscess, for when one opens it, great harm comes to the patient;
and if the abscess is from a soft touch, not a flowing colour, and you see that it can be completely covered, then empty the patient and cover it without fear, and treat the area with dry and constricting things.
Know that when a solution of continuation comes in one of these upper cartilage, it benefits little, unless in some men.
Therefore, whenever this happens to someone, look to see if the wound is fresh and bleeding; and then close the two lips with a stitch, then treat it until it heals;
and if the lips are separated on both sides, then you should cut all around their edges until they heal, then bring the two lips together with a stitch, and constrict them, and apply powdered dragon's blood over powdered incense; and put a piece of strong plaster or other adhesive plaster over the powders, and leave it until it comes off by itself, then treat it with ointment until it heals.
The manner of sewing is to prepare a solution: either with needles, as we have said in the suturing of the belly; or with thread, as I have already made known to you.
of lip abscesses
Within the lips there occur hard abscesses, resembling peas, both smaller and larger;
therefore you should turn up the lips, and cut on each nodule, and take it with tweezers and scrape in each part;
then apply vitriol powder to the wound after cutting, until the blood stops flowing;
and then leave it with honey, and clean the area of dried matter until it is healed.
Often there grow on the gums a pustule that the old call 'albus';
you should grip it with tweezers and scrape at its root, and let the pus or blood flow out;
then place on the site vitriol powder, or other restraining and drying powders;
and if the wound reopens after the incision, and this often happens, then close it again a second time, cauterizing it; if it does not reopen after cauterization;
Sometimes they form at the root of teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, which are ugly and rough; and sometimes the teeth turn black and green and rot, as the corruption spreads to the gums, and the teeth stink;
you should make the patient hold his head in your hands, and press on the teeth or gums where they are visible, until nothing remains; and so you should do with blackness and greenness, and yellowing and other stains, until they are removed;ensí si tu vois que li dent est noir dedens et citrin, et la gencive citrine, et li dent puant et la gencive puant, tant qu’il n’i demore puanteur ne
and if one removes what is at its base, that is good. if not, then repeat it again the next day and the third day, until you have removed everything.
and know that teeth have need of various instruments for removal, according to what the work shows them, because the forceps with which one removes the teeth are of a different shape from those used to remove things between the teeth. And these shapes and others should be prepared for you.
It is necessary when you cure a tooth of its pain that you delay pulling it as long as you can, because it must not be done quickly.Et si li dent est en tel leu de sa dolor que on ne peut le traire, et qu’il soit de si grant dolor qu’on ne doit pas le Because it is a very high substance until one has no excuse to pull it out.Et si li dent est en tel leu de sa dolor que on ne peut le traire, et qu’il soit de si grant dolor qu’on ne doit pas le raier, car c’est une substance
Therefore, when the patient is forced to pull, you must be certain of the tooth socket. Many times the pain deceives the patient, and he believes it is in a sound tooth, and has the good tooth pulled; and yet the pain does not leave him thereby, as long as the bad tooth remains, for we have already tried this with those healers;
and when you are quite certain of the tooth that is aching, then you must scrape all around it with a spatulum and press hard to push back the gum on all sides;
then seize it with your fingers or with fine tongs at the gum line and wiggle it gently until it is well loosened, then grip it firmly with the tongs; and have the patient's head between your knees, and hold it steady so that it does not move.
Then pull out the tooth carefully without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, take one of those instruments and insert it into each side gently, and move it as you did before.
And if the tooth is broken and has a hole in it, then you must fill it with wax where the hole is; and if he tightens it subtly with tweezers so that it does not break when being tightened;
and one must work around the gum very gently to loosen the tooth.
And be careful that you do not break it, and leave a part of it behind, and cause greater pain to the patient through the maliciousness of the root.
And beware of doing as the ignorant surgeons do, who in their haste and arrogance sometimes break the jaw, and don't listen to what we have instructed.
but sometimes cause great sickness by hurting the roots or breaking the jaw, as we have often seen.
and when the tooth is loose, wash the gum with wine or garlic and salt;
and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, then apply crushed vitriol to the site;
and if that doesn't work, then cauterize it.
The instruments for pulling teeth should have long, thin points and wide handles so that they do not bend when you pull the tooth;
and these are the forms: And they should be made of thick metal so that they do not bend when pulling, and they should be well-made iron, and they should be toothed to grip the roots.
of the tooth roots When the root remains in its place, you should apply wet cotton to the area for one or two days until the skin softens, and then use tweezers called "algefri" that make the shoulder look like a bird's beak.
They should be made inside as sharp as a file, and this is the shape:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tweezers, you must uncover the skin all around the root, and insert the instrument called "althali", that is, a spatula, whose shape is as follows:
It should be sturdy and thick so that it does not break, and if the root comes out through it, that' is good.
If not, use all your tools, and the forms come afterwards as follows:
And one can also use this instrument with .ij. fingers, whose shape is as follows: and other tools which are in front of the reason for the teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large tweezers, whose shape is as follows:
And let this tool be strong so that it does not break, and know that there are many tools for teeth. There are also other tools which are not counted.
And the wise master finds his own tools according to what his experience and the illness show him, for there are many types of illnesses that the ancients did not teach tools for due to their diversity; if he does not break through the bone or other bones but pierces through, then he should seek the tools that are needed as I have told you, and aid himself with gestures.
And they must be thick and well-fitting to hold the bone, so that it does not slip, but can be held and removed;
then restore the place with appropriate medicine, and if there is swelling in the bone, and it is small, then treat it with this instrument:
When a tooth appears not according to nature, and its shape is ugly, especially in virgin women, you must know whether the tooth is new after teething, and is not in the right place, and cannot be filed or ground down:
then pull it out; and if there is an abscess with the tooth, take this instrument, of which the shape is like a small beak, and made of iron sharpened at its tip;
And tap it gently day by day because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others. And if it is apparent that it can be ground down, then grind it with a file like this, in the shape shown:
it is also like a file, with which needles are made;
and in lime gently pick at the tooth a little bit by bit, so that it does not move until it comes out;
then smooth it at the end with no razor, and if the tooth is too sharp and it cuts the tongue, then file down the roughness until it is even so that it does not cut the tongue or corrupt speech.
When the front teeth are loose from either a blow or falling, and the patient cannot bite down on what they eat without it coming out, and you have tried restraining medicines without success,
then they should be restrained with a gold wire, for silver wire turns green and rots away, but gold never moves.
The wire should be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the amount of space between the teeth;
and if you see the teeth leaning to one side, take a thread and tie it double between two healthy teeth, then place the head between the loose teeth, whether there is one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then start the binding again from where you began, and stretch your hand gently and firmly until it does not move;
and tie it at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Then cut the thread with pliers and gather it together, then tie it between the healthy teeth so that it does not irritate the tongue;
then leave it as tightly as possible for as long as it can stay in place, and if it comes undone or the thread breaks, tie it with another thread;
it will stay in place and serve its purpose for as long as needed, and this is the shape of the teeth and how they lean to one side, as you can see;
And when a tooth falls out, if one puts it back in its place, bit by bit, as we have said;
and no one who is not wise and experienced should meddle with it, and sometimes a tooth is made from cow bone, and it is put in the place where there is a gap, and it is held steady as we have said, and it remains and functions for a long time.
Sometimes this type of growth comes from under the tongue, where nature creates it; or as a result of an injury.
and the treatment is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and put his head in your lap, and lift up his tongue;
then grab the nerve under the tongue, as wide as the tongue is dislocated from its socket, and if there is swelling or a lump, which is due to an injury, then push in with the fingernail and grab it under the tongue;
and be careful that the split is not too deep, because of the artery underneath.
And when you have finished, raise the area with rose water and parsley, or cold water, then put underneath the tongue a tent made of linen;
and treat the patient every night so that the wound does not close over.
And if there is bleeding, put ground glass onto the area; and if the blood is flowing, cauterize it with a slow-acting cautery which is good for this purpose. Then treat it again and again until it is healed;
and if you see it is black or hard, and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is gangrene.
And if it is inclined to white pus and there is moisture, pierce it with an éléphant's tusk, and drain it from one side and the other; and if their blood flows onto your work, then place powdered vitriol on it until it is stained, then return to your work until you have finished everything.
then lift the ax and the saw, and cure it with other cures until it is healed.
from abscesses in the throat Sometimes, bumps called "godath" (possibly referring to a type of ulcer) appear in the throat, and they are properly called "almonds." When you treat them as described in the previous section and they do not heal, then be cautious:
if it is a hard abscess of a small size and light color, do not touch it with iron.Si li corps est de la figure d’une bete fendee, et li corps est mort, il ne le puet demorer; mais si li
And if the body is shaped like a split animal, and the body is dead, it cannot survive. But if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron due to blood flow;Car il se doit curer en autre manier que li corps soit san: il doit curer en le but let it grow until it is long, and then you will cut it off, or it will break on its own.
And if they are of a white color and the roots are thin, then prepare the instrument for cauterizing, but first examine whether the abscesses have calmed down and become quiet.
Then let the patient sit facing the sun, and his head in your lap, and open his mouth and hold the instrument between his teeth, and press his tongue down on it so that the tip of the instrument is positioned correctly.
It should be made of silver or thin brass like a small knife:
When you have pressed the tongue against the tip of the instrument and seen the abscess, grab it with forceps and pull it out, as far as you can.
and bring some cloth with you, then the cup to the instrument, from which is the shape, that looks like some strength; the ends are bent and one towards the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or steel:
If you do not have this instrument available, use tweezers, which should be shaped like a hook: And they are serrated on one side and smooth on the other;
and when you have cupped one of the testicles, then cup the other in the same way, and after the incision gargle the patient with warm water, and water and garlic, and if there is bleeding, then gargle the patient with water, or pomegranate peels are cooked, or myrrh, and similar things, until the blood is stanched; then he heals until it is healed;
and sometimes other abscesses grow in the throat besides the two testicles, so cup them then as the two testicles are cupped.
And I treated a woman of an abscess which was inside her throat, that is to say, a small abscess.
and had almost closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the passageway which was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if it continued for one or two more days.
And the abscess had become so swollen that it had pushed up two warts from the back of her throat.
I therefore acted quickly, and inserted a hook into the abscess, then pulled it outwards, and extracted a large amount of pus;
then I made an incision in the other nostril, and cleared her throat and pressed on her tongue;
afterwards, I inserted a hook into the abscesses, and scooped out some of it, and only a little blood came out; and thus the passageway of the throat was cleared for the woman, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I continued to lance this abscess for a long time;
and the abscesses grew back again, filling the space that I had emptied, until it became very large;
so I lanced and cauterized it within the throat: thus it stopped growing;
and I left that area, and may God do with him what he will after I am gone.
of the grape
When the eye descends to the pupil, and it is swollen and distant, it is called "perpendicular";
and if it is below it is large and round, it is called  "eye".;
When it is cut as we have said in the division, and the cautery does not help, and you see that the abscess has subsided and it is subtle, then you must scoop it out;
and that which is round and gathered together and not distant; and it is blood red or fawn colored or black, then you should avoid incising it. For there is great danger to the patient.
Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have described, from its whiteness and length, you should have the patient sit facing the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument which we mentioned earlier: then insert the needle into the eye, and draw it out from underneath, and cut off the tip of one of the two instruments that I mentioned for the incision on the two almonds.
And you should not cut deeper than the excess which is beyond the natural limit;
for if you cut deeper, it harms the voice and speech;
and after the incision, use what we said about the incision on the two almonds, and treat it until it heals.
And if the patient has fear of covering, then you should use an incision to treat his fear.
And the method of cautery is for acute fever. And let the patient place his head in your lap, and then press his tongue against the instrument we mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and mix it with hot water, so that it is neither too thick nor too clear. and use the application of this instrument, whose shape is described as follows:
At the end of the shaft there is a cup or bowl in which the medicine is placed, like the bowl of a spoon, and with the instrument one applies all the medicine to the eye;
and the patient should lie on his side, so that the saliva and mucus run out of his mouth from the medicine, so that it does not descend into the throat and lungs;
then hold your hand over the medicine and press it onto the eye for about half an hour, until you see it becoming soft and the stinging of the medicine subsiding;
and if you see [it], take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and wet the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument all the way into the cotton on the cane above, so that the cotton sticks to the ulcer;
and do this often, until the cautery is complete, then leave it to dry and fall off after 4 or 5 days.
And if you need to renew the cautery with medicine, do so, and after the cautery is complete, wash around the ulcer with cotton dipped in butter, and cleanse what is around the medicine;
and then rinse with cold water, and treat with gargles until it heals.
This treatment is safer than incision or cautery;
If it is treated by fumigation according to this method, take calamintha and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and avens and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of them in a pot, and put garlic in it, and let it boil;
and the pots are well glued with strong earth, and inside the pot there is a chewed instrument according to this manner: It can be made of silver or bronze, and one end is placed in the mouth of the patient so that the vapors rise into the eye through the canal until the eye is numbed.
Afterwards, he repeats this often until the eye dries out. Be careful not to do this at the beginning of a hot abscess, for many things can happen then. and not to do this except during the decline of a hot abscess.
And if this instrument is not present, take a straw and put an egg yolk inside it so that the mouth of the patient is not too hot; for the straw will not let the vapor harm the mouth, and this is a good and healthy treatment together.
Many times an object gets stuck in the throat, such as a fish bone or some other thing.
If you can see something in the throat, then press the tongue against it with your instrument under the light of the sun until you feel movement;
and if something is stuck in the throat and cannot be removed, then you should make the patient vomit until the meat is cooked in the stomach; by chance the object may come out through vomiting;s’il ne peut muer la chose tant qu’il soit cuite en l’estomac,
If the object cannot be moved while it is still in the stomach, or if the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of rope, or a lettuce root, or a piece of dry bread;et li faice boire vin et aiglent; and give him wine and vinegar to drink; and attach a string to the sponge and then swallow it;Et se li morcelz de pain sont trop gros, li faice les rem and when it comes to the surface, then it will bleed, and then you will pull it out;
and if it does not come out as we have said, then take an instrument of lead according to this form:
And the instrument should be curved at its tip so that it can more easily enter the throat, and the head should be lifted up high; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, or he will choke, nor push the bone inside;
and it is better that the patient himself inserts the instrument, so that he can feel where the object is; if he swallows it, then he should pull it out with the instrument evenly, until it is out.
of the saliva of the throat
Sometimes the blood is drawn, as I have said in the division, through medical treatments; and if this does not help, then look at the back of the throat towards the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument that I have told you about.
And if you see the blood, draw it out with a small hook, or with fine tweezers suitable for this purpose.
And if this does not work, take a pointed stick, and insert it into the throat of the ill person; then heat the tip of the stick with hot iron, and do this frequently. And if the patient has a fever all day.
then take a full glass of cold water, open your mouth and pour it in without swallowing, moving the water around with your hand frequently. and as soon as the blood feels the water, it will clot.
And if it does not clot as we have said, then smoke out the patient with assafetida using the instrument I mentioned for smoking out the throat.
Do this many times, because it will clot without bleeding.Et s’il se trouve en la bouche ou a la gorge lou sang qu’il ne peut engluitir,
And the method of smoking is that you heat a pot with burning charcoal until it has a layer of ash, and in this ash is the tip of the instrument;
then you shall apply the smoke, and the patient place the end of the cane in his mouth, and close his mouth so that the smoke does not escape but reaches the blood vessels.
and the blood vessels will burst now, and if they do not, then resume the smoke treatment many times;
and let the patient endure thirst, and eat salted and bitter things, and drink no water;
and then it will be necessary for her to go out by this method of treatment.
And the shape of the instrument used to treat the blood vessels is, when one can see it, like bent tongs in order to enter the throat; and has the appearance of a surgeon's forceps, and it has roughness from liming, so that what it grasps, it cannot let go;
There are many kinds of abscesses, according to what recollections come here after from both this book and others, and they differ in penetration and size:
and they are of two types, the first of which is in its appearance the same, and due to what it holds in moisture.
And the second kind is due to the locations where they are in the body.
For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundations, and the abscesses of fleshy places are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
And one must not pierce abscesses until the boil is mature according to its completion;
and there are some that one must pierce when they have become crusty, and do not die according to their completion, such as abscesses that are near joints.Et sont divers les apostemes, car il en ont de lor taille et lor perforation;
For when abscesses come near joints, and one lets it be so long that it is pus around, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, which causes contraction in that limb.Et si il le percierent, et il se curast adés, si est cause de grant mal a celui qui a la jointure, car il ne puet remuer li meisme membre tant qu’il vult.
Abscesses are diverse, for they have different sizes and penetrations. The abscess may be near the principal member, and if you delay the penetration until it is mature, it will harm the principal member;
or if it is near the foundation, one must pierce it so that it dies.
and one must not pierce an abscess without digestion being complete, except for the one that is near the foundation, which should be allowed to drain freely inside, and a fistula will result. and it cannot heal in a short time.
And one must know the hour of the piercing of the abscess which is dead according to completion, and it is when the pain is eased, and the lessening of fever, and the decrease in swelling and redness, and the cooling and hardening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs;
and one must pierce in the highest part of the abscess, and where it appears softest;
and the piercing must be done deeply into the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints, near nerves, and throughout all places where there is no fold. For those who bend, according to the affected member.
And when an abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to let the piercing wait until it is confirmed with digestion complete, as we have said.
For if you pierce it before this, then the body is stretched out from its venom, and it is filled with much filth. and perhaps harden his lips and his depths.
And if there is an abscess which has been pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the member needs.
And you should treat it with small abscesses, small holes; and in large abscesses, large holes, and many slits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess;
and if there are such abscesses where one must cut into the brain, and cover; when it has become as soft as a grape, and is dead, then one should do as one does with blisters:
and some are split into three angles, and some are covered as the fuel of myrrh, as with abscesses of the bones;
and some where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar coverings.
Those who have no head, as with a superficial abscess, you must pierce it directly.
And when the abscess is large and has formed a great boil, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus in one hour, but only a portion of it. Then pack the abscess until the next day, then draw out some more the following day; Do this repeatedly, a little at a time, until all the pus has been released.
Especially if the patient is weak, or a woman carrying a child, a small child, or an elderly person. For sometimes an experienced surgeon jumps with the release of gas from the belly, which may kill the patient, and you would not know it.
Therefore, be very cautious with this chapter. After you have pierced the abscess, wash the wound and check if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it's a clean cut, apply bandages made of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess with many openings, you should put a tent in each opening so that they come together.
and if you have cut into the abscess and cut around it, then you should fill it with old cotton or a lining of linen without moisture, and ligate it up to the third day.
then remove the bone and treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
And if bleeding occurs in your work, bring cold water and vinegar, and moisten the cloth, and place it over the bleeding area many times.
And if the blood flow continues, and there is administration of medicine and treatment, and the powders I have described earlier in this book, and it occurs in winter, and the abscess is very nervous, then you should put wet tents and clothes soaked in hot wine and oil on top.
and if it is in the summer, and the area is fleshy, then you should put wet clothes soaked in water and oil or cold wine and oil on top for up to a third of a day, as we have said.
then open the abscess, clean and treat it as necessary until it is healed.
And this is what one should generally understand about the treatment of abscesses:
I have told you how to proceed with the treatment of abscesses, and now listen to the chapter.
From the neck come small abscesses, which are common in people who work in wool, like the pimples on a goat's udder; there are many variations of these.
There are some that are fatty and others that contain pus and moisture;
and there are some which are hard and stone-like in texture, and they do not cause doubt if the artery does not oppose them.
And the operations of the waist are such that you should test all instruments called "dislocators", from which the forms come later, what they contain.
For if it contains moisture, they will push it out from above the length.
And when the moisture is evacuated, one should scorch it without leaving anything behind that holds the moisture, for it will return as soon as something is left behind.
Then plunge cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is available; if not, in water and salt, and apply it to the wound and let it sit until the next day. and those who are delayed by night.
And then resume the cotton, as before, on the second and third days, until you know that it no longer remains overnight;
then treat the wound with ointment appropriately, until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains pus, then open it according to this method, from the long side; and cut your fingernails, and remove all scabs, and put all your efforts into milking the wound where it lies under the skin;
and if the artery opposes you, then do what I told you after.
And also treat an abscess if it is piercing, and cutting and treating as I have told you.
And the cut on the piercing abscess and moistness is lighter, because they are full of blood. And in some of these abscesses, if there is no moisture, and among them was one that I opened on the head of an old woman;
and I found the abscess like a hard stone, rough and white, and could not be broken; and if one were to cut them, they would bleed just as much as a stone.
In other abscesses that come on the head or neck, as opposed to those which come on the heads of children and at the roots of ears, the opening should be left open in the most dependent part to allow pus to drain out.
and treat them as appropriate.
Many times abscesses occur on the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin area, and sometimes they come elsewhere in the body, and they are large, and some are joined together.
And each scrofula is properly within its coat, like the nodule and abscess of the neck, as we have said; and there are many similarities among them.
and there are many similarities among them. There are some that contain moisture, and others that are stubborn and do not want to heal.And li chiés des enfans si adont qu’il ont scrophule dedens le col, ou dedens la teste, ou dedens les oreilles, ou dedens les costes, et il n’i a pas de scrophule qui ne contienent moistor et sanguine.
Therefore, if you see one of good disposition to touch, and resembling the color of the body, and soft in each part and not hard on the nerves of the neck or artery or channel, and not deep;
you should cut it from above and scrape off the skin of each part, and if you have need, cut the two lips of the ulcer at the edges, as we have said about abscesses on the neck;
and pull it little by little, being careful not to touch the nerve or the vein, and do not use the spatula or forceps, so that the hand does not slip, and do not look too far ahead, so that you do not cover what you should not.
And if you touch the vein or artery and it will not let you work, put into the wound powdered vitriol, or any powder that stops bleeding, and bind the wound. and leave it until the abscess is relieved and the wound is softened and begins to suppurate.
And when the bleeding has stopped, return to your work, until you have finished it.
Then examine with your finger if there are any small scrofulae remaining; cut them out and clean them.Et si tu copes a la voinne ou artere, et ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que
And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, you should not cut that scrofula at its root, but ligature it with a strong double thread and let it drop down from it without harm.
Then employ the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then cure it.
And if you pick the entire scab, you should bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them now, so that no superfluity remains due to the size of the scab. you should attend to picking at its root, and pulling it out, and sewing it as we have said.
you should attend to picking at its root, and pulling it out, and sewing it as we have said. Those scrofula that have suppuration, pierce where it appears to be flowing;
And piercing it thus as the one before mentioned, depending on it, then treat it with tenting with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; And when the wound is well cleaned, then cure it with ointment bandaging, until it is healed.Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double
The ancients said and spoke about the incision of the throat; But I have never seen anyone in our land who does this, and it is their written word.
For those with a squint, the flap of skin in the throat called the "epiglottis" must be cut away; and this is not helped by that, because all the veins and the pus from the malady are in those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or in the throat, or in the armpits.
When the illness is in the channel of the lungs, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the loss that comes from strangulation.
Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, we should cut it under the third or fourth rib, a small slit across, between the two circles, or according to the quantity of the slit in the soft palate; not in the cartilage;
and those places are suitable for the cut of the epiglottis where there is no cartilage, and the vessels are long from there.
And if the master is fearful, then he should stretch the skin of the throat all the way to the Adam's apple, then split the chest until it reaches the backbone. and avoid blood vessels, if you see any, and then cut through the windpipe, as we have said;
and it is demonstrated by the flow of blood from the wound in the backbone, and by the lack of voice;
and leave the wound open for a while.
And when the hour has passed at which one doubts about strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound in the chest, and stitch it up completely without the cartilage;
then administer remedies that promote flesh growth, until it is healed.And if there is any sign of gangrene in the wounded man, cut off all the dead tissue with a sharp knife and apply an ointment
Albucasim says that one should not do this until the throat is completely healed, and the patient is judged dead, and the lack of breath. Therefore, cut through the epiglottis so that the patient cannot choke, and he will breathe through the wound, and thus be saved from death;
and therefore the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease had passed, and it passed in three or four days. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and treat it, until it was healed.
And I will tell you what I saw. I saw a lady take a knife and stab herself in the throat, cutting some of the windpipe;
and I was called to heal her, and found her as good as dead.
I uncovered the wound and found that the blood had not come out through the throat or windpipe but instead was escaping through the wound itself.
I hurried, sewed up the wound, and treated it until it healed;
and the lady had no more than a hoarseness in her voice, and she returned to her senses afterwards;
therefore I say that one should have no fear of cutting into the epiglottis.
This hernia is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a large hernia in the color of ochre, and it is very common in women.
And there are two ways of treating it: Natural and accidental;
Or natural without cause.
And the accidental ones are in two ways, one which is similar to fat and the other like an abscess that comes from an artery. And there is fear in it, and one should not operate with force unless the hernia is small; you should test and probe throughout the whole opening: If you find it as soft as fat and there is no vein, then treat it like an abscess and cut all around its head if there is nothing there. But if: You probe well and treat the abscess as it should be, until it is perfectly healed.
There are many ways to do this, and I will describe all their appearances.
And now I must explain the difference between a cut and a dislocation.
I say that a dislocation is when there is a constant fever until the swelling has passed and the wound has healed: then the fever and heat abate.Et la fievre et le chalor reposiez, si comence li porriture, qui
With a cut, there is no fever or heat or pain, and it contains pus, which is its own sac and is the color of the body's flesh. It starts like a pimple and becomes swollen:et si li porriture ne voudra point acomplir, si la fievre et le chalor ne ceient point, et li porriture ne creissez point;
and if the swelling won't go down and the fever and heat don't abate, and the pus doesn't increase in size, then they are of two types: dry or moist, and their colors vary as I have described.
When you come to the treatment of the nose, you should first test and examine it with an instrument called an "introducer", according to what its shape comes from in the following chapter.
And the manner of inquiring into abscesses on the brain is to squeeze the most moist place that you find in the abscess, and gradually move your fingers, until you feel that the instrument has penetrated the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
Then pull out the instrument, and be careful not to let anything slip out.
If the pus flows easily, whatever its color, treat it as I have said for other abscesses.
And if after the instrument no pus comes out, know that it is hard, so treat it in the shape of a cross, and grab it with tweezers, and gently scrape each side and guard the membrane where it lies so that you draw it out healthy with the brain.
And if you cannot draw it out healthy, then pull it in pieces so that nothing remains.Et est-il grant danger que li chiés de l’ajutoire soit desaloiez, et il ne peuit demorer en son leu; et il est grant dolor al
For if he does not move anything, then it returns to him many times.
and if he stays a little while and the wound does not trouble him, then apply some corrosive powders to the wound, press on it, and put hot poultices on it; treat the wound with other treatments until it is healed.
and if the wound is large, then cut the two lips of the wound and treat it with what heals flesh.
and if the bleeding vein is contrary to you or another, then hurry and apply powdered vitriol to the spot and leave it there for two or three days until the wound scabs over and the bleeding stops; then return to binding what has been left open.
Here are the forms of instruments for dislocation, and there are three types: large, medium, and small;
and there are three types of warts which are called "albaret", and one type is called "breb", and there are three varieties: large, medium, and small, in order to surround the abscesses of fistulas;
and they are like the needles used to sew witches, made of brass, iron, or silver, and the yellow-tinted ones are the most effective, proven to be so, for surrounding the growths of fistulas;
and there are three types: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the opening of the fistula.
The shapes of the knives are very varied, as you can see here:
and there are knives with two curves of three types as well;
and if [it is] the elbow which has three curves, and [is] also in three ways;
and if [it is] the elbow which has two curves, and [the] elbow of one curve only, and  [is] in three ways;
and all these are necessary in their place.
The heads of these knives are cutting tools, and there are some which do not cut except from one side, so that we do not cut the vein or nerve;
and these probes are placed in handles, so that the patient does not hurt themselves when opening abscesses;
and they are of three types: large, small and medium, as you see;
and we do not use them except in fleshy places, such as legs and arms, and breasts, and armpits, and similar places;
and sometimes another small instrument is made, resembling the slices of a fig, according to this shape, with which one stanches blood: and it is sometimes placed in the place that heals by filling the veins and arteries, and sometimes they are filled according to this great form:
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell up when they become corrupt, so that they look like women's breasts;
and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, should apply the ointment described in this chapter from line b to g: then scrape off the fat, and fill the wound with an ointment made from pitch, then stitch together the two lips of the wound, and let it heal.
And if the breast sags down, and becomes soft due to its size just like it happens to women, then they should make two cuts above it, like two similar incisions; and the two cuts should meet at the bottom, so that the larger cut contains the smaller one according to this shape from line b to g; then scorches the skin between the two lips, and removes the fat, and applies what we have said about stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary for the treatment, until he is healed;
and if he is not healed, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient will not rest, or due to bleeding, you should fill the wound with wet cotton soaked in corrosive ointment; and let it remain until it dissolves the remainder and the fat, then treat it until he is healed.
These abscesses that come from under the armpits are like hard scrofula and they have nodules, and some contain moisture.
Those who retain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line b to line g: And when all the content of the abscess is drained, then fill the wound with clean cotton, and leave it until the next day; then remove all the cotton and dress it with suitable ointment until it heals.
And if the abscesses are like scrofula, then treat them as we have said for fissures of scrofula, and if the wound is closed, then administer cautery as we have said before.
When an artery is severed, and the skin on top is sutured, it often results in abscesses, and likewise, the vein becomes swollen and abscessed;
and if one knows it is due to an artery, then the abscesses are long and deep; and when you feel it with your fingers, you will feel the dislocation;
and when it is in the vein, there is a visible swelling;
and it is foolish to cover this abscess, especially when it is under the armpits and in the groin, neck, and many other places, and is very large. Therefore, one should avoid cauterizing with iron, and the one who is on top should also be avoided, and in the one who has inflammation of an artery that opens above the skin of the neck;
then operate with a knife, and cut the artery from the threads well, so that it is exposed;et puis fent un trou au chief de la pize, si grand com ele soit;
then make a hole in the head of the stone, as large as it is; then put an awl under it, and pierce it through to the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread in two places, according to how I instructed you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples;et si c’est une pize que ne se puet aler, et ele est trop grosse, covient le fendre, et aler l’artere qui soit dedenz, et la tyier;
then point the location between the two strings of an introducer so that the pus flows out and the abscess is drained.
then apply the treatment that dries up pus, until the wound drains; then treat with ointment appropriate for this, until it is healed;
and if the abscess is due to the size of the wound, you should dye your hand with something from the abscess all over the skin, then insert a needle under the area you're holding, and thread a double length of string through it, so that you can pull it from the other side; then tie off the abscess, as I've told you, tying one end of the string to each shoulder;
and if you're worried the string might slip out, insert another needle through the entire length of the string under the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tie the strings in four places;
then scrape the abscess until the excess fluid drains out, then scrape off the excess from the wound and leave what is stuck to it.
then place a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil over the wound, then apply poultices and ointments until it is healed.
Also, as abscesses come in the artery and vein, they also come in the nerves when they are injured, or from too great exertion, and similar things.
This happens most often at the shoulders and in all joints where there is an abscess, and its color resembles that of the body, and it has various appearances without pain;
and when you press it firmly, it hurts, and it is not deep in the body but under the skin;
and it cannot move in any direction, neither forward nor backward, nor downward nor upward, and that which is in joints should not be cauterized with iron: for there may be contraction; and that which is on the head or forehead, use the spiderwort plant.
and that which is on the head or forehead, use the spiderwort plant. If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers and squeeze it at its root;
and if it is large, they suspend it with a hook, and cut it open, then remove the bone and sew up the wound until it heals.
Sometimes it occurs in bellies and nowhere else, and is a disease called "mushroom" due to its resemblance to mushrooms, with thin roots and thick stems;
and there are both small and very large ones;
and I saw one man who had two in his belly that looked more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had thin roots, and were slightly cracked, and moisture ran out of them.
I cut them open and found one weighing 18 ounces and the other 6 ounces, and the procedure for incising is to look at the wound if it is moist, and the color of the joint is white and moist with thin roots; if the blade of the spatule is wide, and have the fire cautery ready in your presence.
if the blade of the spatule is wide, and have the fire cautery ready in your presence. For in cutting there are often excessive bleedings of blood, and if it bleeds profusely, then hasten to the cautery.
and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the incision with the knife, take a well-prepared thread, tie it around the tendon as we have said, and leave it for two days;
and then release it, and keep tightening the thread until the tendon is cut without pain;
and if the roots are large, there is fear of cutting near the belly as well, but you can cut half of it, then cauterize it so that it does not grow back.
Then treat the wound and be careful not to cut the skin which is of a bluish color and poor in feeling and of milky appearance.
For this is a deep abscess, and I will come to the treatment of ulcers next.
when the boil has burst If the appearance of a hernia comes from cauterization of a wound or from a fissure in the syphilis, and it is on the abdomen and some of the bowels, as it happens in other routings, or from blood flowing from veins or arteries according to what is before, or from flatulence;
and if it is from the syphilis routing and from the bowel output, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a minor thing without pain, and it opens with various outputs. And if it is from the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it with their fingers, it pops out, and then returns in, and sometimes it is dried up, and increases a lot at the entrance of the bath and through hard work.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a minor thing, and it opens well when you press it with your hand, and it does not constrict at all;Et se li bouez sont desaloiez de lor lieu, et li chiés adoun desaloiez, si convient que tu les remettes a lor
And if the bowels are dislocated from their place, and the head is also dislocated, then you must reset them to their place;and if it is due to blood, then the large and hard abscesses open according to a certain quantity;Et se c’est par ventositeit, si convient que tu and if it is due to windiness, then it is soft in the touch, and the works are such that you look to see whether the appearance is from the blood of the artery, or the vein, or windiness.
and if it is due to windiness, then it is soft in the touch, and the works are such that you look to see whether the appearance is from the blood of the artery, or the vein, or windiness. If you are to leave the wound untreated, then: For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding both the artery and the vein.
And if the appearance is from the intestines or the belly, then it is necessary that you command the patient to tighten his armpit, and be stretched out straight, then sign all around the pit; then command him to lie down soon between your hands, then go around the place that you have signed all over the spatumile, then put half of the abscess at the top to all the great hook; then tie it around with a strong thread, or a strong silk rope firmly, and let the navel be absolved;
then work half of the stretched abscess on the string, and put in your index finger, and seek the intestine; If you find it caught in the bowel, loosen it and push the intestine back into the abdomen.
And if you find the bowels blocked, grab them at the anus, and cut off the excess.
And if the arteries are contrary to you, or the vein, go around gently, then return to your work and take two needles, and thread two strong threads, and thread the two needles through what you have done in a cross shape that you are piercing.
Then stretch the abscess in four places on the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave it so that it may drain, and push out the dead flesh by itself. Or cut it when it is subtle and drainage, then clean it as necessary, and bandage the abscess as we have said.
Or cut it when it is subtle and drainage, then clean it as necessary, and bandage the abscess as we have said. And extract the blood or moisture which you find, then clean the area as it should be, and close the wound.
for sores We have discussed in the previous section the appearance of sores, and how one should treat them with medication, and how one must avoid using an iron cautery;
and we will now discuss sores that appear on the testicles, and the great caution one must take in treating them, according to the ancients. When sores appear on places where they can be scratched, like on the breasts, thighs, and similar areas, and when they are in their initial stage, they should all be removed.
I have never seen anyone heal from this.
And the operation, when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you sometimes cleanse the patient of black bile.
Then have him bleed if he shows signs of fullness, then ease the pain in the affected area to perform the operation.
Then inspect his genitals and anus, and the head from all sides, leaving nothing untouched;
and let the blood flow out freely, and squeeze the area with your hand or something else, and if the blood flow is contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize it until the bleeding stops. Then treat him again until he is healed.
of dropsy We have already described the types of dropsy, how the accumulation of fluid occurs, and the signs of each type, as well as the treatment through medicine and surgery.
and one must not touch with iron in these two cases: that is to say, tympany and ipohondria, for they are deadly things;
therefore when you treat this appearance of dropsy which is called 'scalded' with medicines, and the treatment does not help, look to see if the patient is weak, or if he has another illness than dropsy, such as thirst and stomachache, and similar things; do not touch with iron, for there is doubt in it;
and if you see the patient is very strong, and he has no other illness but dropsy alone, and he is not too young or too old, then you must work thus: let the patient lie on his back in your arms, and press his stomach upwards by pushing the water to the lowest part of his feet; then take the spatiumile with thorns according to this form: And let there be two parts. with a point, and yet not so sharp that it can reach the intestines when thrust in, nor cause bleeding.
then examine whether the dropsy is localized towards the intestines: if you should cut into the buttock three fingers deep directly under the hip bone; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, then your cut should be at the left side of the buttock three fingers deep;
and if it's due to kidney disease, then it should be on the right side, and the patient must not lie on the cut so that the excess fluids do not flow into that weak area;
then pierce through the skin with your instrument, and insert it, and lift your hand to all the spatumile between the skin and the syfac as much as an inch or so deep;
then pierce the syphilis until the sputum comes to the surface, and that is the source of the pus, then pull it out, and insert this instrument from which comes the shape: And it is similar to a thin silver rod, and is made of light bronze or brass, and has at the bottom a small hole: and on one side, it has three holes; and two on the other, and one on the other;
and the end is shaped like a feather, and that is the shape of the incision from which the scribes cut feathers:
at the top there is a groove, so that when the instrument comes to the pus, it will immediately go onto the instrument;
so draw off half or a third, for if you draw off more than is proper in that hour, by chance the patient may die from the shock to his spirit, or he will faint, or he will approach death;
but empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the malady signify, and his pulses;
then treat the instrument and retain the water, which is now retained by the plug that blocks the hole on the syphilis, about which I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner;
then restart the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering from that, and treat a little water;
do this every day, and keep applying until there is no more water but a little bit of water.
And if you doubt the patient, and leave a lot of water, then treat with hot sand or sachet, and by much sweating or bathing and in the sun, and drink tea; and treatment with drying medications until they are healed, and cauterize the stomach and liver and spleen after the extraction of the pus, as I said before.
Sometimes children are born without a foreskin, or with a small foreskin, or one that is not in its proper place.
If necessary, cut into the foreskin with a very thin knife according to this method:
then place a small, fine plug of wool in the urethra, and tie it and hold it there for three or four days. When he wants to urinate, remove the plug and let him urinate, then replace the plug.
Perhaps this is not necessary, because the pus that comes out will not allow it to close.
Those whose foreskin is small, if they are circumcised with a sharp knife, as we have said, will enlarge.
Those who do not have an opening in their place are bloated, because some are born with the opening at the head of the penis, which prevents them from urinating until they lift their penis upwards. They cannot ejaculate because the material cannot reach the bladder, and this is a serious disease.Et ceux qui ont le pertus bas, tel pertuis est plus grant et plus large que l’auter; et quant il se tient en litiere et s’assied, li urine ne puet venir a la marris, si qu’il
And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies on his back, then the top of the rod and the cup are also as big as a feather, so that the hole piece in the middle, as it should be.
And beware of bleeding that often occurs, and if it happens, then stop the flow of blood from whoever is bleeding, and cure the wound until it is healed.
of pustules on the penis Many times these warts come on the penis, and they are an ugly-looking growth;
and there are both malicious and harmless ones;
so you should grab them with a needle subtly, and cut and clean all of them, then put cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment on top; then cure it with diaphenicon ointment until it is healed.
And if the ulcer is malignant, discolored and putrid, then you must apply cautery.
When you have cut it, and if the wart is on the head of the penis, and part of it is inside the skin and part outside, then you should remove the wart that is inside first; And when it is sewed up, then heal it.
For when you sew it up together, the scrotum is not secure so it can be pierced, and blackness and corruption come in his penis and testicles;
You must cut out all that is black and rotten, then apply a plaster of honey and wheat flour made from pomegranate bark and fennel, then heal it with other remedies until it is healed.
And if there is bleeding, use the lunar cautery according to this form:
Cauteries have two uses together: l’un est qu’il tue la carne corrumpute et li maux One is that it kills rotten flesh and the disease, that is, in bloodletting and corruption; l’auter si est a la dislocation, que il rassoie li
The other is for dislocation, to smooth the joints and if the scrotum is rotten and retracted, you must insert a rod into the penis, and the patient will urinate through it.
and when the foreskin is swollen at the head of the penis, which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or due to a wound or abscess, you must therefore scrape it with a sharp instrument, as far as the ligature, and free the glans of the penis all around;
and if it is a serious matter to discuss this, you must scrape it with a sharp spatula or knife, starting from the head of the penis and moving down;
then gently pull it apart and place a thin damp linen cloth in the opening to prevent it from swelling again.
Circumcision is not a dislocation like other wounds; Nevertheless, when we perform this operation by choice, and properly on children, it is necessary to do the best and most gentle work for their safety.
I say that the ancients did not mention the circumcision of their infants, for they did not practice it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experimentation.
For I have seen most of the masters and healers who perform circumcision around the glans, and on foreskins, and on all new-borns.
if it were the hernia because there are two membranes, and by chance one is above and the other below. Then they cover it, and the pain is doubled, and in the purification which is done on the glans is not assured, the end of the member.
and in the purification of the nail, by accident the iron slips and they ruin the work, and many times they are born so that they don't need purification, and I have seen it.
Of the purification that is done forcefully all around the thread of hair, I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut justly both above and below.
For when you press your hand, you cut evenly all around. but the thread should be well wound around the skin.
and the manner of the first work is that you should make the child think, if he hears, that you only tie the thread around the penis, and then you let him go in all the ways you can;
then make it stand upright between your hands, and conceal the strength between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the tools.
then put your hand on the penis and breathe or cough, and pull it upwards until the head of the penis is exposed; then cleanse it well of the dirt that has accumulated there, then tie the cut area with a double thread, then tie it under the scrotum to the other testicle;
then cleanse it well of the dirt that has accumulated there, then tie the cut area with a double thread, then tie it under the scrotum to the other testicle; and hold it by the testicles with your index finger and thumb, and press between the two threads, then quickly lift the foreskin and pull the head of the penis; then let the blood flow little by little, because it is the venom; and place powder on top and on top of the powder a cloth glued with a roasted egg yolk tempered with rose water, cooked in good and fresh rosemary oil, and let it stay until the next day, and then treat it again until it is healed.
The form of forces for purification is as follows:
the two knives should be thin and sharp, and the handles should be as long as the palm equally:
The mistake in purification is when the blood vessels inside are cut during the incision;
Therefore, you must stretch it with your fingernail, so that the skin becomes an abscess;
and grasp it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then hold it with tweezers, and then grasp it.
And if it lasts for 3 days, and what is under the skin is swollen, then leave it until the abscess is relieved and the skin is lightly scraped;
then grasp it as you can, and beware of the part of the penis, it will not harm him in any way.Et s’il est desoz la verge enflez, si le laisse tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez; et li vout quier en l’end
Therefore treat the site of sudden wounds with powder, as we have said in the treatise on powders, and if one applies it too generously, and it goes above, it will do no harm.
And cure it, therefore, as we have said, until it is healed.
from the retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to a stone, or frozen blood, or bowels, or unformed matter, or similar things that we have described in the division.
And if the urine is not loosened and you see that it is retained by a stone which is stuck in the neck of the bladder, then you must have the patient bend his knees; and place his feet on his back, and arch his belly from the part above his back, and restrain the patient's breathing as hard as he can; and then the neck of the bladder is compressed to express the stone above, causing the urine to be released;
and if it does not come out as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must use an instrument called a 'syringe' to extract it. The syringe is made thus:
It should be made of thin silver wire, like the feather of a bird; The tube should be about a palm and a half in length, and thin at the tip.
And to make the urine flow out in this way, you must take a length of double thread and tie a small plug of wool or cotton onto it. Then insert the tip of the thread into the syringe;
and cover the excess wool with oil or butter and a little egg white, then have the patient sit on a chair. Then anoint his bladder and penis with moist oil or olive oil and warm water;
then place the syringe gently into the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, then double the penis upwards towards the scrotum;
then fill the syringe before it reaches the bladder, and the patient will feel the pain travel to the empty space; if this is not done according to this order, then because the person guiding where it goes is wrong;
then tightly wind the thread all around the wool, and urine will follow the wool, then pull it out, and make the urine flow;
and use the syringe again until the bladder is emptied and the pain is alleviated.
When burns or blood come in the bladder, or pus is accumulated there, and you see water and medicine distilling, then do this to all of the instrument that is called "clepsydra", and it is formed:
It is closed and has three openings: two on one side and one on the other, as you can see;
and the hair-like channels through which the medicine passes must be such that it blocks the penis without addition, and one can milk out moisture and fill when necessary;
and when you see your medicine flowing in the bladder, place the tip of the syringe into the moisture, and draw out what is inside.
then suck up the moisture with the syringe, and then close off the opening firmly. if it enters inside, it will now reach the bladder, and the patient will feel it;
and this is how you prepare the subtle enema to cleanse the bladder:
A vessel made of silver or brass, with its spout pointing upwards;
and below it has a hole or slit;
then take a lamb's bladder and place it on the fire to heat up, along with the water you intend to use for the enema. Tie the bladder with a strong thread, making sure the knot is tight;
then insert the tip of the enema into the penis, and squeeze your hand over the bladder to release the water gradually, until the patient feels it has reached his bladder.
and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make it into a circle, and pierce it evenly all around. then thread a strong wire through these holes, then assemble the circle as one would assemble a ball, and put inside what you wish of oil and moisture and water, and fasten it in the instrument.
and do as you did with the bladder, squeezing by hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of the stone
We have already discussed in the division of stones the methods and extraction together with medicines;
and I said the difference between a stone in the kidney, and all the signs, and which kind of stone one must operate on; and in the bladder, and in the penis;
and I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder occurs more often in children, and it is a sign that the water jumps from the bladder like water in its subtlety;
And he pulls out the hair, and twists his scrotum, and he hurts him many times, and then he stops. and this causes the foundations to crumble;
and healing is quick in children until they are four years old, and it is slow in the elderly, and it is moderate in those between youth and old age;
and the cure is quicker in those who have large stones than in those who have small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is fitting first to cleanse the patient through enema, to draw out all the feces which are in the intestines. For it sometimes blocks the search for the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet and lift him up and move him around so that the stone sinks to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it will come out from above;
then let him sit between your hands, with his hands under his thighs so that the bladder is completely tilted downwards;
then feel and touch inside;
if you feel the stone within the cavity, then you must cut upon the stone now.
And if it does not give way to pressure, then wet your left index finger with oil, if the patient is adult, or your middle finger if the patient is young; and insert it into his anus, and feel for the stone within his urethra, and when you feel it with your finger, draw it gently into the bladder's neck;
then press upon your finger, and the stone will move out of the way where you intend to cut.
And instruct the assistant to press upon the bladder with his hand, and tell him to extend the scrotum upwards with his right hand, and with his left hand pull back the skin underneath the testicles in the area where the incision will be made;
then insert the spatulum, which is curved in shape: And they do so between what is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but to the side of the left arse cheek.
and be straight on the stone, and your fingers be close to the anus, and the incision should be diagonal so that it is wide at the top and narrow at the bottom, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
by chance the pressure from the fingers which are by the anus may cause it to jump out without effort.
and know that there is such a stone where there are edges and margins: if it is easy to push out;
and some which are underneath, similar to a grape, and round, whose passage is easy.
For those therefore where there are edges and margins, make the incision larger;
and if it does not jump out, then you must hold steady with tweezers which are as sharp as a knife at the tip, to extract the stone so that it does not escape; or you put underneath the instrument a subtle bandage on the head;
and if you cannot trick it in this way, then widen the hole, and if there is bleeding, then stop it with vitriol;
and if there is more than one stone, then stop the largest at the neck of the bladder first, then cut above it, then pull it out, and then the smaller ones after it if there are several.
And if it is very large, then it must be seared, and a larger wound made. For there are two things that happen to the patient: either he dies or the urine comes out through the wound where the urethra cannot heal;
but nevertheless, try to pull it out, or tear it with pincers, pulling it out in pieces;
and when you have finished your work, stop the bleeding with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it steady, then put on a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rosewater and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then treat the patient on his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you loosen it, wash the area well with oil and water, then treat the wound with thin ointment and thick ointment until it is healed.
And if abscesses, scabs and blood clots come to the wound and congelation of blood in the bladder, and there is retention of urine due to this, known in such a way that without salt with the urine: then put your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains there, it will corrupt the bladder and destroy it.
then cleanse the wound with water, vinegar and salt, and assist the patient in every way you know until he is healed.
and it is necessary that every hour as you treat him, to tie his two thighs together and apply the medication on the affected area.
And if the stone is small and located in the passage of the penis, pierced through it and let the urine flow out. if the patient with such an injury, which you treat many times, is then excused from further treatment. I have tried this before.
Take an iron needle with three pointed ends and insert it into a hot brand:
Then take a thread and tie it around the base of the stone so that it cannot return to the bladder.
Then push the wire into the base gently until it reaches the stone; and turn the wire in your hand within the stone little by little until you can pierce the stone from the other side;
then urine will flow immediately, then press your hand on what is remaining of the stone within the wire. If it is broken at once and comes out with the urine, the patient is healed;
and if you cannot do this due to any resistance, tie a wire underneath the stone and another one above it, then push the wire between the stones with both wires in place, then pull it out, untie the wires and clean the congealed blood in the wound; and treat it until it is healed.
of women's stones
It sometimes happens that a stone becomes impacted in women, and if it does, the treatment is difficult, and it is prohibited for three reasons:
one is that the woman may be a virgin;
and the second is that one cannot find a skilled woman who will undergo examination, especially when she is chaste.
And the third reason is that one may not be able to find a skilled woman in this art of medicine;
and the fourth reason is that the woman's stone is often deeper than a man's, so a deeper incision is required, and there is greater fear involved. And if necessity demands it, you should press a skilled midwife into service, and with great difficulty force her to do so, and if you cannot find such a midwife, then a wise and cunning but unchaste woman will suffice;
and have a wise woman examine her, or a woman who knows something of medicine, and instruct her to do what you tell her from your examination of the stone. and be sure to check if the woman is a virgin:
and be sure to check if the woman is a virgin: then she should push out her bowel and search for the stone.
and if she finds it, then she should push on her abdomen and constrict under her navel, and recommend that she push out her bowel or as the patient needs, and press her left hand firmly on her bladder.
If she finds it, then she should move it inch by inch from the entrance of the bladder all the way down to the root of the thigh.
Then she should press on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the urethra, where it is most sensitive, and feel for the stone in that area. and do not move your hand above or below the stone, and make the incision small at first;
and do not move your hand above or below the stone, and make the incision small at first; then open the incision wider if you feel that the stone is cutting into the wound so much that it can come out, and know that there are many kinds of stones;
that is to say, small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and they come in many shapes.
you will know what to look for in order to identify the type of stone.
And if the blood flows, then put crushed vitriol in place, and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops;
then return to your work until the stone is out, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of stones for men to help you with your task;
and if the blood flows and it is an artery that has been cut, then put the powder on the wound and press hard with bandages and bindings, and do not stop pressing, and leave the stone and do not try to pull it out, for the patient might die; then cure the wound.
And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the swelling has gone down, return to your work so that the stone comes out.
Ramice aquous is nothing other than an assembly of moisture or white albumen, which is beneath the shell of an egg.
It is called "syfac", and sometimes it is found in the yolk of the egg, if one believes that it is another egg. It is the skin of the egg between the white albumen that we have mentioned.
And this happens rarely. And the generation of this ramice is due to weakness that comes to the testicles and is spread out from there.
And sometimes it comes from a blow to the eggs, and this moisture has many colours: or yellow, or colourless, or black, or watery white, and more besides.
And these are the signs to know this assembly, for if it is in the white albumen that we have mentioned, then the abscesses are small, as long as an egg, and do not pierce the shell, for there is moisture all around it.
And if there is moisture in the fabric itself, then the abscesses burst with an egg yolk, and because of this they think it is another egg.
and if the moisture is between the skin of the scrotum and the testicle, then he feels good;
therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, examine all the way around, because the form is as described above. According to this, then, what comes after the insertion point, judge what is inside.
And when we treat it with iron, then the patient should be bled according to his strength and the fullness of his body;
then have him lie on his back, on something slightly raised, and put a lot of bedding under him;
then sit on his left, and instruct the assistant to sit on his right, and extend the scrotum towards one of the two sides of the heart;
take the spatulate lead, and cut the skin of the scrotum from its base up to the testicle, and make the incision straight while slicing through the skin of the scrotum until you reach the white membrane, and carefully peel it away according to your ability.
then pierce the testicle with a large needle and draw out all the water, then place your fingers in it, and it will rise again.
and do not touch the heart of the testicle, but only the membrane. cut it all around in sections, cutting the membrane carefully and not too deeply, for if you cut it badly, the water will return.
and if the testicle bursts during your work, then reset it in its place when you have finished working on the membrane.
then stitch together the two lips of the heart of the testicle with one stitch, then treat it as you would any other wound until it heals.
If you find that the egg is corrupted by another disease, then you should tie off the suspended vessels, fearing the flow of blood;
then cut open the scrotum throughout its suspension, and extract the testicle, and treat it as we have said.
And if pus has collected into two parts together, know that these are two sacs; then cut open the other part in the same way you did the first, then wipe away the blood and put soft linen soaked in rosemary oil into the wound;
then cut open the other part in the same way you did the first, then wipe away the blood and put soft linen soaked in rosemary oil into the wound; and put another piece of soft linen soaked in wine and oil over the testicles, and place double layers of cloth over them, and tie it all together following this form:
Then take two pieces of cloth and fill them with wool according to this shape and sew them together at the opening of the breeches, and one of the cloth pieces should reach from the anus to the back, and the other to the groin area;
and the other two on the two sides of the armpits, and all the restraint gathered at the buckle of the girdle;
and sometimes medicine this ramification of cautery in place of the knife-edge of iron, and it is that you press the delicate knife, and cut the skin of the testicles, and it is heated as we have said, so that the white membrane containing the water is exposed;
if you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that membrane gently, and scorch it with this delicate hot cautery;
And scrape it in all ways that you can, until you draw out everything;
and be careful that the fire does not touch the testicle;
and know that this operation is much safer; and must guard against bleeding and the wounds of cutting;
and if anything opposes you, whether an abscess, or bloodletting, or something else, then cure what opposes you, according to what has already been said.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this procedure due to its horribleness, then use perforation as I have told you, and when you are certain by the signs we have mentioned that the pus is gone, then let the patient sit on a high seat: then pierce the abscess in the part below at the full width of the spatula, and insert the perforator deep into the body;
and make the hole wide so that all the pus can flow out;
then put cotton on the wound, and tie it, and let the remainder of the pus drain, then treat the wound until it is healed;
and if the white membrane does not let the pus out through the mouth of the wound, then you must push a feather or the instrument used to treat the water in hydrops into the wound, as described earlier;
And the wound will open more widely and you will know that the fluid is returning, and it will come together after six months or around there, and when it has come together as before, thus the illness will pass its course.
You should know that in the dissection of this nerve there is fear of many dispositions, because of which I think it is better to leave it alone:
and I will tell you the work and the appearances of the abscess.
Therefore I say that many abscesses come in the body, and especially in the genitals; and this is for many reasons.
This is to know by an excess of sharp and bitter humor, which is spread in the genitals, or from a blow;
and the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and does not cease to be painful, and is a serious abscess;
and sometimes there is an abscess grey and purulent and puss-filled, and sometimes it comes from a vein, or swelling of a vein.
When it is from a vein, it is recognizable by the hot nature of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and you must not touch it.
That which is from swelling of a vein is recognizable by its appearance when touched, and one can well make an incision on this type of abscess, and others like it; and you should cut the skin of the testicles, then the yolk will rise to the top, and the white part will become solid, and it will release the suspensory ligament from all parts of the egg.
If the yolk is already soured with these new characters, then you should cut open the egg and scrape it out;
and if it is on the skin or within the vessels, you must release all that tension and smooth out the lump.
And if the crack is at the back of the shell, then you must crack it all and extract the egg as we have said.Et s’il y a u neuue char ou dedens la tenve, si covient que tu la cope et la delivre, et mets l’uef en autre vaissel.
And when your work is done, then dress the wound with soft wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapper like a berry, with the softening of the testicles, and it makes the patient very sick when he goes.
and the treatment of this disease is just as fearful as the one above, and yet we will still describe its treatment according to what the ancients did.
You must make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then put the suspensory of the testicles down to your fingers, all along the vessels that are closest to the penis, and squeeze them firmly, and stretch them out;
then incise widely with a sharp spatula across the vessels, so that they are exposed, and then scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples;
then thread a needle with double thread, and tie it to the first place where the wire came out, and tie it directly to the other end. then cut away at the skin evenly, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted moisture.
then treat the wound as in other wounds, so that no blood vessels are cut that nourish one of the testicles.
for there is no harm in this, and if the wire comes out through all the blood vessels, then the testicles must be pulled out of all the blood vessels. so that the artery does not lose its nourishment due to the cutting of the blood vessels, and dry up and can no longer help itself.
The causes of this dislocation are due to the incision that comes from the armpit or the extension over the belly in the part of the inguinal canal, causing the intestines to descend from that opening to one of the testicles.
and this dislocation occurs in the socket or from its extension, and these two methods come from many causes:
or from impact, or from jumping, or from crying, or from lifting a heavy load, and through similar things;
and the signs that it is from the extension of the socket, are that it happens little by little over a long time, and does not occur suddenly; and the abscesses are even throughout, towards the depth, because the socket presses on the intestines.
And the signs are when it is of the section of the sinus, that it causes sudden pain at the beginning, and there are different abscesses appearing underneath the skin close to the surface, and it is due to the discharge of the intestines and the body from the sinus.
And sometimes the fester comes with the intestines, and is retained inside, and causes great suffering to the patient, especially when it is pressed.
And in these treatments using iron, there is fear, which is why one should avoid them.
And the method of treatment is that you instruct the patient to push the intestines back into the wound with his hand, if he can; then hold his neck between your hands and lift his hips;
then lean the chest upwards, and cut all the skin of the long bones; then insert hooks into the sides of the incision according to what you need to open the wound, and let it be such that the pus can come out.
then scrape off the scurf that is under the skin of the scrotum, until the hard white scurf is uncovered all over.
then insert your index finger into the scrotum, between the white scurf that is under the skin of the testicle and between the second scurf, and separate what is behind the testicle and between the second scurf.
and then move your right hand into the scrotum, and have the white scurf facing up towards your left hand, and lift the testicle out of all the scurf towards the incision. and instruct the assistant to extend the testicle upwards, and loosen what is tight behind the scrotum;
and examine with your fingers if he has any hard, white, membrane-like object in his intestines, and if you find anything, push it back down into the abdomen below.
Then take a needle with a thick thread made of six fibers, and insert it into the rear part of the membrane which is behind the scrotum's skin. After threading the needle, pull the thread through the foreskin, leaving about twelve fibers exposed. Then tie the fibers together in a cross shape and use it to tie the membrane, which we mentioned is under the scrotum's skin, with a strong knot of two parts. Then wrap the threads around the testicles and tie them securely with a knot of two parts, ensuring that no blood vessels that supply them can pass through, so that no abscess forms. and put the plaster according to the first long line of two parts of this, and after these two lines let the syphon which is under the heart of the testicles be the larger part of an egg; and after all the rest according to the roundness that the egg carries;
then cup in the part which is under the skin of the testicles, as much as the blood flows, and the bowels, as we have said before;
then bring soft wool moistened in oil, and put it on the wounds, and then bring the plaster that we have described. And sometimes the white syphilis that we have described is cauterized after the incision, due to doubt about blood flow. For this happens many times, and let the plaster hold until it bites through it;
and if it takes a long time to bite through, then be anointed with warm water, and put on what we have said, until it bites through;
then treat the wound with other treatments, until it is perfectly healed.
of a fleshy hernia
In this branch, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the cure with iron.
And the ancients said that it is done like the thread which is together with the screw, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after the incision slightly above or below.
then press on it, and treat the abscess of the one who operates, until the vessels leak;
and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes a rupture occurs in the intestines, as we have said, and the orifice opens;
and none of the intestines come out through it, and if any do, it is a little, and it is repaired every hour;
and nevertheless, if he stays too long in this state, the wound putrefies and suppurates, so that the intestines protrude;
and this happens because of the extension of the pus which is in the intestines, as we have said, for it is extended, then softened and swollen, and the orifice opens;
and the treatment if by cautery, as we have said before;
and sometimes it is treated with iron in this way: and the patient lies on his back between your hands, then apply the cautery to the root of the wart according to its size, three times;
and then extract the skin tag underneath the skin, and then take the hair and place it on the visible spot where the tag was;
and press it firmly into the belly button, then cut the two visible spots on the hair shaft where the tag was, and cut both of them;
then pull out the hair shaft, and do not touch the skin tag or spread anything on it, as I have instructed you in the treatment for intestinal worms; then treat it like a wound.
then treat it like a wound. And when you cut the threads, it cleans and cures the wound until it is healed.
Syrup is constricting and has no appearance in the wound, and cautery is better for this purpose and closer to safety.
of the softening of the skin of the testicles
Many times the skin of testicles becomes soft in some men because the organs inside are softened and it is noticeable to look at.
And when one wants to cure it, one should make the patient lie on his back, and press the soft skin on top of the natural skin;
Then bring together the two lips with one stitch, and if you see it, sew the excess of the soft skin firmly with three or four stitches.
Then press between the stitches, and heal it like other wounds until it is healed, and remove the thread.
of chastisement
You should know that castration is considered a sin in our law, and because of this, I would prefer not to discuss it in this book.
It is only necessary for two reasons:
The first is that surgeons know how to respond when asked, and they know how to treat it.
and the others, because we often have need of the castration of certain beasts to help us, such as of a ram and a ewe and a kid and other animals.
I say then that there are two types of castration: either by pulling or by cutting.
In the type of castration that we perform by pulling, we make the animal sit in warm water so that the testicles are softened and dangling; then grab them with your hand, until they are dislodged and you no longer feel them.Et la beste soit contrainct a demourer en aigue si longuement, tant qu’il soit asseré par la cuiture
Of the castration by cutting:Car il faut que tu sache, que a nul You should know that you must tie the scrotum with your left hand and press the skin of the testicles, then cut through both at once, when you have well-scalded them;
and let some pus remain under the skin, and the subtle pus which is beneath the vessels.
and this method of castration is better than that which is done by pulling, because with the pulling some testicle might remain, causing the beast to desire sex.
then heal the wound until it is healed.
of hermaphrodites
There are two types of hermaphrodites in men: one is where between the two testicles there appears as much as the shape of a woman's nature, and it has hair, and sometimes it urinated standing up.
And the other method is for women, and it has on the buttock a rod-like protuberance and two testicles.
And the treatment for both men and women is that you cut open the scrotum all around, and treat it as you would other wounds:
In the second type of hermaphrodite, men whose urine exits through the skin of the testicles require no treatment.
A pustule is an unsightly swelling on the natural part. And some women have them as large as a hand, and that is the cure.
You should smear the excess of the pustule with your hand or a knife, and then cut it lightly;
and do not cut too deeply so that bleeding occurs, but cure the pustule with another cure until it is healed;
and apply an ointment to another wound that arises at the mouth of the pustule; and perhaps it will burst, and is similar in appearance to a boil, and for this reason the ancients called it the 'cow disease'. If you must treat it, as we have said, with cautery, and heal it until it is cured.
It is erratic when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the opening is small; and if the pustule bursts and the blood flows out, it is cured by another cure until it is healed. and is natural at birth, or accidental due to illness;
and is natural at birth, or accidental due to illness; or it is caused by a wound, or by a subtle or dense toxin, and is made deep in the head, or in the sides, or below, or wherever it may be;
and conception, and childbirth, and perhaps flowers to have;
and the knowledge of the stars is through the observation of their paths.
If the tumors are visible nearby, then use your fingers or a probe.
If it is so subtle that it approaches the two books, then you will hasten and they will surround him thus:
Place your two index fingers together, and let the woman be on her back with her legs spread;
Then the two books are formed, so that the subtle star is surrounded, and the spell is cast over him;
Then take wool, wet it in oil, and place it on the spot, and let the woman lie at home every day, so that she may not sweat.
And if the ulcer is hard and thick, then you must cut it with a spatulum like a myrtle leaf.
If the spell is for a male child, then they suspend it on an ox and a he-goat;
And have stanching medicines, such as agrimony, dragon's blood, incense, together with egg white;
then administer a wide leaden cane, so that the wound does not heal closed;
and thus it remains for a long time, and then a tent of dry linen is administered;
then it is cleaned with other cleansings until it is healed.
And when there is fresh blood in a wound, it must be covered in this way, unless it is an abscess. For one must not cut into an abscess that is in the breast.
of hemorrhoids Hemorrhoids are openings of veins from which blood flows without a break in the habit, and when hemorrhoids are old they become thrombosed;
And we have said in the division of similarities of us, and the signs, and I will say here those that receive cure.
I say that hemorrhoids and thrombosed external hemorrhoids, when they are perfectly formed in the anus and do not appear on examination, are not cured by iron.
Those which are at the mouth of the anus, one can feel; these can be cured.
Therefore, you should put the woman in a cold room, then the uterus is held with tweezers, and the neck in its roots, then powder is applied to medicines that restrict blood flow, such as acacia and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things;
then pour water over her feet for an hour, then put her in cold water;
And if there is bleeding, let her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peel and gall and similar things, then take barley flour, cook it with honey and garlic, and apply the ointment to her back.
And if it is stopped up, that is good. If not, make her breathe through straws on her back and breasts without piercing;
Then take wool, soak it in plantain juice or dogwood juice mixed with old wine, and breathe through it in the affected area.
And when the abscess has drained, treat the wound with ointment until it heals;
and that which is called “albathir” is red and looks like rough felt, so it should be covered as I have said; and then treat it until it heals.
Many types of abscesses arise in the body, such as sores and pus-filled abscesses and herpes and boil and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have described in the classification.Et li apotomes de fevre sont plusors: or l’un est de la fleme; or l’autre est de sang; or l’autre est de sang et de fleme.
Therefore, I shall describe in this treatise the hot abscess that occurs in the brain, which is not one of those that form in the bowels;S’il vient sus le chevel, si lo fai couper sus la tete, et li fai un bouton d’or fin ou de fer, et li leu estrainne les senges qui vienne a l’aposteme.
and if you wish to know the treatment with iron, look at whether the abscess is painful at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and whether it turns red if you can see it. Therefore, do not hurry to pierce it, but let it fester until the pain is relieved;
then make the patient sit on a low stool or chair, with his legs bent and feet supported, leaning forward onto his knees;
let his thighs be spread apart, and let him place his arms under his knees, and tie them there well with a good bandage;
then open the wound towards his right side, and insert the instrument to form the mouth of the wound, from which the pus will flow out afterwards;
and you must insert the instrument a little way in order to test the depth of the wound, so that when you insert the instrument further, it does not go in deeper than necessary and harm the patient; and if the instruments are larger, then one must cover the depth of the wound with cloth so that the instruments do not cause pain;
one should put the point of the instrument at the top and hold it tightly.
And when an abscess has been opened and one feels around in the wound with the hand, then one should cover the opening with a bandage, a sponge, or a cloth;
and when the bowels are emptied, one should put into the wound moist tents soaked in rose oil, or in dried green oil;
and put the tent above the wound at the bottom of the wound, and put over it a bandage and over that a clean lamb's wool soaked in water or mallows that have been cooked;
then, after two days of treatment, until it is healed;
and sometimes we raise it and the wound with a clyster of water and honey, then of water or cooked roots of iris and arisarum. then return to the ointment.
And if the wound is closed in the wound, then you should guard against cooking with iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
of childbirth It is necessary for the midwife to know the natural shape of childbirth and its signs; when you see the woman pushing downward and desiring to smell the ar:
then the child hastens to come out; then you know that this childbirth is following nature's course, and the afterbirth comes out with the child;
and when you see these signs, you should gently press her belly so that the child comes out quickly;
because when he emerges head-first, the afterbirth comes with him, and the birth canal is cleansed of its excess fluids through good cleansing;
and what comes otherwise does not come naturally.
For it sometimes comes under his feet, and comes out of his body or shoulder, and hands, or it comes on his stomach, or back, and is accidentally turned around his neck, and in other bad shapes;
It is necessary for the surgeon to be wise and cunning in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the shapes and how one should help them.
If the infant comes out of its head by a natural opening, and the woman gives birth painfully, and her strength is weak, then make her sit on a saddle, or have women hold her;
and place the الطبيب between their fingers the small spatula of which I spoke earlier: and split the placenta, and scrape at its nail until the moisture that is inside flows out;
and press the woman's abdomen so that the child comes down, and if it does not come down, then the woman must be enema with a mustard poultice with oil of six herbs;
then have her pressed and sneezing with a condiment, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: if the child does not come out right away.
And if both hands are born first, then you must gently reset them little by little: and if they cannot go in, put the woman on a chair, and lift her feet up; then tip the chair back onto the ground, and hold the woman upright so that she does not slump forward;
and if the hands cannot go in and the child is dead, cut the hands at the joint which was described earlier, take out the child, and reset it in the same way.
of the child's feet When the infant comes onto its feet, it must be pushed upright. And then rock it back and forth until it is steady.
Then grip one of its feet and stretch it out gently.
Let the child jump up to its armpits, instruct it to grab hold, and then make it sneeze forcefully. If it jumps, God willing.
And if it does not jump out as we have said, then pull it back and forth gently until it is in its natural position. For then it will be easy.
And if it does not jump as we desire, take mustard seeds, and six-year-old oil, and melted gum, and grind them all in a mortar; and apply this ointment to the woman's genitals, then make her sit in warm water up to her ribs;
and when she is soft underneath, put a myrrh collar on her and let it sit for an hour. then have her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and lightly press her belly, for the child will jump now.
from the birth of the child on his knees When the child comes in this way, he puts his hands on it bit by bit. then she should lie on her back, and her feet hang down, and she should lie on the bed. and fold her hands bit by bit, and then she presses her hands on her belly, and takes the cushions from under her, so that she is aligned downward. and if the child does not jump, take her feet and move them around, then move her belly upward, then press with your hands. and rock the child bit by bit. and instruct the woman to press until the child emerges.
of the child's exit, which comes out as wide as a hand You should trick your hand into emerging: if it cannot be returned, then have the woman walk and stand.
if she cannot walk, then have her lie on her bed and lift her legs straight up;
then bring the mustard plaster that I mentioned earlier;
and if she does not give birth, then have her sit on a chair and study how to return the hand; and bring out the child according to its natural shape, and have her sneeze, and command that she hold on until the baby comes out.
from the baby's exit on its neck, and have her hands spread out, and her face turned towards her mother's back I should grip her hand, then push it little by little, and move it gently;
and when it is even, put on the mustard plaster of vinegar and oil, as we said, then command that she move little by little;
and when you have done this, have her sit on a chair, and command that she holds on; and let it sneeze. in the same way for all of the afterbirth
in the same way for all of the afterbirth When all the secondina comes out in this way, then grip the secondina with your nail until the moisture is released;
and if the infant vomits on its face and neck, grip it by the head until the moisture is released and the infant dies;
then put the infant back inside, so that it is positioned correctly, and instruct the woman to grip herself a few times:
of the issue of twins Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four are born; and this is not a strange thing, but it happens rarely. They are strange, and do not live long if they are;
They are strange, and do not live long if they are; I know that they are multiplied, and are separated by the placenta, which is attached to the womb;
and sometimes they emerge as naturally as a tooth, as we have said.
And if they emerge painfully, then the surgeon should follow our instructions, and be subtle, quick, and light-handed in what he does. and thus act as he sees fit for their health. of many children
Sometimes they are formed in the womb in one, two, three, four, five, six or seven, or more to fifteen, and they are all formed like children in the measure of the glorious sage, and the surgeon should know all this, because sometimes similar things happen. then he should act according to what is appropriate.Et s’il avient que il ait en la marris uns ou plusors qui ne se
of the dead child
When you are treating a woman for a dead child or an abdomen, as I have said in the section on obstetrics, and there is no movement, and you are forced to use your hands; then you must know if the woman is of sound mind, and has no accident where she has fear of death;
then the woman should be laid on her back, with her hips tilted down, and her legs raised;
and the midwife should apply the herbal remedy to the perineum if she is tied to the bed so that she does not drop the baby;si la femme est sovinee sus ses deux chiés, et li ministre lui teigne la vouture entre les deux jambes;
then the woman is laid on her two hips, and the midwife applies the herbal remedy to the perineum between the two legs; then rub the mouth of the mother with moist oils mixed with mustard seed and fenugreek and linseed, then anoint the midwife's hands with these oils and herbs;
then they are put into the mother gently, then they examine where she feels the pinching that is suitable for this, and take care if the child is positioned to descend on its head;si la marris ne senton point la dislocation des chiés qu’il faille le chié droit ou le gauche, puis les bouton en legierement ou il faille, si la marris senton li enfes apparilliez a dessendre, s’il est legierement apparilliez, si doit il estre dessendue
if they put the weasels on their eyes, or in their throat, mouth, palette, under their beard, in their armpit, or near their ribs, and if the swelling is on the feet, they should be placed on the feet, and on the sides.
and it is necessary to hold the weasel in their right hand, and place the cloth between their left fingers, and tie it around their whole hand lightly, then insert the weasel into any of the places that we have mentioned, until it reaches the hollow.
then place another weasel against it, or one-third of the size if you need more, so that the extractions are equal.
then they are pressed equally from both sides, to push out, and the weasels are held in place with teeth, like this:
And if any part of it remains, then anoint one of his fingers with oil, and rub it in that part, and draw out the other part.
and if nothing remains, then place this incision higher up, and do this until it all comes out.
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be returned due to the tightness, then you must wrap a cloth around it, until it all comes out; then apply the cupping in the bend of the wrist or at the elbow, and so you must do for the other hand, and also for the feet.Et si il demoure ainscun sang, si le mets sus I drapeil, et le tiens tant qu’il fuie tout;
And if any blood remains, then place it on the cloth and hold it until it all comes out; And if the head of the child is large and it is tight in the birth canal, or if there is a gathering of pus at the head, then you must insert the spiny spatum between your fingers, pierce the head, and draw out the pus; or to use the instrument called "almidach", from which the form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one;
and thus the same way, make if the child has a large head naturally;
and then pull out the bones with tongs, and if the head jumps out and is forced, let it be broken, until the moisture that is in the wound comes out;
and if it cannot come out, then cut it in pieces to the extent that you can;
and if it is swollen on the belly or under the ribs, then you must pierce it so that the moisture runs out.
And if the swelling is above his feet, the pulse is light, and the breath comes easily to the mouth.
And if it is constricted in the belly or the foot, then you must stretch it with your hand wrapped in a cloth; and cut open the belly or the foot so that the moisture that is inside comes out;
and if the other limbs are paralyzed, and the neck remains, then he puts his hand into the wound up to the mouth of the wound; then he puts in a hook or two, and pulls it out;
and if the mouth of the wound is constricted by a hot abscess that has come to it, then one should not work on it, but apply moist and fatty substances; and he applies poultices, and uses warm moistening fluids.
And if the testicle is on his side, and you can make it even, then apply what we have said about a living child;
and if one has no power over it, he pulls it out in pieces, leaving nothing of the testicle behind.
And when you have done this, apply what we have said about hot abscesses that come to the wound;et s’il vient de lassitude ou de fraicheur, si amenistre choses froides et molifians.
and if blood flows, let it be placed in a water restraint, and administer other treatments.
And I saw a woman whose fetus had died within her; then another was sewn over him, and the other died. After a long time an abscess came in his arm, and swelled so much that it opened, and began to discharge profusely.
I was called to the priest, and I thought long and hard, but could not heal the wound.
I applied a strong drawing plaster, and out came a bone, and after a few days another one. I was very amazed, because the belly has no bones.
I thought that they were the bones of a dead child.
I wanted to see the wound, and as soon as I laid hands on it, the woman felt better. and the woman lived for a long time like that, and then she suddenly died.
And I haven't mentioned this chapter before because when masters find something strange, they know how to treat it.
Now we come to the form of pressure which is found in books;
and in the second turn, at the head of the second line. Nevertheless, the horns should be more subtle and made of ivory or boxwood;
and the mouth of the tube should be two fingers wide and the rim of the trees one and a half palms long; and let the two limbs be made of the same wood, which are firmly joined together at one end and separated by half a palm's width or slightly more at the other.
and these two extensions are fitted into the mouth of the wound to open it when the two horns are turned.
A more subtle and lightweight form is made of boxwood or ebony, according to the appearance of tongs; and has two extensions, as you see, a palm long and two digits wide;
and when you see the wound open to all the instrument, then let the woman lie on her bed, with her feet hanging and her legs open, then insert the two extensions together into the wound, and hold the head of the instrument between her thighs; then work your hand into the instrument, just as you did with the tongs, depending on how much you want to open the mouth of the wound, until the patient does what she wants.
This instrument is completely decorated and has many variations in its appearance. And when the patient sees them prepared, the operation is faster and more skilled for their quantity.
Do not despair over the instrument, but prepare it, for their need is inexcusable.
When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, you should instruct the patient to hold back her breath, then make her sneeze gently, and then squeeze her mouth and nose tightly; and if she vomits, all the better.
If not, take a pot and place herbs that can open the mouth of the wound inside, such as chamomile, anise, rue, camphor, and centaury; all these herbs, or any of them, are cooked in water over fire;
then put one end of the pipe into the pot and the other end into the mouth of the patient, and apply it until the vapors enter the patient's mouth;
then make the patient sneeze, as we have said. If the pus comes out quickly.
And if she remains after this treatment and does not pass away, as we have said, command the midwife to wet her left hand in oil of assafety or in a poultice of alder, and then put it into the birth canal, and draw out the placenta; and when she has found it, she should grab it and stretch it little by little, straightening it out, so that the patient does not feel pain during extraction;
but she must move it gently to the right and left, and then pull it out; it will come and be released.
And if the mouth of the wound is tight, we have described the cure for sneezing, and the fumigation of herbs;
and if it is not cured by all that we have said, then be sure to follow the treatment;
but it is necessary that he who is at the mouth of the wound be tied to the thigh of the woman, then cleanse her with a four-fold ointment; if she expels and releases it, and comes out;
but still, when she expels, a bad odour comes to the stomach and head, and the disease worsens. Therefore, it is necessary to use suitable fumigations:
some of the ancients have tried fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
The instrument used to fumigate the woman for retained placenta and afterbirth is as follows:
It is like glass, and one puts the narrow end in the wound, and the wide end above the fire;
and apply the fume to the coals, and to the lice until they are gone, then start another.
Many children are born without their foreskin pierced; instead, it is closed by a thin membrane. So the midwife should pierce this membrane with her finger nail and not cut it with a sharp instrument, and she should be careful not to tear it.
Then put wet linen in wine and oil on the wound until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will heal, then put a wooden splint through the wound and leave it for several days, then remove it when the child wants to walk around.
And sometimes this membrane comes from a wound or an abscess suddenly; then cover it quickly:et s’ele est en la bouche, si le met sus lainne mouille and if it is in the mouth, then wet linen should be applied and treated as we have said about the caustic of the stone.
Fistulas that come from under the foreskin are called nodations, and those that grow from beneath the foreskin, or in the space between the two parts, are either single or multiple.Et s’ele est en la bouche, si le met sus lainne mouille
and when this knot is old, it opens, and often emits moisture or pus, and sometimes these ulcers are persistent;
and they are caused when there is flatulence or vomiting, or sometimes a burst vessel.
And if there are fistulas that pierce all the way to the bladder, and halfway down the penis; and they can reach all the way to the hip joint, and to the knee.
And thus one knows a persistent fistula in the anus, and not a persistent one; and you should thrust your index finger into the anus, and push a fine needle made of brass or iron into the fistula when there is no crookedness.
And if there is crookedness, then push in a thin rod or horse hair until you feel the rod or hair with your finger;
and if you do not feel it, and it does not come out through the anus as flatulence or wind, nor turn green, as we have said; you know that it has not pierced through; then cure it quickly.
And when the fistula penetrates as far as the bladder or the duct of urine, and urine escapes, and cannot be stopped by medicine.
If it is pierced just up to the hip joint, then the vein is flowing just up to that spot; if there is a twisting and the pain spreads around, then it has entered there, and neither medicine nor poultices help;
and in these piercing sores there is no cure except through hard work, and the foolishness of those who meddle is useless.
In the one that is not pierced and is not old, there is hope of healing by fire, as I have proven, and the patient lies between your hands on his back;
and he will raise his legs up to his thighs, and have his thighs inclined towards his belly; then insert a tent of copper or lead, if there is any tortuosity that you know about, where the tent should go.
If he feels pain in his anus, then you must insert your index finger if the tent has not pierced him;
and where you feel the anus or the flesh, then you know that it is pierced; if they cannot work on it, then it cannot be healed.
They say that some can still be healed, but that rarely happens;
and the treatment that is given, they scorch the wound with a subtle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as it was previously stated; and insert it fully into the fistula until it comes out from the anus; and do this two or three times until you know that these false hairs are singed, which resemble an owl's feather.
then dress the wound with wet bandages in butter until these hairs come out, then dress the wound with ointment binding the hair and sealing it.
If he is healed in this way, it is good.
If this does not work, he cannot be healed otherwise;
and if the tent pierces and does not reach the bone which is in the foundation, and there is between your finger and the tent a thick covering of hair or of syphac, and you see the fistula following the covering to the core; if the tent is pulled at the beginning of the fistula and pushed in before the tent, and then cauterized afterwards until it reaches the tip of the tent; and the tent will be delivered and will fall out;
then defecate those charred bones that look like bird feathers, and leave nothing behind.
And if the pus comes out and flows between you and the wound, then cauterize it with fire or with an astringent medicine.
For fire cautery draws together two bone things: that is to say, the burning of those charred bones, and the clotting of blood and the drying up of moisture;
then the treatment of moist tents with butter or crushed things, until the bowels move, and let the burnt bones leave the body;
then treat the wound of hard, dry, burning lumps, and the remedies are dry.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if a fistula comes all the way to the bottom of the foundation, and is removed from the body, put your finger or foundation in it, and inquire about it.
If you feel the bowels, and there is a lump of pus or char in it, about to burst, then there is no hope except through faith and hope, by administering one of three remedies:
either you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut into it to the depth, or if you can, put in tents and treat it as before;
and do not go too deeply, lest you pierce the organ that holds the foundation, and cause the evacuations to emerge unwillingly through that channel; then treat it as we have said;
then treat it as we have said; by chance, you may be healed by removing that covering and cleaning it after the wound has been exposed, either with a tent or another sharp instrument; then cut away at the diseased flesh within the wound as much as you can; then strive to close the wound and stop the fistula from spreading in the region above the foundation:
then strive to close the wound and stop the fistula from spreading in the region above the foundation: if it is more beneficial for the patient.
And sometimes they are like this: and when you insert the tent into the fistula, and it is near the foundation beneath the skin, take a tent pierced at its tip in this shape: And he inserts a twisted thread into it, and he inserts the tent along the entire thread into the fistula until it reaches the tip.
If it is perceived at the edge of the foundation within, then pull out the thread from that hole, as you would press your finger into the fundament.
and pull the end of the thread, and bring the two heads together, and press them against each other, and leave it for one or two days.
and restrain it sometimes so that the threads catch those hairs that are between, and grow together.
then cure the wound until it is healed.
If the fistula does not open on its own, then you must make it open in every way that you can, if it is not too deep. For it is not appropriate to cover the wound with a bandage, then treat it, as we have said, until it has healed.
The shape of the spatulon spine which they make for the fistula is very sharp and pointed on one side. And on the other side it is not, so that one does not catch what one should not, as you can see here.
Hemorrhoids occur in two ways:L’une est de la cossine qui se part en cossine en or they are within the anus, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and some produce blood, and there may be one or more, and they are located within and at the top of the anus.
but those that protrude have a little moisture, and sometimes pus or a little yellow water or blood, and they are the colour of the body.
and the treatment for those who have them within the anus is that you instruct the patient to straining until they go into a chamber, so that the anus opens and the warts are visible. then grab it with tweezers or your fingernail, then pull it out by its roots;
and if the tweezers cannot hold them because of their moisture, then take them with a piece of cloth, or cotton, or a piece of camel hair; and pull them with your fingers, then press and powder on some hot powders that are in place of cautery; or you can cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cautery, then treat them with other treatments until they are healed;
and if the fundament cannot exit, then enema the patient with a harsh and asper enema to clean what is in the fundament so that it can exit clearly; then the patient defecates, and if the thread comes out of the anus, then the treatment is light;
then the patient defecates, and if the thread comes out of the anus, then the treatment is light; and you should grab them with your fingernail or tweezers, and press, then treat as we have said, until it is healed and fears the incision by iron. You should administer the suturing in this way:
You should administer the suturing in this way: take a twisted thread, and put it in a needle, and then draw the thread above and pierce the needle from the other side, and turn both ends of the thread under the needle, and let it be loose;
and tighten the thread, then tie the thread, and remove the needle, and do likewise with all the others, and leave one to drain the excess blood;
then place a moistened cloth in rose oil or cerate over the wound, and place it on the wound, and instruct the patient to rest;
and then let him stay until he defecates, and when it is passed, treat the wound with ointment and other remedies until it is healed.
from dryness of the anus or rectum Drying of the bowels occurs often in the intestines, due to constipation from natural causes, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help. If necessary, cut the tip of a spatula or your fingernail to create a scrape that does not leave moisture behind; then treat it until it is cured as it should be;
and if it cannot heal, then restart the scraping more fiercely than before, until it heals a lot and is scalded; then treat it until it is healed.
where there is trembling A wart is a small appearance formed under the body, and goes very deep;
and sometimes the frost bites it, and one feels it like dead from trembling, and it comes all over the body, and more in the hands than anywhere else.
And its cure is that you take a straw of an goose feather, or a strong vulture feather, and place the straw on the trembling, until the purple circle trembles all around it; then turn your hand to all of the straw until you scrape all around the trembling, and push it deeply in, and uproot the trembling from its roots.
And if you see fit, make a cane of bronze or iron according to this shape, and let it be thin underneath and drawn out on top: it does not pierce, so as to keep it in place, and to press tightly.
And if you see, if you cauterize the tremor, as it is before the cautery chapter.
Sometimes they make a clyster of silver or of brass, or of melted copper or alloyed;
and sometimes they make these small and large instruments, according to those who have them. Those which are administered for the treatment of children and the weak and painful are small.
Those which are administered for the treatment of children and the weak and painful are small. The form of the small and large enema is above wide, or the belly is bound according to this manner:
and there is a deviation in the bellies, and the intestines are pierced inside, as you can see;
and on one side there are two openings, and on the other one;
and the belly where one puts medicines is made of a beast's bladder or parchment, and it is pierced all around with small openings, and there is about an inch between each opening, then insert into these openings a strong thread of twisted thread in the shape of X or entwined around, and assemble the belly so that it looks like a goat; and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread, then administer a clyster.
and this is the form of the circle:
And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the tip of the clyster with oil or egg white, or similar, then insert it gently; then the minister squeezes it with both hands together until it is empty, then removes the clyster and lets the patient lie on his side, and if the medicine wants to come out, he should press as hard as he can; and if he sleeps for a night, it is even better.
And if you use the clistere for the disease of stomach ache, and the medicine rushes to come out, then repeat it until he is cured.
And if the hemorrhoids are in the anus or rectum, then the clyster should be as thin as for a child;
and this is the form of the thin clyster that presses against the skin:
We have already discussed the treatment of wounds in the previous section.
Now we will discuss the cures using hands and medicine, according to their effectiveness.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and by what they are made.
The causes of wounds are due to the impact of stones, or cutting with a sword, knife, lance, spear, arrow, or similar objects.
Wounds can occur in various parts of the body, such as the neck, head, leg, belly, liver, and other similar organs.
I will now discuss the treatment for each type of wound, starting with simple head wounds, as this will lead us to remember other related topics in this chapter.
I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head, and the bone is not broken, you should first check if it was caused by the impact of a stone or similar object, and if the skin is still intact but the wound is large, and you suspect a hot abscess: if he bleeds from the cephalic vein immediately, and there is little blood from the wound, and let the bleeding be in the opposite direction of the injured part;
and prevent the patient from becoming bloated with wine and rich foods.
And if he does not want to bleed, then his food should be reduced, and he should not drink wine or eat meat;
and place cotton wet with rose oil only on the wound, if hot abscesses appear; or wine with a styptic;
and if there is no hot abscess, then place on the wound, if it has all its blood and has not been moved by the air, a powder which I will describe shortly;
and if it has been moved by heat, then place on it some ointments until it heals.
And if the wound is large, like that of a sword, and the lips cannot be brought together with tenting, then stitch them together, as I will describe for abdominal wounds.
If the wound is exposed to the bone, and it can be seen, and it is not holding on except for a little bit, then cut it off. then heal the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods like testicles and cooked wheat, as well as meat, and similar things.
And if you find pus in the skin, and it is not reaching the bone, then cut off all the pus, and drain it out, then heal it.
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which causes bleeding that cannot be stopped by medicine, then tie it with a thread. And if this does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is easy: and you shall put this powder on so that the burn has moved.
And the manner of the powder is as follows: take frankincense one part; dragon's blood two parts; burn the ingredients together and grind them into a fine powder, then apply it to the wound, pressing it firmly so that it sticks well and draws out all the blood;
then bind it tightly, leaving it in place until the swelling goes down; and one does not remove the medicine until the wound is healed.
And sometimes one does this with chalk alone, when one doesn't have incense or dragon's blood, but that the wound is moved by the fire.
And if the burn has moved the wound, simply leave it as it is, without applying any of the powder;
but apply some digestive poultices made from barley flour and water or honey, until the wound drains well; then treat other wounds until he is healed.
And if the fracture of the bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine tweezers:
and I will tell you about fractures of the head next.
of the wound on the neck
If a wound occurs on the neck and it is single, then there is no difference between it and one in the head, but if the nerve of the neck or artery is cut.
If it is a nerve, do not treat the wound, and do not apply anything constricting, because it harms nerves and makes them retract; and put nothing cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuance is with the brain, which is the highest member;
but let the medicine be warm, as with warm water washed chalk, and mixed with rose oil, and cuce washed also in warm water, and other minerals of the same kind, and moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, then cut and bind it, then treat it until it heals.
And if the wounds are deep and there is pus and swelling, then pierce them higher up;
and if an artery is cut, and there is bleeding, then ligature it, and stop it, and cauterize it if necessary;
and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the windpipe, and the passageway for food is blocked, then cut open the neck above the Adam's Apple, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape; and then hold it gently, and leave it for several days, then treat with ointments that promote healing until it is healed;
and if the wound has left an impression on the bone, then treat it thus: and if there are bone fragments, remove them all if you can, and those that you cannot reach, leave them until the wound suppurates, is cleaned out, and the passage is cleared;
and if the wound is fresh, apply the powder I have described above. And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as I have said in that chapter.
If it is a deep wound from a lance or knife, and the patient is not vomiting wind, then: you will know that the wound is mortal;et si tu ves que la chair est verte ou noire, ou qu’il y ait sanguine en la chair
and if the wound is not deep and is fresh with all its blood, then do not apply the powder at first, nor ligature it for fear of the blood clottings breaking loose, returning to the heart, and killing the patient;et si li sang ne demort pas em parfond, et n’est pas venimeux, et la chair n’est noire ne verte, et le sang n’y est, si n’a grant dolor, si le laisse au repos et a leu de sang qui vienne, et le guarisira; but I apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day;
and if you don't have ointment, put old cotton in the wound to draw out moisture, and let the patient sleep with their head on the wound for three, four or more days; and if there is no spasming, nor trembling of the heart, nor strangulation of the throat; and when you see these good signs, you will know that the wound is saved. Heal it then with poultices and other remedies until it is healed;
and if it cannot heal, and there is still discharge, then you will know that there is a fistula;
treat it then as one should. And if the wound is from a sword or knife, and it is superficial, or deep, or in the back, then treat it as described above; if it is large, with stitching;
and if it is small, with powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has torn away pieces, then the wound, and the bones are displaced if they are dislocated; and if they are not dislocated, then let the wound fester, so as to lessen the extractions;
and for other wounds in other limbs, the judgment is as we have said.
from a rupture of the belly
Breaking of the belly occurs in large, medium and small ways;
of the great wound sometimes the intestines, or the nerves of the intestines, by which the entry of air;
and stitching is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the large one, because one puts the intestines back in more with pins, if they are not put back gently from hot to cold;
because the intestines swell as soon as they feel the cold, they contract more at their tips, and due to this, the wound heals better, so one must reset the intestines to their place, rather than the others.
And you should know that there are three types of hernia in the abdomen:
The two common hernias occur in the abdominal wall, and the hernias of other wounds in the body, and there are two other types of hernia that are specific to certain wounds.
Nevertheless, they are more common with abdominal walls, and I will describe each one and make it clear.
I say that when the wound is small, and a little bit of intestine has come out, and it can be easily put back in, then it is one of two ways: either because the wound is small, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.Et a ceste costure covient il que tu mues les intestins a son lieu et qu’il ne se demourent en l’enduit ou li plaie est fait.
And when it is cold, heat it in such a way: wet a sponge or a soft cloth in warm water only, or cook it in squint water and cypress and spike and rose until the swelling is relieved;
and sometimes this wine is restraining, and it is used alone to reduce swelling.
And when you see the swelling leaving, then moisten the intestine with water or old wine in which are cooked mallows and marjoram, for by this the entrance is made easier for a little while.
and if it cannot enter, then make a small cut in the instrument with which they cut hemorrhoids;
and the first cure is made to the wound, from which one must not cut without great necessity;si li taille est saine de l’entree sus la plaie, et quonque ne muoie, si convien la curiere dousement a l’enfeure que
and this is the instrument to split it with:
if you cut inside at an angle and do not go straight through, and look here at the shape: And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out, then put them back according to their natural shape in their proper place, if you have the power, for this is better.
When the wound is large, and it is in the lower part of the belly, then you must have the patient lie on his back with his legs higher than his head: and if it is in the lower part of the belly, then put the head and feet higher than the lower parts, and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two sides, then have the patient turn onto that side so that the wounded part is higher than the other;
and thus you must conduct yourself with large and small wounds.
With small wounds, take what you have ready, then grip with your fingers the edges of the wound all around, and bring them together;
and this is the common way of stitching, and it is that you take a needle or more, according to the width of the wound, then leave from the head of the wound two threads' worth of space, and thread a needle with a strong thread through it; and pierce the two sides of the skin with the two sides of the sutures, which is underneath the skin inside, so that you make it pierce from that part, and tie the two ends of the sutures together;
then draw the thread through twice around the needle from both sides, then bring the two sides of the wound together evenly, and then leave two threads' worth of space, and thread another needle;et ainsi tu faices II ou IIII couppes selonc la quantiteit de la plaie.
and tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not cease to do so according to your need for needles, until the entire wound is bound;et si il advient qu’il ne se peust restrainer avec les aguilles, mais aine qu’on le poisse destrer, il covient que l’on le destreive, et que l’on lie les chiés dou cuir entor la plaie selonc la maniere
let the needles be medium-sized, both fine and thick, for fine needles cut through all flesh, and very thick ones cannot enter well. because of this they should be medium-sized.
and one must not push the needles too deep into the flesh and through the skin so that they do not cut and open the wound before the wound is closed.
then one should cover the heads of the needles so that they do not hurt the patient when he sleeps, and put tents or bandages over the heads of the needles to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is closed.
and this method of stitching with needles is most suitable for small wounds, because only one or two needles are needed.Et quant li malaide a grant plaie, si convient qu’il soit costé a la manière de l’esguile; et puis li covient mettre le drapelz ou la tente sus li pi
The second stitch is common and is where you bring together the two ends of the skin and the two ends of the הסית (syt, a type of cloth) with a needle and strong thread.
And when you have pierced all four ends together, bring the needle back to the place where you started, in the way that one sews a dress.
And space each stitch with the thickness of a little finger.
This stitch is good for a man, and I sewed up a wound that a man had on his belly, which was cut with a knife, and the wound was more than a palm wide, and the intestines were exposed for more than two palms in width, and the wound was in the belly.
I brought him back to health after his intestine had been outside for 24 hours, and the wound was sewn up for 15 days, and I treated it, and he recovered.
And they thought he would die, and it was a miracle:
and I did not treat him with ointment, because I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine; and apply cotton wool soaked in honey to the wound twice a day, and wash it with water until it is healed.
Or I shall tell thee of two proper ways of suturing:
take the needle and insert it in the wound from the outside just until it touches the interior;
when it has pierced the skin straight through, then hold the eye of the needle where it entered and pull it through from the inside out until it emerges on the outside;
and the technique of this suturing is that you sew as the furriers sew furs, leaving some skin on one side and taking some from the other, so that the sutures are completed.
The second method of suturing which Galen describes correctly, is done as some people join two pieces of skin naturally and apply one edge of the wound to the other, thus:
stick a needle or needle tip, and pierce that area only, and leave the two ears of the syringe; then turn the needle and pierce from the outside towards the inside, to the two ears of the syringe; and draw blood until it flows freely through both ears.
then pierce one and then the other from the outside towards the inside, in two other ears of the syringe that are on the opposite side; and draw blood until it flows freely through both ears.
and this is the usual method of suturing and the most common.
Galen says this word, and some testify to it, that one should sew the belly with two needles, with thread in each; and when you have sewed both sides of the wound, pass the needle through from one side to the other, and then back again, so that the thread lies across the middle of the wound.
and one should push one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew sores; and when you have sewed both sides of the wound, pass the needle through from one side to the other, and then back again, so that the thread lies across the middle of the wound.and when you have sewed both sides of
and know that when the rupture is in the belly, then the cure is more difficult than from other places in the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
and it is so that when you find the fresh wound full of blood, as long as the wound has not bled, then put back the intestine and the gut;
then put on healing powder, and if the wound has bled, then put on any suitable ointment until the wound heals over; and tie the thread, and sew the lips of the wound, and the muscle; then treat the wound as the others, until it is healed;
and if you have no medicine, then put on old cotton, and change it twice a day until it is healed.
For you need no other medicine in many situations where the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound will affect the principal members, then you should wet a light woolen cloth in tempered oil or rose oil, and place it around the wounds, and under the armpits;
and if there is pain or a swelling in the bowels, which often happens, then cleanse with a clyster of tepid black wine, especially if the swelling reaches the intestines;
and pierce it from within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestines, which are called 'young', cannot heal when they are injured, and this is due to the thinness of the veins through which they run, and the subtlety of the entire body, and their close connection to the nerves.
And if the membrane jumps out of the wound, then put it back in as the intestine, while it is still fresh;
and if it is old and become green or black, then you must tie off the area that is black so that bleeding vessels don't come, for there are veins and arteries there;
then grasp what is between the ligaments, and place both heads dangling from the bottom part of the wound to loosen the extraction when the sutures are cut, and the wound heals.
of the route of the boil
When the intestines protrude and the wound is small, it can sometimes be healed in some people, because I saw a man who was stabbed in the belly;
the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became a fistula, and from it came excrement and flatulence;
I applied treatment according to what I knew, and did not cease to treat him gently until he was healed and the wound closed.
And when I saw it healing, I feared that the man had discomfort in his belly; but there was no discomfort, and he stayed in good condition, eating and drinking;
and some experimenters say that when there is a small wound in the intestines, it should be bound up in such a way: take a piece of sheep's testicle, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the testicle is unfurled, place it over both lips so that it holds them shut.
Then tie the testicle to the head, and it will stay in place so that it cannot be dislodged. Then put another testicle after it in the same way until the wound is completely bound up. And then dress the wound.
If they are wounds in the intestines, and no harm comes to the patient, then one can ligate the intestines with a fine thread cut from an animal's intestine, in such a way:
take the end of this intestine thread which is very thin, and then tie to the end of this fine linen thread, put the thread through a needle, and sew up the intestines, and reset it in its proper place.Car il doit estre liiez l’intestine par le fil de lin, et li chief liier a l’intestine d’une beste si qu’il ne se puet desliier;
and this method of sewing up the perineum is not appropriate except according to the way of faith and hope.
and if the wound is great and wide, especially when it is in one of the grave intestinal diseases, then there is no remedy or healing except with subtlety.
of fistula wherever it may be Know that any wound or abscess, when it wakes up, is universally called a "fistula", and especially when it is hooded and bowed in.
And a fistula is according to the verdant nodulation of a hard and white tumor, where one does not feel pain, and it is as common as the feather of a bird;
and sometimes it is in a clear bowels, and sometimes dense; sometimes small, and sometimes enough;
and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, it is not due to one of the VIII causes: that is, by the smallness of blood or body; or for his malice; or because there is a hard lump within it, and upon the lips, which prevents the growth of hair; or because he has too much bowels; or because the skin is shrivelled and the matter within is of poor quality; or because the medicine is not good for the treatment; or because the putrefaction is of a pestilential nature; or because the digestion in the region is tardy and slow, and health is delayed, and there is swelling by nature; or because there are veins or bones:
And I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments with medicine in the division.
Now I will tell you about the treatment for a fistula that is done with the hands.
You should know that fistulas occur throughout the body; because they can come from large veins, or arteries, or nerves, or the eye, or the intestine, or the bladder, or any part of the sides, or the spine in the back, or any joint in the hands or feet; and if it affects the principal part of the limb, and similar places.
And all fistulas that are in this way are very painful to heal, and there is nothing but hard work and ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not reach the point I have described, and you are confident in the cure, and you see it working, then take a tent of iron or bronze, if the fistula is straight, and pierce it;
and if the fistula is crooked, then use a thin tent of lead, because lead bends around the curvature;
and if the fistula has several openings and you cannot pierce it with tents, then cleanse it by cauterizing one of the openings, because moisture travels from one opening to another;
then pierce it as hard as you can, so that you may discover whether there is a bone or nerve, and whether it is deep, and ask the patient about their pain when you press your hand, and where they feel it;
and when you know the true location of it, and whether it is near a joint or nerve or artery or vein, or in any of the places I have told you, then cut according to what I have instructed, and remove the diseased flesh and rotten bones within.
then treat the wound until it heals; and if the fistula is deep and in a good location, you should cut it deeply, as much as you can, then place moist tents in medicinal vinegar, and insert them into the fistula up to its head, so that the medicine corrodes the excess matter remaining at the bottom.
then apply healing ointments to the healthy flesh until it is healed.
and if it is not healed by this method, then cauterize it as we have said; and if the bone is diseased from the fistula, cut it out.et s’il est a la jointure ou nerf ou artere, si le coupe et li ostes la fautreure, et si li os est corrompus, si le cope, et tu le ramettes s’il n’
If a vein or nerve does not trouble your principal limbs, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed and there is decay and blackness in it, then treat it with king's ointment until the decay is all removed, then heal it with healing things;
and if it does not heal and returns as before, know that you have not gone to the source:
if you uncover it and go to the bottom, and remove all the decay, then restore the place;
and if it is thus healed, that is good. If not, know that the decay is too deep for you to reach it;si le memre est trois ou quare disloquez, se il s’en peut aler, si covient que on le fasse aler et que il rent a if the limb is dislocated three or four times, if it can be moved, then it should be moved and return to its natural position without any other artifice;
and if there is a small rotten bone, and you can pull it out with tweezers, then extract it with the instrument suitable for this purpose, and if there are many bones, pull them all out without leaving any behind.
and if moisture is causing the dislocation, and there is no error or fear, then cut and release the moisture and the flesh, and free the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then put something on the wound that promotes pus, and let it fester around the bones, and then they will be more easily removed.
And if it is a large bone, such as in the leg or thigh, then clean only the corruption until all the blackness is removed, and then dress the wound.
And if there is a large part of it that is rotten, and it comes to the marrow of the bone: if it needs to be bandaged and wrapped all the way up to the腐敗, and then treated until it is healed.
and I will tell you about a fistula that happened in a man's leg, so that you can take example and help in your work.
He was a young man of about 30 years old, who had pain in his leg due to a cause that came from inside the body, so that the matter came out through the leg, and it was swollen with a large abscess, and he did not know what to do to open it;
but the doctors worked so much on it that the abscess opened and a lot of matter came out, and it became a fistula, and many openings came from which all the pus and moisture of the body flowed out;
and many doctors treated him for 2 years, and there was no improvement in his condition, so I was called to see his leg and the medicine with which he was being treated, and I saw that which flowed out through the openings caused great harm to the body; and the bodies of the young men became red, and had a citron colour.
I pitched a tent in one of these openings, and then searched all the openings, and found that one came against another all the way down the leg.
I hurried then, and probed one of the openings until I exposed a portion of the bone, and found it rotten and piercing through, with the corruption going right to the bone inside;
I probed what appeared to be of the rotten bone, and believed there was no other corruption except that which I removed;
and began to dress the wound with strong medicines for a long time, but it would not heal;
and then I began again, and exposed the bone as before, and found the corruption continued in the bone, and probed it, and then removed it, and laboured to heal the place; but I could not, for whenever I probed around a palm of the bone, and drew it out as far as its root, then I restored it with medicines;et je vis bien que ne demoureroit ains qu’il ne fist l’un de ces deux: ou il morroient par la corruption qu’il aveit en son corps, ou and he was cured and healed quickly, and the procedure did not need to be repeated except for the weakness of the patient who could not endure it, and because of the fear of death that I had for him. For the bloodletting, he often bled profusely, but he was completely healed, and in the bone a hard lump grew, and he had a good disposition and no harm or contrary effect anywhere, neither lying nor moving.
And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, then it should be treated in this way: take a string and tie it to the head of the bone that is open, and have someone pull it upwards; and tie another thicker string of linen to the first string, and tie it around the flesh above the bone, and pull on the head, so that you draw up the corrupted flesh from below, and uncover the flesh above where you want to operate, so that the string does not cut the flesh;
and place a hot coal or a small tablet under the bone to cover the corrupted flesh;
and one must wait as long as one can see and feel the corruption, and wait again another time.
And if the bone is rotten and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then cut away all the flesh;
then put embers underneath, and then feel from one part of the corruption to the other, and the sore will be drawn towards the embers, as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, cut away the rotten joint, and feel the bone where it contains from the other side;
and if the corruption is along two joints, there is no other remedy but to cut them away;
and if the corruption is in the knuckle of the hand or foot, it is a serious matter, but nevertheless you must investigate the corrosion and how it appears to you; and cleanse it in every way you can, but be careful not to damage the vein or nerve.
and know that the knives and saws for cutting bones are many, according to the position of the bones, their appearance, thickness, thinness, size, and hardness. and therefore one must prepare different tools for each type of operation.
and know that the job will show you the tool you need according to your knowledge of this art and the testimony of the nature of the diseases; if you think about the tool you need according to what is appropriate for it.
The shoulders may dislocate due to an internal or external cause;
and when you have treated that corrosion with medicine, and it does not help, then you must cover that limb up to the place where the corrosion is, so that the patient escapes either death or the greater evil of losing the limb.
and the signs are that the limb becomes black as if it were burnt by fire, and then after the blackness, the rot spreads from limb to limb, and affects the whole body;
if it is from a bite, and if it is from the sting of some venomous creature, such as a sea scorpion, adder, or similar, if the rot is on the head, then cut off the hand, and do not give it any time to spread to the arm.
And if it reaches the hand, then cut at the joint so that the rot does not spread to the arm;
and if it reaches the arm, then cut at the elbow;si elle viegne au coude, si la cope a la jointe de l’elbow
and if it passes the elbow, that is death, and there is no remedy other than to cut off the quantity according to its strength;
and do the same when the corrosion comes to the foot: if it comes in the first joint, then dislocate the cup after the other joint;
and if it comes to the foot, then dislocate all of the foot; and if it rises in the leg, then dislocate at the knee joint;
and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to kill the patient with a blow;
and the method of dislocating a limb is to tie it above and below, and extend one assistant's hand downward from the lower ligature, and another assistant's hand upward from the upper ligature, and you loosen the flesh between the two ligatures by a span, so that the bone is exposed;
then dislocate it and place a piece of linen on each side so that the bone does not touch the healthy spot, and cause another injury or abscess to the patient.
And if blood flow occurs when you operate, cauterize the site directly or apply some restraining powders.
Then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the wounded member with an appropriate ligature and treat it until it is healed.
And I will tell you what happened to a man in a dream:
He had a dark discoloration that looked like a burn, and this corrosion began at the bottom of his big toe, spreading to cover the entire foot;
And when the man saw the corrosion, he covered it with copper, and it was healed.
Long after, the corrosion returned on his finger, and he came to me, and I applied some counter-irritant remedies after cleaning the body, but could not stop the corrosion;
He wanted me to cover his hand, but I refused because I had no hope that the treatment would work.And he said: "If you do not want to treat it with counter-irritants, then cut off my hand." And I said to him: "If you were a king's son, I and I doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would not die, for man's strength was weak.
And they all despaired and returned to their land, and had their hand bound, and were healed.
and I have not found anything wrong with this except that one should not do it to someone else if they need it.
Sometimes an abscess forms in a fleshy part, and remains so long that it causes a great gathering of pus; and then they rupture and discharge, and the place remains hollow like a vessel; and the skin above is as thin as a separated cloth, and does not reach the bone or nerve, and such a disease is called 'healthy', and not a 'fistula'.
but if it is so long that it reaches to the bone, it is called a "fistula".
and the cautery should be applied all around the wound, especially when it is deep, just like a bandage. and do not worry about causing harm.
And if you are afraid that the skin will burn, and the corruption is not in depth, and the skin is thick, then cauterize it thus:
examine if the breast is swollen and the nipple has an offensive odor, then treat it with an Egyptian medicine made thus: take asafoetida, oil, and litharge, in equal amounts, and put the mixture in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and as thick as honey;
and then take some of this according to your need, and they make it in water and honey, and they administer it as an enema to the breast, and they constrict the opening; and let the medicine remain for two hours, then extract it by squeezing;
do this many times until the breasts are relieved and the poultice removed;
and sometimes they are enema with water of ashes when this medicine is not available, and it is that you burn vine wood to ashes, and pour water on it, then strain the liquid and use it as an enema until you know that the breasts are relieved;
and if the patient cannot bear it, or the Egyptian medicine, nor the water of ashes, then they are enema with water and honey in which there is some powdered quicklime; or cleanse it with honey and wine, for honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and wine makes the wound breathe.
and when you have done this and trust that the wound is clean, then cleanse it with that which makes bowels move within him, and it is what you prepare poultice of diafinit, and mix it with rose oil and wine.
or cleanse it with some medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken of the properties in the section on ointments.
and if the wound of the breast is small and the pipe of the enema cannot enter it, then widen it a little with an iron, and put in it a tent made of egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment, as much as can be inserted.
and if the wound is too large, then cut and leave only the place where the enema can enter, and if the orifice that vomits bowels is above, then cut it below, where it is.
if you cannot cover the breast from below as you wish, then prepare in such a way that the bow points to the lowest place it can reach. For when the bow is drawn fully, do not leave an arrow to lodge there. let the bow move gently downward, and let nothing of the bow remain.
let the bow move gently downward, and let nothing of the bow remain. take consoliding remedies to apply over the wound, and they must be placed over the linen bandage that covers all the breast; then press firmly on the opening of the breast, making the hole as wide as the first one, then apply a suet ointment over the other bandage according to the size of the wound, and place it over the wound to ease the bow, without removing the large bandage for several days.
and that which is on the nipple, remove often to take out the bow, and know what flows from the bow, whether it is venom or little or enough, or digestive, or undigested;
and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been applied in such a way and you see the nature that rises on the nipple, then you know that the milk is coming out, and approach the saints;
and then untie it in the morning, or at noon, and when you untie the wound, change the other bandage, and renew the ointment.
And if subtle poisons spread over a long time, you should not despair of health, for health is approaching.
For there are men whose wounds heal slowly with pus in their wounds, and those who heal quickly in the contrary way;
and if undigested milk flows from the breast after many days, know that the milk is not coming out;
and if the breast is slow to heal and is distant, then apply dry medicines that are moist in substance but dry in virtue, like an ointment that is diaphanous, for it contains a large amount of vitriol, and this is the final medicine.
take diaphanous ointment, and make it with rose oil, and equal rose wine in substance;
then cook it and use it;
and with the same make honey candy, when diaphanous ointment is not available, or take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind them into powder over the honey while it is on the fire;
and then use this to glue a bandage onto the breast, and sometimes administer aristologus root, which is like flour made from vetches and centaury; and use simple remedies or compounds: grind them to powder, add the honey I mentioned earlier, and use it.
And if the wound is deep and not healed by this treatment, then you will know that the corruption goes deep, causing impressions in the bones, or hard spots in the limbs or internal organs. if the wound is a fistula, as we have said earlier.
Paresis is an abscess that arises underneath the fingernail or toenail, or occasionally in other places. It can also arise in the armpit, or the groin, or the stomach, or between the buttocks, or on the back, or behind the ears, or anywhere else.
And when it becomes infected and is left untreated, then an abscess forms, and it runs and oozes pus as long as the root of the nail is affected, and sometimes it affects the entire nail. This can also happen to a toe or any other finger. The same treatment should be applied to all such cases.
and comes the corrosion to the bone, so that it causes a fetid pain, and the shoulder is made broad on both sides, and the color is yellow.
When you treat it as we have described in the previous section, and the treatment does not help, then you should cut away all the excess tissue that is hanging from the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterwards. Cauteries are of great help if the bone is healthy, and the fingernail is healthy;
and if the nail pushes against the flesh and begins to grow out, and the blister, then you must put the thread under the nail pushing the flesh out, and pull it up, and gently and subtly cut off that flesh, and put on the rest of the flesh burning and corrosive medicines to remove everything; then cure the wound until it is healed.
And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut it out and draw it out, because as long as the corrupt bone remains, it will not heal;
and if you see the shoulder becoming corrupted, cut it out in the neck as previously described, then cure it until it is healed;
and if it is wild, and bitten, and it feels great pain, then you must treat it first;
then cut the nail of the thumb with an agaric, cutting diagonally across the top, and be careful that the cutter does not reach the flesh underneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain;
and if it happens, put something on it to soothe it.
The two joints that grow in some people's hands by chance are sometimes all flesh, and sometimes they have bones, and sometimes nails; and some grow from the root of the joint, and the growth is on some fingers.
Nails which grow from the top of the finger do not move, but those that grow at the joint of the finger may move.
The cutting of one who is fleshy should be done thus: Cut it at its root with a broad agaric.
The one that grows at the root of the joint is difficult to treat: if you hold it still.
For those who are born in the back of the jaw, you should first scrape the round flesh to the bone, then scrape the bone with an appropriate needle, then heal it until it is healthy.
Joints can be united by birth, or by the joining of a wound, or by a burn, or by similar things.
You must cut this suture, so that the fingers grow according to their natural shape; then place between two tents or moistened sheets in rose oil, so that they do not adhere. or you put between two thin pieces of wood, until the glue dries, as it should be.
If adhesion occurs to one of his hands with the palm, correct that adhesion as it should be.
Veins are large, enveloped vessels filled with melancholy superfluities that come from various parts of the body;
and this happens more often in legs for those who walk and work and carry things, rather than others.
Therefore, you should administer to him some purgative medicine, and then the basil drink.
There are two types of cautery: one is done with fire, drawing out the black blood; and the other way is to lift the vein and draw it all out.
The incision is done like this: first, raise the leg with very hot water until the large veins are dilated, then straighen the leg from above the thigh to just below the knee;
Then open the vein in place I, or II, or III, with a wide cut, then press and draw out the black blood into your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood comes out as the illness can bear;
and then cleanse it, and instruct him to anoint himself with black pitch;
and repeat the bloodletting and bleeding when the veins are full, which benefits the illness.
The treatments for this illness are as follows: examine the leg of the patient, if there is much hair, then put it in the bath, and pour hot water on the leg until it turns red and opens the veins;
and if you do not have a bath, heat it by the fire, and then open the vein from the long side of the knee to the top of the ankle, or in the part below the ankle;
then open the skin at the base of the fingernail, and scorch the vein on both sides until it appears when you feel for it.
and you will see it red and black, and when it enters the skin it looks like a white cord;
then tie off the vein underneath, so that it is raised up from the skin, and then cut it at the base, then clamp it in another place above in two places;
then scorch the skin above the vein until it appears, then lift it up to the nail, just as you did before, and cut it at another nail, just as you did before;
then make another cut, or several if you need to, then lift it up and cut it at the toe, then pull and lift up to the second cut;
then draw it out from cut to cut, until it comes all the way out, then tie it off;
and if you cannot milk and raise it, then put a needle on a very strong double thread, tie it and milk it, put it under the udder, and turn your hand from side to side until it comes out. and beware that she does not kick, for if she kicks, you cannot milk or raise her, and harm comes to the patient.
And when you have finished milking, put on the wound wool soaked in wine and rose oil; and treat it until it heals.
And if the vein is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it twistedly, but do not kick it; and milk it as we have said before.
The shape of the iron with which one kicks the vein is curved, and it does not cut, so that it does not open the vein;
and is of a thick curvature because if it were thin, it would pierce the vein but let it be thick as we have said and here is the form.
This vein is found in legs, in hot parts where no herbs or trees grow, and in dry land where there is no moisture;
and by chance it grows elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens with warts that grow underneath the skin, just as snakes and worms do, growing between skin and flesh.
If the signs of the beginning of this wound are that a great inflammation comes in the leg, then the location changes, and the wound begins to come out, just as a root of a plant.
When the shoulder opens, you must wrap around it a piece of plaster three and a half inches to four inches wide, and tie it, leaving the plaster hanging down on the leg, and every time it dislocates, wrap it around the plaster and the wound.
And if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and wrap around the remaining plaster, but do not cover its root at all until it is completely healed. for if you cut it, it will enter the flesh and cause an abscess and pus in that spot, and a serious illness.
Because of this, it should be treated little by little until the very end, so that nothing remains in the body.
And sometimes this vein, when treated from the palm of the hand, is ten or twenty inches long, and a man came to me once whose was twenty inches long. And when you cut it, it causes a stream or gush, and pierces right through to the bottom so that everything flows out.
And the matter inside is emptied, and medicine-impregnated dressings are applied for a few days to cause pus to form, then it is treated like an abscess.
And sometimes this vein has many branches, especially when it opens at the joints of the foot or ankle, and there are many gushes, and from them springs blood.
Treat it then as we have said before.
of worms that live between skin and flesh This disease is called "cattle disease" in our land, because it often affects oxen. It is caused by a small worm that lives between the skin and flesh, moving throughout the body, ascending and descending, until it bursts through the skin where it goes, and escapes.
It is also accompanied by the emergence of humors, like worms, serpants, roundworms, and other parasites in the belly.
Its malice is feared because when it moves through the body and reaches the head, it can enter and destroy the eye. This happens often.
When you see it moving and wriggling, one cannot help but feel revulsion.
Therefore, you must tie the area above and below tightly with a strong string, then cut it out and if the worm is deep in the flesh and you cannot extract it, then cauterize it with fire until it dies.
and the greater harm he does, as we have said, is that he runs to the eye.
and if you see it coming near the eye, grab under his chin firmly, then lift up and pull out.
and one must use the treatment for purifying the body with dissolveing medicines to remove bad humors and to guard against constipating foods.
of pain that comes from flatulence This disease is called "vomiting" in our language, and it is a pain that comes to various limbs and then moves from limb to limb;
and I saw what I am telling you. I was called to a sick woman and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm;
and soon after, I saw it rise to her shoulder as fast as anything, as quick as silver when it moves from place to place. It moved rapidly and looked like a worm. ;
the pain leaves that spot, and goes to the shoulder, and then a little later runs through the whole body, until it reaches the other arm;
then she began to turn around the body, just as I saw her.
I was very surprised how it moved from limb to limb like that, because I had never seen this disease progress in that way before. Nevertheless, I have seen many whose pain has moved from one place to another, but I have not seen it in the woman;
and I thought that it was because women's bodies are dry and their veins uncovered, and that this caused the wind to be constrained in them;
and they do not appear according to this reason in those who are constipated, and who have moist bodies and relaxed veins.
And when you see this disease being cured, and the patient feels the pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then open up above and below, and then press gently until the wind is forced out of its place; and cauterize the area;
and if you do not see it yourself, then have the person who performs enemas, as with foul-smelling pills, and serapium pills, and similar others.
Arrows are diverse, according to their appearance and according to the part of the body where they strike.
The diversity of their appearance is such that some have large points, some small, some sharp, and some smooth; and some have two angles, and some have tongues, and some have pieces;
and those that break in a member do so in two ways: or in a principal member it breaks, as with brain, heart, liver, lung, kidney, intestines, bladder, and similar members.Or il chiet en membre de la chair, si com en osse, en tendins, en ligamenz, en nervoz, en veines, en arteries, et en toute l’autre chair qui When it therefore breaks in any of these members, and the signs of death that I will tell you about appear: Then you must be wary of extracting this arrow, for death often follows such a course; And if this evil sign is not apparent to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then pull it out and treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain is when the arrow pierces and penetrates the bone, and the syphilis emerges from above the brain, and there is scotomata, and an odor, and a discharge, and redness, and inflammation of the tongue, and spasms, and a disturbance of the mind, and vomiting of blood; and perhaps it emerges from the nose or ears; and perhaps they lose their speech and voice;et li sains lours le corps et li membres et le vis, and the healthy person feels pain in the body and members and face, and from the wound emerges white moisture resembling pus, and also like a bruise on meat;et si li sains se levent, il die qu’il a grant mal, et si li saige bevet,
and if this sign appears, keep to the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is inside.
The signs of an arrow wound when it hits the body are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were stuck in a hard object, not hollow; and sometimes the arrow wound goes silent like the pulse, and there is dark blood, and coldness and cold sweat, and syncope: then know without a doubt that death approaches.
And the sign of an arrow that never leaves the lung is that without pain foam comes from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and breathes heavily and seeks the cold air.
And if the arrow hits the bottom of the foot, it is between the small bones; and there is great pain and deep sighing; and all the limbs move from the shoulders.
And if an arrow hits the stomach, perhaps something undigested will jump out of the wound.
And if an arrow hits the belly, and nothing comes out of the bowel but feces, then there is no hope for a cure, nor for the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow hits the bladder, and the urine comes out in a spray and there is leakage, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is deadly.
The other members, such as the face and neck and throat and shoulder and armpit and spine of the back and hip and thigh and leg, and similar limbs, are safe according to various conditions. When the arrow is in a nerve or artery and is not venomous, as I will tell you so that you can do likewise.
There was a man who got an arrow in his eye socket at the root of the nose: I probed it and pulled it out from under the fat of the ear, and he was healed without a scar.
And I pulled out an arrow that had pierced the fatty tissue under his eye and was lodged beneath the eyelid; the arrow was stuck with its tip pointing towards the bridge of the nose, and it was as long as a Turkish archer's arrow, with a thin shaft and no feathered fletching. It had pierced through without any sign of blood or pus.
The patient healed without any complications.
I pulled an arrow out of the throat of a Christian man; it was an Arabic arrow with feathered fletching:
I cut away the barbs and carefully extracted it, and the Christian man healed.
And brought a arrow to a man who had it lodged in his chest or belly, and thought he would die;
and after thirty days had passed, his condition did not improve; I cut into the arrow, and extracted it, and he had no bad reaction.
And if you see a man who has an arrow lodged in his back, and the wound is sutured over;
and the arrow remains inside him, and his natural functions do not change, nor does he experience any discomfort in any of his natural processes.
And you see another man who has an arrow lodged in his face, and the wound is sutured over;Et demora li saiette lor dedens, si com je vos di, et ne fu nulz dous de ses oevres naturels changiez And the arrow remains inside them, as I have told you, and none of their natural functions are changed, and they remain without
and many others.
And there was a certain arrow shot at the king, a prince of the realm, that had pierced his eye and was slightly inclined towards the right side; and the arrow was fully embedded.
I was called to attend to him after three days had passed. I found the wound very tight.
I examined it carefully and couldn't feel anything; but he felt a piercing pain under his right ear.
I thought it was from the point of the arrow. I applied a soothing and digestive poultice to the area to reduce swelling; and I saw the head of the arrow. Je mis sus lo leu de la saiette poudre de fer et de plomb, et
and I saw the head of the arrow. Je mis sus lo leu de la saiette poudre de fer et de plomb, et I applied powder of iron and lead to the head of the arrow, and reapplied the poultice daily. The wound healed, but the patient felt the presence of the arrow in his eye for a long time;
and he told me so. I put corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it was open and I probed it and felt the head of the arrow which was embedded there.
Then I applied this medicine to the wound until the head of the arrow became visible;
and it healed well within four months. Then I enlarged the wound with forceps and could not extract the arrow;
so I continued to manipulate it with instruments until one day, according to what is written in this chapter, I drew it out and healed the wound.
And those who have knowledge of such things judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: so I restored it and the wound was healed completely.
Here I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you put your care on what I do not say, for books cannot include everything.
but the wise masters compare on very little great things, and on what they are present and lacking, they find new works and new tools, to the descent of strange things that come in this art.
I say that arrows grow in the members where they are stuck according to two ways: or through the place where they enter, or through another part;
and that which goes out through where it entered is an arrow entering into their muscles, and sometimes goes out now.
And if it does not go out now, then leave it so that the flesh around it becomes rotten and the outlet is relieved;
and if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, then leave it like that for a few days, and move it every day;
And then it leaps, and if it does not leap, then pierce all around with a very thin stick until the orifice widens, and then pull it out.
And if the arrow has been driven into the body so that it cannot be seen, then look for it throughout the body; and if you feel it, then draw it to a suitable instrument;
and if you cannot due to the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, then open it as widely as the wound is large;
and pull out the arrow if you can, and if there are barbs on the arrow that hold it in place, then cut away the flesh where the barbs are located on both sides as far as you can, and then bend or twist the barbs of the arrow so that you can pull it out;
and be careful not to break the arrow as you pull it out more forcefully.
And if you cannot remove it in one go, then leave it until the flesh around it is swollen, and then pull it out, for the extraction will be easier. And if the flow of blood causes a problem, then refer to what we have said about curing in its chapter;
and beware of cutting into a nerve and opening a vein, and use every trick you know to pull out the arrow safely, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently;
and place the patient in the same position as when the arrow struck him, for that is the best help you can provide; and if you cannot do this, then place him according to the signs that show themselves.
The arrow that comes from another direction, or where something of it appears, or the skin is swollen in that spot where one can see or feel it clearly:
cut above it, as high as the tweezers can reach, and then pull it out: if it jumps out immediately.
And if it is caught in the bone, then rotate your hand rapidly, so that it goes into the bone and widens the opening, then pull it out.
And if it cannot come out, then leave it and try pulling again until it comes out:et s’il est en haut ou en bas, et ne peut demourer en son lieu, et tu vois que il se remue, si le mets sus li foyez selonc le membre qu’il a la dis
and if it is high up or low down, and cannot stay in its place, and you see that it is moving, then reset the joint according to the limb that is affected by the dislocation:and if there is an
and if it is cut, and you see to administer bandaging, then let him administer the instrument chewed, so that the tip of the arrow enters the gum of the instrument;
and then bite down, and if the arrow is chewed, let him bite down on the instrument with its tip entering in, to aid extraction.
And if the arrow has touched, then you must cut all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can, then cure the wound as it should be.
And if the arrow is cut or pierced in the mouth, belly, bladder, or side, and it is close by, and you can cover it up, then let him cover it up.
And be careful to not cover the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and then close the wound, if necessary. and treat it until it is healed.
The shape of tweezers used to treat arrows are similar to an owl's beak, and here is the shape:
There are many ways of doing this: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
The shape of the arrowhead is like that of a bird's feather, to push against the tip of the arrow, just as it is shaped:
Of veins from which one heals there are 31, of which there are 16 in the head, namely: II. Veins that are behind the ears, called "two herbech and the II arteries that are in II temples apparent; and two veins that are in the eyelids, which are called "aspirations". and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the two windpipes which are in the neck; and the two veins that are above the lips, and these are the veins called "augerich"; and two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins which are commonly used for bleeding are five in each arm:the first vein is called  "superficial external", and it runs along the arm just below the skin, from
one is the  "cephalica", which is on the left side of the chest, and common people call it the  "vein of the head";the second vein is called   "superficial internal", and it runs along the arm towards the palm, from and the middle one is called    "fast", and it is composed of the   "cephalica" and the   "basillica", and common people call it the   "vein of the heart";the third vein is called    "basillica", and it runs along the arm towards the back of the hand, from and the basilic vein is located on the right side, and the lay people call it "wound of the belly", and it is situated above the bladder, and it is that one which opens clearly above the scrotum.
And the salvatoria vein is the one between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches:
and in the leg and in the foot there are three veins: one is below the curve of the scrotum on the left side, and the second one is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein called "nest", which is at the ankle of the other side;
and in the other leg there are three veins below those.
The bleeding from the veins that are behind the ears helps with old cataracts and with emigrine;
and the qualities of the surgeon, as I told you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then tighten the patient's neck with a rope, so that the two veins appear behind the ears, descending from the head; hold it tightly at your waist, and where you feel the pulse under your finger, press inwards;
then take the lance and pierce under the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand all along the vein upwards, and cut both the skin and the vein well twice with the lance, and let blood flow until you see it;
then tighten and bind it, until it is healed;
and I have already said about incision and cautery in the first book.
The healing of the two arteries that are in the two temples, it helps with old-age blindness and habituated dim vision, and to the body of the eyes, watery eyes.
and the qualities of the healing agent are as I said: and that the patient holds his neck still, so that the two veins are clearly visible; and feels the pain in your chest, and then signs inwardly;
then lightly press the vein near the top of your index finger, and insert the lance below, and press the vein upwards, and draw out the blood according to your need;
then release the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then place cotton on top; and then let it heal, and leave it until it is healed;
and we have spoken of their formation and extraction, at the beginning of the book.
The sores of the frontal vein are as valuable as the cephalic veins in old diseases of the face, and in emigration and redness;
and its qualities are such that the patient twists his neck so that the vein appears; then take the instrument called "digging", of which this is the form:
And place the point on the vein, and press with your hand or something else, and let the blood issue according to the amount you want; Then loosen the neck of the patient, and ligate the vein so that it is healthy, sometimes with a wide flame.
Nevertheless, the flames should not be too narrow; and he should heal crosswise, because the bone is close, and might break the flame when it is subtle.
The healing of the two veins that are in the two eyelids, and also for eye-inflammation, redness, and diseases of the face.
And the nature of their healing is that the patient should twist his neck in some way, as before;
Then it heals, and the healing is through the tissue, a little way down from the long flame, a little wide, because there is no flesh there. And if the flames are subtle, perhaps they will break;
Then make it bleed until you have enough blood, and then tie it up with a thread, and tie it well.
The healing of the vein in the nose is useful for nosebleeds and for sudden madness, and for diseases of the face, such as inflammation and redness that come to the face, and especially when it is chronic.
and the quality of bleeding is that the patient tightens his neck, then pulls his nose to your left hand, and takes the subtle flame long, and inserts it into the lip in the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well there, and the blood will now begin to flow;
and do not go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your need, then ligature it for a night, because it is quickly restored;
Bleeding from the two sinuses helps with strangulation of the windpipe, and at the beginning of hoarseness, and many illnesses, and impetigo, and scrofula, and herpes, and stomachaches;
and the quality of bleeding is that the patient tightens his neck from both sides, as we have said;
and the master is standing above the patient's head, and the patient is sitting on a chair, then cut the vein in the arm generously, then draw blood moderately, as needed.
then tie off the other vein, then gently constrict the veins, so that the patient is not strangled. and let it be until morning, so that the wound can heal.
of bleeding from the gums The bleeding of the veins in the lips helps with sores in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and splitting of the lips, and pain in the teeth and gums.
And the quality of the bleeding is to have the patient sit in front of you, and constrict his neck as I've said; then turn the lip, and examine both veins, one on the right side and the other on the left; you can identify them because they are black, and because there are small black veins around them.
Cut both of them, and if you don't recognize them, and you're in doubt, then cut the largest one on each side, and likewise do the same for the veins above and below, as it's the same procedure.Et li voinnes qu’a l’enfre, si les cope a la fin, car il y a en l’enfre pluseurs veines que ont poeur;
of bleeding under the tongue The bleeding of the veins that are under the tongue is helped by the bleeding of the cephalic vein, and it is in the constriction of the throat, and in the diseases of the eye, and in the diseases of the mouth.
and the qualities of the bleeder are that the patient should hold their hands out in front of the sun, and stick out their tongue, and look down on each side for a black vein:
so therefore bleed both, but do not go too deep, for under them are the arteries.
The veins of the neck from which one commonly bleeds are bled in two ways:
either with a large mirtin needle, or a thin olive-wood one as sharp as a needle, and it is called 'anesil'; and they are large and thin according to the width and constriction of the veins. The shape of the flame of myrtle is highly renowned, and it is wide as you can see.
And it is necessary to open the veins smooth and full of clear blood, and those that contain thick and troubled blood; and that is the shape of an olive-shaped flame:
and it is more pointed and subtle, used for bleeding veins that are fine and contain subtle yellow blood.
The basilic vein, which is one of these veins, helps diseases that are under the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the belly;
and it is necessary for the bleeding to be stopped, and for the artery underneath to be cauterized. And if he opens the artery, and a gushing of blood comes, then it must be stopped, as I have said; and the flame should not be gripped, but cut as if with a knife.And if the artery bleeds, and gushing blood comes, then it must be stopped, as I have said; and the flame should not
And if the basilic does not open clearly, then you must dislocate it, and change to another; or you want some of them, or you heal in place of them the vein inside the arm: it opens clearly; and the cautery flame extinguishes, as we have said.
And if you want to find the site of the bleeding, you must therefore stretch out the arm, and touch the site until you feel the pulse; then mark the site with a cut, then tie up the arm, and cauterize the vein until the flame goes out; and be careful not to pierce the artery when you see the site swell, for that is the artery; avoid it therefore.Car si tu le feris en l’artere,
And if you see it gush out high like a child's urine, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is arterial blood: therefore hurry, and put your finger on it for a long time, then take your finger off if the wound stops bleeding, as often happens. bind up his arm and leave it, and do not move him who is sick.
and let him be afraid, and do not move him until he is healed.
And if the wound is not clotting and he is bleeding profusely while you are waiting for the medicine, then press hard on the artery until it stops. and stop the flow of blood.
Take a piece of fir wood and split it, then take one half and tie it firmly in place until the next day.
If the wound is clotting, that's good;si li sans ne estainchie, querre une escorce d’alier if not, get a piece of alder wood and, as we said earlier, use powders to stop bleeding.
and the bandages are not wrapped in various positions because of the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
The bleeding of the vein in the middle helps that it draws blood from the head above and the body below, because it is composed of basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said;
and the surgeon must be careful not to pierce too deeply and find the nerve, and it should swell and the wound be harmed, and perhaps it cannot heal;
and this nerve opens in many people, but if it does not open in some because of its subtlety, then you must anoint it with the anesthetic; and avoid the nerve as much as you can.
And if it has a vein between the two nerves, they cut it open.
The bleeding of the cephalic vein helps draw blood from the head and aids the eyes;
and one must open the vein with a flame from an olive branch or a myrtle twig, for it is the safest of all veins, since there are no nerves or arteries underneath it. Nevertheless, one must find the lightest vein, and if one misses the first time, one should try again; and sometimes veins swell up in certain people, when one misses the first time, but it does no harm.
The quality of the bleeding depends on your thought process.
The first thing you should know about opening veins is that it is not done merely to treat disease but also to prevent it from coming;
and it can be performed in one of three veins that are in the arm: namely, the cephalic, the fast, and the basilic;li cephalique est li plus legiers de sainier, car il n’a pas and one should open the vein at the beginning of spring, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of digestion are apparent;
and one must bleed him the first day or third, after two hours or three of the day.
The bleeding which is administered to the sick has no fixed time, but when there is need, day or night, at all times and at all hours.
and one must not bleed children until they are fourteen years old, nor women carrying a fetus beyond the fourth month until the seventh. Nor should the very elderly who have passed 60 years be bled.
And when someone wants to be bled, in whatever way, he should first clean out the intestines with a gentle enema if he has retained a lot of feces so that the veins do not draw harmful excess fluids from the intestines into the principal limbs.
Nor should one bleed those who are too bloated with food, nor those who are drunk, as long as it lasts, nor the hydropic.
and if one is sick after colic, vomiting, diarrhea, and excessive sexual intercourse with a woman, from exertion, from lack of sleep or fasting, and from all that depletes the body through arms or the body itself.
then secretly restore the humor if it is thin, through food and drink and medicine if you have the power to do so.
then enter the bath if nothing else is helping, to restore the humor and to heal the wound around the navel, as we have said.
and avoid hard work, straining, and excess during that day, and similar things.
and be calm and cheerful, and let the patient be higher than the person healing them, and rub their arm 2 or 3 times, then tighten the bandage above the wound gently, for if it is too tight or too loose, it cannot heal the wound.
and then he rubs the area with his hands, until the veins swell, and they are felt;
then moisten the needle with a little old oil, then place his finger from his left hand on that vein underneath the site he wants to cauterize, so that the vein does not burst and break when cauterized.
For there are veins that flow like cords when cauterized, and others that are full of wind and so when the needle is placed on them and the cautery is applied, they draw back from the heat and cannot be opened, and thus one must be careful of these. And if he opens the vein, and the wound is too narrow, then one must be careful with this.
And if the vein opens on the first attempt, that is good; If not, then begin again a little lower down, or above the wound, if the swelling has subsided.
And if the swelling persists and the patient is in fear, then leave it for a day or two, and do not bind the arm. Perhaps hot abscesses will form;
do not enter into a bath, then begin the bleeding again if she wishes;
and if the wound is small, or the blood flows slowly and you doubt that enough blood will come out, then insert the fleam directly into the wound;
and work a little gently, so that the swelling does not subside; for it often happens, when the wound is small.
If you see the area swelling, do not begin the bleeding again, and place some linseed oil on it, for it lightens the body of blood, and is useful in that place where there is oil;
and so administer the leech oil on each wound that you heal the veins to stop the flow of blood;
and the same thing happens with triacle and bowels when they are placed in the wound; if subtly the blood splits and escapes when it is too thick.
And if a large abscess comes, which often happens, especially when it is not healed in the first place or when the opening of the vein is small, you should hurry and put a damp sponge in lukewarm water on the wound, and hold it there for an hour;
and you should do this after the blood flow from the wound stops, and if it remains in place for several days with some blackness or green, then it does no harm;Et s’il vient a la voix qu’il se remue ou qu’il se fende, si le faict mal. and if you see it, put on something made of aloe or myrrh mixed with medicinal juice, a poultice, or something similar.
And often there is an abscess and an appearance at the base of the penis:
then put your hand on it, and if you find the area soft to the touch, then that appearance is bad. Therefore, avoid putting anything we have mentioned on it, because sometimes it comes from an artery;
but let him dry-foment the area to harden it, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And treat each wound according to its quantity and the strength of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it go until it is thinned out; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for one who is full and bloated, and needs bloodletting, that they make him a larger wound, and let the flames be wide;
and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and they should bleed him little and often, and they must bleed him by cutting across, not by pricking;
and this method of bleeding is safe from blood loss and nerve damage, and is better than bleeding from the long or wide vein.
And for one whose body needs bleeding, it is necessary to give them moist bread in pomegranate juice; If he is hot-tempered, let him eat moist bread with pomegranate juice three or four times before bleeding. And if he is of a cold complexion, let him eat moist bread with syrup of rosewater, or with scented honey syrup mixed with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger and cardamom, and with fragrant syrup.
And if he faints during bleeding, after losing a lot of blood, then he should drink warm broth and fragrant syrup, and use other things that we have mentioned in the chapter on syncope, for opening the vein.
And if he wants to empty his arm and bleed again, it is necessary, when he is weakened by a large bleed, that he bleeds little by little according to the amount of his continued strength.
And whoever wants to open their arm after the first bleeding, and they have a strong body, then heal for .7 hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And whoever wants to bleed elsewhere, then they should bleed on the second day or the third day.
For there is much blood within the body which has become heated, and brings on fever; if one must draw out a great quantity, and widen the opening as far as it will stretch with the finger; then you must examine all the conditions of healing, and put your hand on his pulse as he heals, so that death does not come to the place of the wound, and this often happens when the surgeon is negligent;
and one must not, when you see to unbind the arm and make the blood issue out a second time, and the opening is closed, press directly on it; nor if it is crooked, that he extends his arm suddenly, for that would be bad;sies qu’en la seconde saingniee tu leuisses li bras pendre par un drape, et li pertus soit sus loing de
letting the arm hang by a cloth, and the opening be distant from the shoulder; but let it be until it heals the second time;et or you point the flame to the tip of the vein until the frozen blood in the vein melts and flows out, then place a little salt mixed with water on it, and press gently.
And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not constrict it, until the abscess is reduced.
And if it is necessary to let blood a second time, then bleed in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The veins in the arm are healthy in the area of the vein in the head because it is composed.
And the way of bleeding is for the patient to put his hand in hot water until the vein is dilated;
then let him be bound up gently so that the vein appears well, then he should be bled from the middle, neither from the top nor the bottom;
and the cut should be wide, and bleeding should be done close to the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot come out, then put the hand back in hot water and let the blood run into the water until you have enough;
and if it is winter, do not put the hand back in hot water, for one puts their hand in warmer water in winter than in summer;
and the bleeding from this vein is safer than from any other vein, for there are neither artery nor nerve.
The bleeding to save the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it is done:
Hold the hand, and put in warm water, until the vein is swollen, as one sees it; and if it bleeds across, and you tie it from all sides, it will not hurt anything;
and do not go in too deep, for the nerves are stripped of flesh everywhere underneath, and then put the hand back in warm water if the blood is frozen in the wound, and it cannot come out.
And when you have stopped the bleeding as much as necessary, then put oil and silk on the wound to heal quickly, and do this for each wound.
The bleeding in the left hand is beneficial for the disease of the mouse, and do everything just as I told you about the right hand.
The salve of the sophia is good for all diseases that are under the body, such as diseases of the stomach, and retention of fluids, and diseases of the kidneys, and the buttocks and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the qualities of its bleeding are such that the patient puts his foot in warm water, and rubs on the vein until it bursts, and he applies a poultice to the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot they go very fast.
treat it then with the broadest vein, or at the ankle, which is better.
And if you treat it above the foot, beware of the nerves underneath, and treat it across as well by cutting.
and let the fire be extinguished.
And if the blood cannot come out, then put the foot in water, and let the vein bleed well.
And if it lacks the first time, do it again a little higher up, for the vein is salty;
do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and thus do the same with the other foot equally.
The location of the sciatic vein is at the ankle bone, and its pulsation extends to the pain in the hip, when it is due to hot blood.
And its quality is that the patient goes into the bath, and pulls up above the ankle three times by twisting, for otherwise the vein does not open;
and if it opens, then treat it in all ways you can, and across; And it is better to cut it off because the skin is safe, and it is very relieved by hand.
And it is better to cut it off because the skin is safe, and it is very relieved by hand. And if you do not believe this, cut a vein in the leg that opens towards the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and be careful of the nerves.
Let the blood flow as you wish, then loosen the bandage and put on cotton and tighten it; It is now healed.
Cupping glasses are made from horn, or brass, or glass;
And ventilation is done in two ways: Either by cutting and drawing blood, or without cutting.
And this ventilation which is without cutting, is according to two methods:ou par entremise de plave de vairre, ou d’arain; Or it is through a glass plate, or brass; either it is with fire, or without fire;
and ventilation which is done by hitting and by bloodletting if it is done in XIV places of the body, one of which is all at the top of the head; and others are among the neck; and two others on each side of the neck; and the ventouse under the chin; and the ventouse on both shoulders; and the ventouse above the hips; and the ventouses among the two arms; and the ventouses on both legs; and the ventouses on the two ankles;
and ventilation does not draw blood, except from small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and because of this it doesn't weaken him at all, as with bloodletting from a vein; and it must not be administered, neither by all fire nor by any heat, in any illness that comes from fullness, until the whole body is emptied.
And if through necessity or habit it is necessary to bleed, then we should do so every hour at the beginning of the month, or at its end, and at intervals throughout each season.
this is because there are some who have a heavy head when they need to bleed;
and some experience bloating and redness in their face, head, and neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and some have a drop of blood in their mouth, and their tongue swells, and they bleed; and there are some who dream, and see through the night blood and wounds and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, especially if it occurs during the night, we instruct them to drink a medicine after three hours.
Bleeding from the nose helps with headaches … that come to the eyes, and should not be done after evacuating the whole body;
and this bleeding is in the place of the headache, and should not be done by those of a cold complexion, or who have catarrh, because it does them great harm;Car s’il li est aprés le sangle, ou sur la coste sus li sangle, ou deduit par la coste sus li sangle, et que l’on le tienne si fort qu’il ne se mueve, et que il vienne de lor chief sang, et qu’il soit au costé sus
and for this reason, the elderly should not use it, nor those who have serious diseases.
And those who often heal from it become oblate, and because of this, the cupping glasses should be placed a little lower down due to the risk of oblateness.
The wind-gazing in the neck is in line with the pulse of the head and the basilic, and for this reason it helps with tightness in the feet, and with splits in the gullet of the lung, and with constipation and bloating;
and one should not push it too hard, because if it is pressed too tightly, it harms the stomach and the heart.
The wind-gazing at the two sides of the neck helps with headaches, and eye pain and inflammation, and with strangulation, and with toothache, and is in line with the pulse of the basilic;
and you should instruct the patient to express his hand when placing it, so that he does not constrict the artery and cause a rush of blood.
The ventilators below the chin are good for mouth diseases, and gum decay, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and they are in place of bleeding from the two lips.
Ventilation of the armpits is good for a disease that comes from heat and fullness.
The ventilators on the sides are as good as three veins in the arm, because they draw blood from these large veins;
and instruct the bleeding person not to pierce too deeply, because the place is bare of flesh, and has veins and arteries underneath.
The cupping glass that is on the buttocks is good for hemorrhoids and illnesses underneath, and it should be large, and made of copper, so that it draws well; and by chance, if it were delicate, it would break; and it makes large wounds.
The cupping glasses on the legs bleed very openly, because they draw blood from the whole body, and are good for old pains in the loins, and in the hips, and in the bladder, and restore the flow of urine;
and are in place of two sutures, and of two ankles, and yet they weaken the body after long use, and cause paralysis in many ways.
The method of applying the cupping glass is to first place it empty, and suck gently, and apply it firmly, and move it evenly, and not stop doing this until you see the area red and swollen, and the redness of blood appearing;
then heat it, and re-apply the cupping glasses, and take care in the disposition of the body, for there are some with such thin skin and clear pores; one should only pierce once, and one should make wide wounds, and not too deep; and suck gently.
And if the vein is thick, one should pierce twice: the first time to open the path of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very thick, then it must be struck a third time.
and when we want to draw out a little blood, we only need to strike once. And if we want a lot of blood, then we start again often;
and if the blood is thick, then pierce it deeply, and the ends should be such that the skin is pierced suddenly, and it suits someone who has tough and hard skin, and who have narrow pores, that you grease the places of the ventouses with astringent and dissolving oil: if it is in the head, use violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil;
and if it is in the liver, use watercress oil, or lily, or chamomile, or similar.
And if the swelling is large and cold, take oil of marjoram, or of balsam, or of fennel, and similar oils.
And if one is being bled from tender skin and large pores, then no oil should be used, but it should be washed after cupping with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or pumpkin water, or porcelain water, or something similar.
And those who have a lot of moisture should get up from garlic, or myrrh water, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have large surpluses should drink old wine, or dry water, or a decoction of aniseed or chamomile, or similar;
and it is not good to bleed with cupping glasses before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for one or two hours;
and he should not sleep after cupping, and it is good that he warms himself, both when he should be bled and when he is bled.
And beware if the person bleeding is choleric, and if the blood is too thin and inflammed; if he should eat cool things like pomegranates and endives and lettuce with garlic, and similar things; and eat pulses, and meat from a pot, and moist meats.
and eat pulses, and meat from a pot, and moist meats. And those with a cold complexion should eat honey syrup, and moderate old and new wine, and pulses, and small birds and peewits;and those with a hot temperament should not eat too many pulses or meat, but rather drink cool water.
and on the day he is bled, he should drink more than eat;
and it is necessary to give some people theriac or musk before or after bleeding to strengthen the main members; dilute the wine, but those who are hot-tempered should not drink it.
The leeches that are used without causing pain are those placed on the liver, and the mumps, and podagra, and on the belly, and the groin, and the hips, for these members cannot be bled without pain, except to attract blood from one member to another, as we do when placing leeches on the breasts when the nipples are healthy;
to remove the viscousness that is in a member, as we do by placing leeches on the belly and groin to reduce the size of the member;
and removes pain when there is obstruction or stone, and it removes by its attractive power the obstruction, or the stone from its place;
and so it does when placed over the liver and over the stomach when there is retained flatulence; these cupping glasses are administered empty in order to suck only slightly. and sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water, as in the case of diseases of the pleura; in such a way one fills the cupping glass with warm water, or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
The shape of the cupping glass administered by fire is as follows:
And it should be two fingers wide and half a palm deep, and on the side near the middle it has a small hole, just big enough to push through an awl, and it should be made of copper, smooth in front so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb;
and he has in the middle a bent rod of iron or steel, to hold a candle, and there are both large and small ones depending on the illnesses and age of those who use them;
because children's cupping glasses are different from adults', and for thin people they are different from fat people.
And one should thus place this cupping glass on the member:
take the candle of wax or linen and put it inside the cupping glass through the rod which is inside the cupping glass, so that the flame is at the bottom of the cupping glass and does not burn the patient;
and then place it on the member, and one's fingers must be on the hole that we have mentioned, so that when one wants to, one can release the vapor and remove the cupping glass;
and they take the linen as before, and repeat it often if necessary.
In the cupping glass therefore which is administered for pleurisy, in all acute diseases, there is no tube or aperture, and it is not removed until it is full of water, and is placed on the limb alone;
and this is the form:
Leeches are not removed until in members where one cannot place cupping glasses because of their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and in bare flesh, such as elbow or knee, and other similar places;
and the quality of its use is such that when you find leeches in clear, clean water without mud, you should take them;
and put them in fresh water for as long as they are famished, and have nothing in their bellies; and then cleanse the vein and apply cupping glasses, then rub the limb until it is red, and place the leeches upon it;
and when they are flat, and itching, if it is in a place where one can apply a cupping glass, one should, because it helps a lot.
If not, then raise the area with a bandage, and then with water, very well, and then squeeze it out;
and if the bites heal too slowly after the body of the leech, then soak a linen cloth in cold water and place it on top until the leech is stretched out;
and if the bites are numerous, then place ground vitriol, or gall, and similar things on top until they are stretched out;
or you can place half-peeled peas on the area and leave them until they warm up the area, and it will stop right away;
and if you need more, then take other leeches.
And if the leeches will not attach, then rub the area with fresh blood, or pierce the skin with a needle until blood comes out, and then apply the leeches; as soon as they smell the blood, they will attach.
and when you see that they are sucking, then powder over a little aloe and powdered glass, or ash, and they will stop immediately.
Here begins the book of fractures. This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine and is a cure for fractures and dislocations.
Know, dear son, that the fools mock this chapter, which they have never seen in any ancient book or letter;
and for this reason knowledge is strange in our land, for I have never found any good ones;
and I know nothing of it except through the science of ancient books, from which I have studied so much that I have attained knowledge, and through experiment and the habit of my life;
and I have described in this chapter what is contained within, and abbreviated it at the end, and clearly demonstrated the forms of the instruments that are used, just as I have done in the two chapters before.
Therefore, we must say in the prologue of this book the subjects of the discussion and the chapters in which the sage sets his understanding, and dwells on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a fracture, dislocation, twisting, or break occurs in someone, you must hurry to heal the patient on both sides, if anything does not heal him completely, as with weakness of the body, or old age, or frailty; or if the weather is not very warm, or too cold;
and eat cold foods, that is, cold joints, and bird and squirrel meat, and do not drink any wine, nor eat any fatty foods, and do not fill yourself too much with meat that fills the veins with blood, until you have reason to suspect a hot abscess or inflammation in the limb;
if the patient returns to his former way of life.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, one must feed the patient foods that promote swelling and stickiness, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, eggs, and offal, and fresh fish, and wine, and similar things. For with this swelling the bones will close up and heal more quickly.
And you should know that broken bones in the elderly and the very young cannot heal well or unite naturally due to the dryness of their limbs.
but nevertheless, reset the broken bone by pulling on the large tendons that stretch and join the limb together, as tightly as it was before. and do not cut off all blood flow to the area; for that reason, one should feed on rich foods, as we have said.
And you should know that there are various types of fractures in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all the ways of fracturing. For there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another in grinding, as with the tip of a quill for writing.
For there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another in grinding, as with the tip of a quill for writing. And if there is a break with a wound, and a break all over a small split.
And each part has its own function and its own unique healing process, according to what is remembered about it.
And a broken bone is apparent by its crookedness and can be identified by pressing on it with the hand.
and when there is no twisting or tenderness, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no fracture.
but there may be twisting, or splitting, or a small fracture. You should not move it by hand, but rather apply the remedies that follow, and then hold it firmly in place.
And you should know that the fracture that goes into the bone, and the two parts are separated, they must now be put back together equally, as with abscesses.
and if hot abscesses come, he leaves them for a day or two, until the abscesses are calm;
then he puts it back in place as easily and gently as possible, and you should know that the restoration of this one is easier than the restoration of the one with pieces;
then they are restrained, as appropriate afterwards.Et saiches qu’il convien que tu fasses la mesme chose en celi ou il ait pieces et non pas en
And if there are broken pieces of bone, they are separated into two parts, whether it is a hand or foot, or a small limb, or two tendons, or one tendon and a hand;
and set the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the limb are separated, then by all means bring the additions back into their places as you can, and be careful that your work does not cause the patient injury or pain.
and adjust the two heads of the bone according to the best forms.
And feel it with your hand if you think it is not right:
and stretch it gently, without pulling too hard or pressing as those do who bring about a hot abscess and contraction in the limb through their work, as we have seen many times.
And when the limb is healed, then instruct the patient to be careful not to move it, whether waking or sleeping, turning over or in any other way: and make sure that the limb is secure so that he does not feel any pain.Et s’il ot aprés doulour, si le ramene a son leu selonc ke tu sai, et f For when he feels no pain, then it is not at all, and one must put him in such a position that he feels no pain.
and make sure that the limb is secure so that he does not feel any pain.Et s’il ot aprés doulour, si le ramene a son leu selonc ke tu sai, et f For when he feels no pain, then it is not at all, and one must put him in such a position that he feels no pain. and be careful that it is set straight, so that no crookedness comes to it when it is restored.
and the qualities of the broken member are according to what I tell you.
Know that broken members vary in smallness and greatness and in form.
For there are small members, like arms and fingers and their likes: and one must wrap them in soft, fine linen; and those that are large, like thigh and leg:
and one must wrap them in a wide, hard bandage, for the wide bandage envelops the entire large member and holds it tightly from all sides evenly so that there is no swelling.
Then tie around it with light bandages, three or four according to the member, and press your hand tightly against all the bandage, then go above the dislocation and loosen it less so that the dislocation is pushed out a little;
and soften the bond little by little, until you grasp a large part of the healthy tissue, then take hold of another bond, and twist back and forth on the broken area;
then go to the area under the break, and pull gently, not too hard or too softly, as we have said in the first hour above;
then place between the bonds, cotton or linen, until they are all even, then tie it all tightly with a bandage on top; and then put your splints well placed on top if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, then place something soothing for the abscess, hot, and which reduces the swelling, and leave it thus for several days;
Then pull gently on your splints; they should be made of half a cane split lengthwise, or from palm wood, and made in this shape:
but it is necessary that the star that one puts on the fracture is a bit larger and wider than the others;
and also as long as it needs to be in the small or large member; then press on the stars as you did in the first hour, then tie a string over them gently, just as you did in the first hour over the fracture; the tighter it is, the better, but not too tight;
and the string should be medium thickness, not too thick or thin, and made of soft flax;
because if the strings are thick, as I have seen foolish people make their ties with strong cords, and that is a great error, for the tie cannot be even if it is too thin, and there should not be less than two fingers' width between each star.
And if the patient is wounded in the head after the stretching of his legs while healthy, then place under them linen pads or other soft cloth so that he does not get hurt.
When the wound is with a fracture, and the bone is broken, I will describe the treatment for this later.
And know that it is not good to stretch all the broken limbs on the first day. For when a member is swollen, you must not put splints on it for more than five or seven days, or longer depending on the heat of the abscess.
And here is the manner of ancient plasters to restore fractures, dislocations, and torsions:
And it is that you take flour that is stored in the walls of the mill, and cook it with plenty of egg, and put this mixture, neither too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way of the plaster restoring fractures in many dispositions, especially in women and small children, because it is not too hot or too cold.
Another way of plaster restoring fractures, dislocations, and torsions: Prenes de la cire et l’uef et confis ensembles, et quanque il soit ben confis, mets li Take wax and eggs and cook them together, and when it is well cooked, put in 3 barberry plants and ladani and myrrh and asafetida and gum arabic, each at 10 doses; myrrh and aloe, each 5 drams; aloes wood VIIII З.; grind them into powder and mix with egg white; if the person's complexion is hot, use this plaster, for it has a good composition and quickly restores broken bones, and benefits many people.
Another recipe for a plaster that helps with twisting injuries: Take mugwort and honey, mix them together. myrrh and aloes, mix seven parts. aloe six parts. armenian bole ten parts, and grind well, and infuse with water or wine yolk, and administer it.
Another way to treat dislocated joints and bones that have been displaced from their sockets, and to ease the resulting pain, and to shrink the bone, and to heal fractures: take take new lamb's wool, and boil it in oil and honey, and apply it to the affected area.
This plaster does not restore, but it is good for soothing hot abscesses and removing pain.
Another way to treat broken bones: take take dry fig leaves and deadnettle leaves, and grind them together, and make an ointment from it.
Another method of plaster for healing bone fractures and reducing the swelling of an abscess: take new lamb's wool, moisten it in arsole and oil, and apply it to the affected area. It also helps to restore broken bones and reduce the size of an abscess. Take the root of wormwood, chamomile, violets flowers, and wheat flour, of each one part;
and crush, and cook with wine, and if the member is scalded, cook it with moist coriander water or just water, and use it.
Another method of emplastri more forceful than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the member. Take roots of marsh mallow, and flax seed, buckthorn berries, milk thistle, and dandelions, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of each one part; and crush, and cook with salted water, or fresh water, or wine, depending on the heat of the member and its condition.
Ypocrates says in his book that one should not put anything on a broken member to restore it other than a cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems according to Galen that one must put on the broken member, to restore, dry things a little warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another method of plaster that is good for injury and pain:Pren flos de violetes, de camomille, de mallow, et de fenugrec, de ch Take violets, chamomile, marsh mallow, and fenugreek flowers, all in equal parts; take mugwort and peeled human hair, or bird feathers, and marsh mallow, and mix them together, and crush them, and make plaster from it and use it.
And then he looses it a little after, and takes care that the patient feels no pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; if he does not loosen it by hand in a few days. And if pain comes to the place, or itching, or restlessness or swelling, then hurry and loosen it and remove the plaster immediately;
and take a light cloth, and a sponge of damp sea-sponge, and dip it in water, and lift up the place until the itching stops, and the pain is eased;Et s’il ne leve pas tant qu’il fuige la fieve, si covient li ostre l’emplaustre, et le mettre ades a l’ombre et a leu fraich, tant que li dolor se paier. then let the member rest an hour, then put on lamb's wool dampened in water or rose oil, and bind it up with a cloth, until you are sure there is no hot abscess;Et s’il vient aposteme a la dent, que li dent soit mise sus ainne fraiche, et li leu sea moillie en aigue, ou oile de luisant, ou oile d’amand, si covient le mettre sus dent fraiche, tant qu’elle se
and relieve inflammation of the member, and remove pain, then start again with gentle pressure, and a little ointment, and do not squeeze as hard as before. and gently until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen, and you need ointment and binding, then do it again, just as you did before.Et se il n’est pas sanez, et il ne te veult bien estraindre, si covient qu’il soit osté dou membre et mis en autrui lieu, et li membre ben liien et ben reposé.
And if there is nothing of what we have said in the member, do not dislocate it until 3 or 4 or 5 or 7 days. And sometimes leave it for 20 days according to what one sees, as long as the fracture heals and the bone nears the surface.
then reduce it further than before, and increase its flesh, as I said earlier;
and if you see the area drier than necessary, know that healing cannot occur; then immerse it in warm water every time you dislocate it, and do so every third day, and loosen the pressure a little;
by this work then shorten the growth of the member, and gently mend what the foolish do, who restore the crooked member.
It is evil, and if it is done timidly, I see no other outcome than weariness and doing it correctly.
There are many types of fractures, and various shapes, and the causes are distinct.
for there are fractures that are made by the impact of a sword, and the collar bone breaks all the way to the hyoid which is under the jawbone, as with a blow or a staff; and because of this type of fracture is called 'a sword cut'.
Or the sword cuts the bone from above without piercing it, and this type of fracture is called 'absolute';
and the wound of these two fractures are large or small.
And if there is a blow with a bladed weapon, or a split or from the collarbone, or from falling on stone, or from other similar causes.
And if there is a broken bone piercing through to the membrane below the bone, or on top of the bone, and this wound is large or small.
And if there is a wound that is buried in the bone as subtle as a hair, and the split is small, and therefore this fracture is called "capillary";
and if the wound is made by a stone or by falling, or by a similar object, and drives the bone below, and the site is hairy like a blacksmith when they work on kettles; if it pierces the bone inside.
And this happens more often in those who have moist bones in their heads, like children's heads;
and it happens in all types of fractures where small pieces are separated like tiles;Et quant li os se fend et est les pieces separees, adonc covient le chief d’en tirier la piece qui est dedens, ou il li sanz And when the bone splits and the pieces are separated, then you must pull out the piece that is inside the wound,
And we shall know all kinds of fractures through examination, and through the corruption that is upon them, and through the foulness that is upon them.
The appearance of hair is known when one has uncovered the bone and rubbed it, if the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of a fracture, be wary of the signs of illness, and if you see any bad signs, such as vomiting of blood, loss of consciousness, swelling, fever, eyes bulging and reddening, and other similar things in various dispositions, then it cannot heal without a doubt.
And if you do not see a fearful accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when the patient comes to you first, and it is winter, then you should remove the tooth before the fourteenth day that you can.
And if it is in the spring, then you should hurry to remove the tooth before the seventh day, so that the gum beneath the tooth does not become corrupted, and the accidents we have described occur.
And if the bone fracture extends to the membrane that covers the brain, then you must split the fractured part like this:Quant tu sens li os qui est brisez, tant qu’il soit moelleux et friable, tu le rendras si fort com il fu por son naturel;
and you must grip the head of the dislocated joint and expose the bone in every way you can, and probe the wound more gently than you can, and if bleeding occurs when exposing the bone, or an abscess forms, treat it with what is appropriate, and you must fill the area with soft rags soaked in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the abscesses are calm and bleeding is stopped; then begin to cut around the bone, and this is done in two ways:
one way is to cut straight across in front, and that is the shape:
And then make another larger cut than the first.
And the second way is to have many different cuts, some narrow and some wide, and they are pointed, and made of iron:
and work gently so you do not wound the head.
And if the bone is hard and thick, you must pierce it all around so that you can apply the trepan with chisels, not deeply enough to penetrate through the skull, and there should be a rim or ring on top of the point so that it does not go through the bone.
And you should have several of these so that each one comes into its own place in the thickness of the bone so that you can use chisels for all the skull.
There are three ways to make chisels:
The technique for piercing around a broken bone is to place the chisel on the bone and twist it with your hands until you feel that the bone is pierced;
Then move the chisel to another spot a little further away and do this all around. Then cut into the space between the perforations with a cutting instrument, as subtly and gently as you can, as we have said, until you pull out the bone with your hand or one of the instruments you have, such as tweezers;
and make sure you do not touch the brain or the eye.
And when you have pierced the bone and cut it, you should resect the thickness that remains in the bone with some other instrument like a chisel, but it should be more thin and more delicate than the other chisel;
and if anything of the small bones or any scales remain, remove them easily with the instrument; then dress the wound with tenting and ointments as we have said.
And the other method of treatment is that which Galen describes, which is safer; and he highly recommends it, and it is his word. First, you must expose a part of the bone, at the place where the fracture is open, so that when you have exposed that part, you shall place under the head of this lens-shaped incision, from which the fracture has occurred, in order to cut it.
And do not cut from one side only, for the wound is open on both sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone;
then hit it gently with a small mallet all around, taking care not to damage the membrane underneath.
If it is attached to the bone, gently pull at it, for the bone can be removed without harm or fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not pierce through to the membrane, and the bone is only cut slightly on top, and there are small pieces, then one must smooth out that roughness, and remove the scales with a sharp rasp which you should have in various sizes, in order to adapt it to each location according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Take a large rasp first, and then a finer one afterwards, and do not stop doing this until it is smooth.
For all other hairline and subtle fractures, you should treat them according to their specific nature:
and this is not something that can be learned by one who has dedicated himself to this art.
And if the wound is open, you should wet a linen cloth with rose oil according to the size of the wound, and place it over the wound. Then take another double cloth, dip it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth. Then apply pressure as gently as you can so as not to tear the wound, then place another bandage over it, without tightening it more than necessary to hold the wound in place.
and leave it thus for a day or two, until the abscess is soothed, then loosen it, and administer remedies such as lily roots, and wheat flour, and incense powder, and aristolache, and similar things;
and make a powder from these things, and apply it to the wound, and then administer other remedies without biting;
and guard against the wound becoming dirty, so that you do not leave ointment on it, nor allow pus to gather, for when pus gathers on the membrane of the brain, it will become infected and cause great harm to the patient;
for when one applies something biting to a sore, it bites from above. Take care then, if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without a doubt.
And if darkness does not come from the medicine one has applied, but because of the power it has, one must take a portion of honey and three parts of rose oil, and mix them into a paste, and apply it to the sore; then treat with various treatments until he is healed.
Know that sometimes the two parts of the nose are broken, or one part by itself, because there are two bones in it;
and that which is underneath is cartilage, and does not break, unless it is split or twisted, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should put your little finger or a hole in the nose, and place that broken part inside your index finger, and hold it in place by force, so that the nose returns to its natural shape; and do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.Et s’il se finde ke la brisure est a l’enbas dou neis, si covient que tu le tiennes aler a bas
And if the break is above the nail, and the fingers cannot reach the spot, then you must use the end of a thick stick.
And if the break is in both parts, do likewise and hurry to reset it on the first day, if you can;
if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess is calm, then put a linen tent on the head of the wound, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you place another in another part, if the fracture is there; and let the tents be so big that they fill the holes of the wound.
And some restorers say that one must wet the bandages with butter, and change them every day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but one must make them wet with egg white and flour; then leave the tent, until the bone is stiff, and the cartilage hardened.
And sometimes one puts in goose feathers instead of tents, and around it a soft cloth, and the fracture is held, and the patient breathes among them; or do what you wish.
And if hot abscesses come to the nose while you are working on it, then put a poultice of rose oil or in a little diaquilon.
And if there is no abscess, then put on a plaster, by force, of wheat flour, and incense powder, cooked with egg white, then place gentle compresses on top, and do not bind the wound;
and if the fracture of the nose is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then extract it with appropriate instruments for this, then close the slit, and treat with healing, warming things like plasters and ointments suitable for this;
and if there is no wound inside the nose, then treat it with tenting, and insert canes of lead, until it is healed.
When the jaw is dislocated below and there is no external wound, and the break is only out of place, and not broken in two, so that it curves inside, then one can easily tell.
It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, for you to put your index finger into the patient's mouth; and if the fracture is in the left jaw, then put your index finger from your right hand, and gently insert it into the fracture, and ease it with the other hand, and apply pressure evenly.
And if the break of the jaw is separated by one-sixth, then you should administer an extension of one-sixth, so that it is even.
And if there is movement of the teeth, or grating, then hold them in place with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then apply cerote over the broken jaw, and over that, place a double layer of cloth; and place over the wound a well-made bandage, or a piece of leather of equal length and width according to the jaw, and tie it as tightly as possible, and instruct the patient to rest and eat light foods.
And if you see that the swelling changes, then release it for a third of the day, and then reapply pressure where it is swollen. And place an ointment on top, made of ground powder with egg white or sisam flour, after you have removed the bandage.
And place a light lining on top of the ointment, and if the ointments don't work, and the condition of the patient doesn't change, leave it until he is healed. many times it is healed within three weeks.
And if hot abscesses develop, then administer what we have already said many times.Et se il a contusion sus la mandibule, si met sus cerote, et sus le cerote lainne legiere, et li estele longes; et se li estele s’aert, met ainche sus lainne legiere, si come tu oges li contusions; et adonques covient il que li disloque la mandibule a leu.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, examine to see if any pieces of bone are missing; so skillfully of the host are suitable instruments to this.
And if the wound is narrow, widen it with flame according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces, and there remains none inside, then stitch up the wound, if it is wide, and place upon it a suitable poultice to promote healing.
The fracture is broken several times in front, towards the shoulder, and the break is according to 3 ways:
either it is broken and separated into two, and there are pieces, and this is the easiest to restore;
or there is a break with a wound.
And the work is such that when the break is without a wound, you need two ministers so that one can hold the shoulder where the fracture is; and the other stretches the neck towards the affected part;
then put your fingers on the break evenly so that the shape is as it should be and there is no appearance or misalignment.
And if you need to stretch further, place under the shoulder a round pillow made of cloth or woolen fabric, as thick as your necessity demands; and hold the forceps lightly, and squeeze the spear in your hand so that you make the break even as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the collarbone out of its socket because it is too deep, then the patient should lie on his back, and place a small pillow under the shoulder, and the assistants should lift the shoulder from below, so that the collarbone bone is raised.
Then grasp the break with your fingers, and if you find it loose, you must split it open;
and gently pull out the pieces, and if the bone cannot join because of an overhang, then cut it with one of your knives; but you must place under the forceps this instrument to protect the nerve:
and it should be like a spoon, and not jagged, and as wide as is necessary, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the action;
and it has two heads, as you can see, and one is wide and the other narrow, according to the shape of the wound that you made when you pulled out the bone;
and when you are certain of a hot abscess, cut open the wound, and if the rupture is small, or if you doubt it is a hot abscess, then apply the wound with bandages and dressings according to its quantity.
And if hot abscesses come, soak a bandage in rose oil, garlic, and wine, and place it over the wound:
The dislocation of the bone, when there is no wound or incision, is to place upon the bone the plaster made from mill-dust and egg white, and place light dressings on top, and if necessary, put a splint beneath the joint. Then take a very large bandage, one palm wide, then place double draping over the dressings and plaster; Then take a thin rod three digits wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage so that the end of the bandage hangs down; and place the rod over the fracture, and wrap the bandage around the neck, and under the healthy joint, and under the affected joint; and realign each part, and when you see that the dislocation is aligned correctly, and you see clearly that the bone is not moving within the fracture, then release it daily, and when the ligaments loosen, restrain them.
Have the patient lie on his back, and while he sleeps, place a small pillow under the shoulder to raise it; If the dislocation of the shoulder is improved by raising it, then tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless some accident happens, for up to 20 days;
Then start the poultice again if you see that it is needed, and restrain and leave him until he is healed;and then have him lie on his back, and place a small pillow under the shoulder to raise it; If the shoulder dislocation improves by raising it, then tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless some accident happens, for up to 20 days; Then start the
and it is restored in most people within 28 days, and in less time for some.
of a shoulder dislocation
It sometimes happens that the shoulder is dislocated or widely displaced, and it is not set right until touched;
then, according to the pattern of the dislocation, reset it in its natural shape, in every way you can;
then apply powder from the mill with egg white, and light poultices, and put on top a double layer of cloth; then place a wide and thin splint, slightly larger than the shoulder, on top, and if there is swelling beneath the splint in any part of the shoulder, apply poultices made of flax to that area so that the splint sits evenly;
then tie it firmly with a wide bandage so that the splint does not move from its place, and check the bandage every day;
and every time it softens, he squeezes it and puts the joint back in place if it is out of position, and then the patient lies on his side.
and the shoulder is restored within 20 or 25 days.
And when this period is over, he releases it and is confident, for it is not an easy bone to put back in place.
And if a piece of the bone has come out in front and is not under the collarbone, cut it away, and do as we have said before about heating the abscess to ease the pain.Et si li espaule est desaloiee par cause de moistor, et on la remet en son leu, et elle ne puet demorer en son leu, si revient adés et desalue par petit mouvement qui avient; si doit on la disloquer premierement, et puis la ramonyer.
of the break of the foot
The bones are sometimes broken in the middle, but that rarely happens; but it often breaks at the end.
And when it is broken in the middle, it inclines downward, and the patient feels great pain and suffering, and becomes constipated and feverish, and may vomit blood, and the bones of the fracture become visible, and he feels much discomfort.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, and he places a cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and joins the ribs with both hands, trying to put everything in order as best he can;
then he applies plasters and poultices made of subtle salt, or other light wood, and wraps it in a cloth, placing it on the broken bone so that it does not move; and turn the bandage smoothly around the back, and tighten it gently, and check every hour that the wound is healing; if it softens, then tighten it.
and if it needs to be loosened, because of corrosion or itching that comes up on the skin, or pain or abscess, then hurry and loosen it, and wipe off the ointment, and address whatever has come about in various ways of healing.
Then reset the ointment, and tighten it until it is healed.
of the break of the ribs
Know that broken ribs only come from large wounds on the back, and in the chest, and only bend because they are slippery. and feel it well with your hands as you should.
And in treatment, you must set the break evenly, as it should be. Then apply the ointment and bind it with a bandage, if necessary.
And if the broken ribs are declining inward, then the patient feels great pain and piercing, just as with pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane. and has fainting spells, and becomes dizzy and vomits a great deal of blood, and this is a serious illness, and the ancients have placed great importance on it.
And if there are those who say that one should administer foods that swell the belly, in order to push the fracture outward.
We do not make any incision unless an abscess is hot, if it has not become so already. And if it has become so, then we lance it to let out the pus and the unhealthy matter.
And some say that one should place cupping glasses over the area to draw out the infection, and this is sensible advice. However, there is a concern that the cupping glass might attract excess fluids due to the weakness of the body.
Some say that one should cover the affected area with warm, moist wool and place tenting between the ribs to ensure even pressure all around; then it should be treated with a poultice of pleurisy root, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear due to the bone protruding through the skin, and there is doubt about the condition, then one should cut over the area of the broken rib, and place an instrument underneath to push out the shrapnel;
and then split the bone and pull gently, and afterwards sew up the two lips of the wound if it is large, and treat it with poultices until it heals.
And if a hot abscess comes, put wet bandages in rose oil, and put them on the site.
and treat the area around the abscess as needed, and let him lie quietly on his side where he should be, until he is healed.
and also in the spine of the back.
And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, take note if you see his hands soft, swollen, and numb, and he cannot move or straighten them, and when you prick him with a needle, he does not feel it.
Know that it is deadly in many cases, and if they are mute and feel nothing when you dislocate and prick them, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the illness is cured, if one applies a remedy.Si tu vois ses mains enflees et molles et que l’on les estraint et poigne, si sent bien et muent, saiches qu’il n’est pas guerez, car la mort y entre.
And if something similar happens in the spine of the back, and you want to know if he is healthy or not, take note if his feet are swollen, and if the symptoms are in his hands, and on his back there are wind and urination without intention;
and when he is lying on his stomach, there is urination without intention. And when he lies on his back and wants to sit up, he cannot. Know that it is deadly: if you do not work on its cure.Quant li piez sunt amollis et le dos sanz egestion
And if this accident does not occur, then the condition is more minor.
And if there is an abscess in the spine, then put rosemary oil or hen's egg yolk on it until it is soothed.
then apply one of the comforting and drying plasters, and tie it with a cloth, and instruct the patient to rest. and not to sleep on the part where he feels pain until he is healed.
And if any bone dislocates, then it is necessary to cover the heart; and remove the bone, then unite the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a stitch, and the physician should apply ointment around the wound, until it is healed.
and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the 'head of the neck', if you force your left palm into a pouch shape, and place it equally in the other hand to your ability, then apply the plaster and bandage it up, if you need it;
then they bind it up, and if there is bone exposed, they stitch it up, and the surgeon treats the wound until it heals.
of the fracture of the bone of the hip
Sometimes the hip bone is broken, and if that happens, there will be some lessening in the thickness of the head. and they go to the bowels, and decline towards the armpits, and bring pain to the affected area, and numbness, and swelling in what is broken.
And for the cure, you must extend your hand over the break; and you must know where the break is and what its shape is;
and if the break is only in the head, then put it back into place so that it is in its natural position and shape.Et s’il avient en la coillee, et li chief est dessoubre, si leve la coillee tant qu’ele soit sus la br
And if the fracture is long, or it tilts inwards, then have the patient lie on his stomach, so that the restoration of the fracture can be prepared. And when you have made it even, then put on the plaster, and then a splint of wood or horn, and hold the fracture steady so that it does not move.
and apply it under the armpits as far as the elbow joint, until the arm is even. And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or his back.
And if swollen abscesses appear, do not touch them until the swollen abscesses are reduced, and apply what we have said earlier.Et s’il y a paor ou dountance, si covient que li malsainz soit assesié en un leu clerguier, et qu’ele soit gardee par clergues, et que li clercs prie And then return to the restoration, and hold it as it should be, if there is no bad outcome;and li clercs preient li chiés d’un costé et d’autrè la man, tant que li membre soit igal.
of the shoulder dislocation
The shoulders are what is between the neck and the head of the shoulder, and if it is dislocated, it should be restored according to one of two methods:la premiere est que li malsainz soit assesié en un leu clerguier; et s’il y a paor ou dountance, si covient que li malsainz soit assesié en un leu clerguier, et qu’ele soit gardee par
one of which is to take a straight medium-sized stick, according to this shape:
Tie his arms with cords, and hold them up, and seat the patient on the chair;
then pour boiling water on his arms, as far down as possible, and place a cushion of wood under him, then stretch him out over something heavy so that he is stretched out downwards;
then the operator puts the broken arm back in place, making it even with his other hand, so that it is put back in its proper place.
The other method is to have the patient lean forward onto his elbow, and tie his hand to his neck; then instruct two assistants, one to pull upward on what is above the break with both hands, and the other to pull downward at each end of the stick, pulling in opposite directions.
And if you want the extraction to be more forceful, then press the ligament below the fracture, and above it, and stretch each of the muscles on their own.
And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, then you must put one cord under the armpit and the other towards the neck, under the fracture;
and likewise if the fracture is towards the neck, then you must tie it gently without exerting force, so that the broken arm is aligned with its position and with the neck;
then put it back evenly, as it should be, and hold it there, if no abscess forms.
And if an abscess does form, do not hold it until the seventh day, and put soft lamb's wool in oil of roses on it, until the abscess is healed.
Then hold it, and the way to hold it is to put the ointment on the dislocation, then raise the arm above the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or breast;
and hold it tightly, and the cloth too, so that the arm stays in place, unless something moves it or the bone shifts.
And if you doubt that the bone has moved, use splints and put one splint wider and thicker than the others over the dislocation, with two fingers of space between each splint, and make sure each splint is as long as it needs to be to extend past the dislocation on both sides;
then stretch them over the stars, as I said at the beginning of the chapter about fracture, more strongly and less by moving away.
And if you see the base of the stars and the stretching, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the hot abscess, then leave it to ligature until the seventh day, as we have said;
then look at each of the three days at the bandage, that itching nor swelling comes to it, nor the growth can come to the member because it is too tight. As the adage says, as we have said.
And if no such accident comes, then take off the bandage after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands on his stomach;
and put under the shoulder a pillow of wool the same height, and look every hour of the day or night that the figure of the broken member does not move, or the bandage become slack;
if he receives treatment through medical skill, and is given the food that we have mentioned earlier, in such a way that the food reaches the most subtle parts. and when he begins to recover, then he can eat solids.
And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be treated for 40 days altogether; and then one must loosen and administer baths and ointments to ease the joint.
And if the dislocation is severe and stuck, it will stay for 50 days or two months.
Of the break in the arm
The arm consists of two bones, which are called the 'ulna', of which one is small and lies below the armpit;
and the other is large, and is the one that lies above, towards the little finger;
by chance it may be just the large ulna that is broken, or just the small one, or both of them together.
When the small ulna is broken, the restoration and healing are easy;
and when the bones are broken, then healing is difficult, and more painful than when they are only broken in one place.
If it's only the small bone that's broken, one should gently extend and put it in place.Et s’il est brisié soulement li gros, li petis est a l’envers; il doit estre ramené a son leu.
And if it is a tough bone, then it must be extracted with greater force;
and he should be laid on a pillow, and the arm pouch higher than the rest, and the little finger lower than the other fingers, and the patient's crosswise body weight on him, and the pillow in front of him higher so that the patient does not suffer any strain;
then the minister should extend his upper arm to the part under his hand, or to the elbow, and another minister to the other above.
And then put the minister equally, according to his best form.
And if there are pieces in the fracture, place each one back in its proper location; and if there is any dislocation, hold the heart, and reset the bone as we have described earlier.
And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken about it in a single chapter; then take the cure.
And if in the beginning of recovery, pustules arise, then apply a dressing of cerate made from rose oil and white wax, not too hard or soft; and I gently wrap it above, until the hot abscess is soothed.
Then remove the poultice, and apply the plaster of flour with egg white, then place the bandages, and have the bandage for the fracture be stronger and slightly larger than the others.
And know that there must be six bandages on the arm in various places: Whether the fracture is in one of the bones, or in two;
and holds more tightly over the fracture than elsewhere, and always less as it heals, as I have said at the beginning of this chapter; and the bandages that are over the fracture must be soft and moist, and not hard or rough;
and the bandages that are over the fracture must be soft and moist, and not hard or rough; and the thread it is bound with, of linen, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And re-examine the limb and the ligament after a few days. And if an accident occurs to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, then you should soak the member in hot water until the itching is relieved.
and let the member not be bound but rest easy.
And then restart the stretching, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones loosened, and similar things, then address it.
And if you see that the nutrients cannot reach the limb because it is too tight, then you should loosen it a little and leave it like that for some days, until the nutrients flow, and then bind it again.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not release him until 20 days.
or in this position, he can place his hands on his neck, and let his necks be even, and guard against movement and dislocation, and sleep on his back;
and know that this broken bone will be healed in 30 days or 35, and perhaps in 20 days, according to the combinations and complexes of the virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
Know that in the back of the hand and at the base of the fingers there are few fractures, and they only come from manyfold folds.
And when the palm of the hand is broken or bent, then the patient should place his arms in a cross position and stand upright in front of him, evenly.
Then he should put his hand on the ground stretched out, and stretch the minister's broken bones, and make them even with each other, so that they are well joined;
and put on the plaster and the bandages, if no abscesses develop there, then he puts on a splint according to the amount of space available. and is wrapped in a linen cloth.
And if the fracture is on the side of the body around the belly, make a sphere out of bandages, and instruct the patient to press it against their fractured side. Then he pulls on a long bandage and the splint should be made of soft wood as large as the palm of the hand, and he presses it against the fracture, just as it should be.
And if the fracture is in the forearm, then you should put a splint on top and another underneath the plant, so that the hand is open and straight; then tie it all around the hand, and stop the bleeding between the two.
And if the fracture is in one of the fingers, then he puts it straight, just as it should be; and he presses against the side, and if you see that a small straight splint is placed to lift the fracture, and it does not move;
and if the fracture is in another finger, such as the index or one of the others, he should make it even and bind it with the healthy finger next to it; or you can tie them all together in a bunch, or put a splint on it, such as a little bag;
and take care in the restoration and in the preparation of a hot abscess, and treat those that arise, as I have said.
The thighbone is often broken, and one can see it when it turns forward and backward;
and the restoration is that one binds the broken bone above, and the other below. And let the patient lie on his face, then extend each band evenly on its own part;
and that is when the fracture is within the bone.
And if the fracture is close to the hip joint, then one ligament should be directed towards the buttock, and the other ligament beneath the fracture.Et li auter liiens que est sous le cotil, qu’il soit vers la cuixe.
And if it is near the knee, then let the band be above the knee, and the extension below;
then put the mirror to the bone equal to his two hands, so that it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the ointment, and bind it, if no abscess comes out.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it calm down, then return to your work and treatment; the ligature is made in such a way.
You must wrap the break with a tough double folded bandage in 2 or 3 places, and leave off the excess, then turn the leg so that the heels come to the root of the toe, and insert the long thread between the thigh and leg, below the knee, and let the end of the thread come above;
then turn the bandage around the leg and thigh, then put splints on the break, and put a splint on the bone of the leg;
then take eight inches of soft fabric between the leg and thigh to even out the strain, then start binding tightly three times or four times above the break. and as you go higher above the break, lessen the strain;
then tie two ends of the thread that you have taken between the leg and thigh, then tie three knots that are above, then go back down to the bottom of the thread, as far as the foot;
and tighten it so that it does not move out of place, then leave it as it is, so that no abscess or swelling or other similar thing comes. And if something happens to it, then untie it and fix what is wrong, as we have said many times;
and if there are pieces of bone that poke out, they should be removed, if possible. and if one cannot, then one must split the area and pull it out; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
And sometimes the thigh is broken in such a way that one puts in nails, like in the shoulder and arm;
Nevertheless, this restoration does not cure the disease.Et s’il est de si grant force ke il ne se puet demourer a leu, si convient adés le
And you shall know that the hip is restored in one day or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of complexions.
Know that in the joint of the knee there is little breaking, but it bends many times.
And if it breaks, it is only a split, or a perforation, and it happens to all wounds, and without wound, and this feels good to everyone.
And the restoration is such that one puts an equal weight on his fingers, as long as he can bear it;and if he cannot bear it, then he must dislocate it again.Et s’il est en la main ou au pie, et qu’il soit de si grant force ke il ne se puet adés remuer, si convient il que tu le
And if it is in the hand or foot, and it is of such great force that he cannot move it at all, then you must first put the plaster on, and a round nail if necessary, and bind it as it should be, then follow all the instructions we have given for other fractures, like hot abscess and similar.Et s’il est en la main ou au pie, et qu’il soit de si grant force ke il ne se puet adés remuer, si convient il que tu le puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et then put on each dressing as it is needed, until he is healed.
of the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is properly called the "muster", and the other the "foscle".
and all the other injuries are as they are in the arm, and their restoration is also the same, and the operations are the same too. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg is twisted all over.
And if only the small bones are fractured, then it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, great pain is felt, and it can be seen clearly; and it turns inside out.
Therefore apply traction, and put it back in place, and bind the splints evenly;
However, if the fracture is bad, and there are several pieces, then the traction should be lighter and gentler; and heal according to your power.
And when you have finished your work, take two bundles of wood shavings that are purple-dyed at one end and white at the other, and let them be as long as the leg from just above the knee to just below.
Then wrap two bands of linen around them, one above and one below, and also at the middle, and at this point he will not be able to bend his leg to the right or left, and thus it is well.
and some apply an oil made from fir wood, and they put the leg in a splint to prevent movement, and they properly apply this to the break where there is injury;
and every day move the leg to see if there is any hot abscess or other accident; until it is healed.
from the fracture of the bones of the foot
At the ankle there is no fracture, but at the metatarsal bones there can sometimes be a fracture, and it occurs in various ways.
If it happens that the bones of the foot are broken, and you see one bone on top of another, then place your foot upon the ground as if you wanted to walk, and then put your foot on his, where the bones are raised, then press until they return to their places.
Then apply the ointment and bandages on top, and place a small flat stone beneath the sole of the foot, then tighten it in a cast, and after you have wrapped cloth around it, and any other things you require.
And after three or four days have passed, loosen the binding, for you will find the bones healed, whether broken or dislocated.
And if there are broken fingers, restore them as we said for the fingers of the hand: Then place a splint along the length of the broken finger, and let it be a bit larger, then place that flat stone beneath the foot as I described, and tighten it in a cast.
and if there are 2 or 3, or more, broken, then put on each toe a plaster according to its quantity, wrapped in a linen cloth, and hold the table under the foot; and be standing on the top of the table from under the belly of the foot, so that it holds it well.
And you must not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, which we have discussed; and treat each condition as it should be.
of the break in the bone of the elbow
When the bones of a woman's pelvis are fractured, have her sit with her legs apart, then lean forward from the waist, and be held from behind;
then fill the pelvic area with cotton, and put in it as much as a stone;
then stand the woman up, and loosen the back little by little, and then jump the cotton, until it comes to the opening of the pelvis, and the bones return with the stone;
and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has finished urinating, put it back again, and do this for seven days or so: the fracture will be restored, and if you wish, take a lamb's bladder, and tie it at the opening with a string, and fill the whole bladder with natural urine; then blow into the pipe firmly, until the bladder is swollen inside: the natural state will return to the fracture;
then fill it with cotton and leave it like that for a few days, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the finger of a man or woman is broken, restore it in the same way as we have said for the bone of the hip;
and they are not hidden from those who devote themselves to it and understand my book.
For the fractures indicate, with many dispositions, the right way to restoration: understand it therefore.
In a penis that is fractured, take a goose's gullet and insert the penis into it; then wrap cloth around it, and leave it for three days or more, and it will be healed quickly.
from a break with wound
It is necessary for one who has a break with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the thigh or shoulder bone or similar, that they be bled immediately, in accordance with the bleeding we have described earlier.
And if the wound bleeds, then resume reducing the dislocation in that same hour or that day, if no abscesses form.
And if abscesses form, then leave it until the third or fourth day, as long as the abscesses are relieved; do not touch it on the second day, nor the third, for you would bring about a bad accident.
And if the broken bone is visible on the uncovered chest, you should gently touch it with your hands, making small movements.
And if you cannot move it into place with your hands, then reset it using an instrument of iron which is seven or eight inches long, and the width depends on the size of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary to use an instrument that is three or four inches wide, according to the need in each case of a fracture;
and let it be rounded and a little thick so that it does not bend when you press it against the limb during your work, and let it be pointed at the end, and thicker at the middle towards the front, thus;
And it is called "palainche", because the curved head of the bone should be placed on the visible part of the skull; and then press down until it returns, and make them even against each other. And if the break is subtle, and the instrument cannot well grasp the bone, then you must shave the head of the bone, so that the instrument can get a grip.Et se li chiés sont desaloiez a cause de moistor, et on les remettra et il n’i demourra pas, mais revient adés et desalue par petit mouvement qui advient, si convien que tu disloques la première fois.
And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, then use the end of a suitable instrument, whether an incision knife or needle, to your ability;
then scrape away what remains in the bone of asperity and small fragments.
And when the bone is reset and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Do this until it is in its place, then soak the cloth in red wine vinegar, and apply it clean if it is soiled; and do not put any ointment or other thing on the wound except oil, lest pus and corruption come from it;
then bandage the patient once you have reset the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and wrap the cloth around it according to the size of the wound, and take great care that the wound is not pressed upon with the bandage;Et si tu vuoilles mettre cerote ou oile sus la plaie, ou il t’appartient, qu’il n’i fust porriture ne corruption.
and many times this has been done by fools, and sometimes brought about the death of the patient or corrosion; and it is the most painful and most severe of all fractures.
And if the wound is large and you doubt that an accident might occur as we have said, and you find pain in the area, then you should not put anything on it; but wrap around, instead of stabs, hard cloth, and tie them.
And when you see after one or two days pus forming on the wound, then remove what you have placed over it completely, and apply an ointment that heals wounds, such as tetra-pharmacon and similar remedies.
And it is necessary to loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is healed and closed.
And it is necessary that the limb be prepared in such a way that the bowstring runs smoothly and lightly.
And if they go astray for many days, and it cannot heal but keeps going back and forth, know that there are small pieces of bone, because of which you should probe the wound with a tent and remove all these dislocated pieces that cause the pain.
And if a fistula or any other kind of corruption occurs, you should treat it according to what he said in the chapter above.
And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, as in the thigh or shoulder, and similar large limbs, do not draw it out, because many die from that, but let it be until it heals;
perhaps it will fall out after 20 or 30 days, then cure the wound if you can;s’il reste ades, tant qu’il ne porrisse, mais le lie entor, et en li leu qu’il
and if you cannot, then leave it.
There often comes after the healing of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and it is an ugly sight to see the limb deformed; and sometimes the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
So take care then when we are young: if the doctor prescribes astringent medicines like aloes, incense, myrrh, sarcocolla, and similar things, so that you mix some of these things together, or all together, and infuse them with styptic wine, or egg white, or garlic; and apply them to the navel as a poultice, binding it on tightly and not removing it for several days;
and apply them to the navel as a poultice, binding it on tightly and not removing it for several days; then remove it and start again with another one, until the swelling is gone;
or you can use a well-made splint; for the properties of the splint are such that it removes all swelling from the limbs;
and if the knotting has turned into hardness like stone, and it needs to be removed, then cut away at it, and the excess will become apparent; or you can have a barber shave it so that it is removed, and treat the area until it is healed.
of the limb which is weak after healing
When the fracture of the bone is restored, and remains after the limbs become weak and sottish, this happens for many reasons: one reason is that it was bound too tightly, and not as it should have been; or because there were too many ligatures, and the limb could not receive nourishment; or from excessive moisture; or from too much movement, not in its proper time; or because he has little blood in his body and is weak.
And the treatment is that you should have the patient eat, and make his body warm, so that his blood is multiplied within him; and give him a bath, and joy and leisure;
then apply pitch to the limb so that it attracts a great deal of warmth, and often bathe it in warm water, until the warmth penetrates the limb; and it returns to its natural shape.
the limb bent after health When the limb is twisted after being reset, and the broken bones are still open, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function:
if you do not believe the fools who say that one must break the limb again from the start, and many fools have indeed done this in our land;
and this work is blamed, and great harm comes from it, and sometimes death;
Nevertheless, if the dislocations and wounds are fresh, then they should be washed with hot water or herbs that soften, such as leaves of marsh-mallow, roots, and honeysuckle, and similar things;
and make a soothing ointment, such as well-prepared diaquilon, and take the mucilage of marsh-mallow, and confit it with goose fat or olive oil, and apply it to the wound;
Or take fat figs, and crush them with colon dung, and similar remedies that soften quickly.
And sometimes the dislocation is caused by continually and constantly rubbing with moist hands. And every hour, movement must be applied to the limb.
And if the wounds are old and hardened like stone, and need to be cut with iron, then they should be covered all the way to the bone, with a subtle incision lightly;Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; and put trust and study into the cure.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to someone, one must immediately reset it without delay.
For if one delays, the place will swell, and perhaps one will put it back out of place.
Therefore, one must not move it when it is swollen: many times causing spasms and other pains;
Nevertheless, when this happens, let the patient bleed, then leave him, until the abscesses are opened;
then warm the limb with hot water and oil, then reset it gently, and treat each joint as the cure will come into its place.
And I have arranged the chapters on dislocations from the head to the feet.
Sometimes the jaws are dislocated downwards, and the dislocation of both is according to two manners: either they are slightly pushed out of their sockets, and softened a little; or they are fully dislocated, hanging down towards the bottom, and drooling saliva from his mouth which he cannot hold in, nor close his mouth, nor control his tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is minor, it can be treated with various remedies.
And if it is entire and complete, then you must reset it quickly, and not tarry at all;
and in such a way that the assistant grasps the head of the patient, and thrusts his fingers of one hand into the root of the jaw at the dislocation within the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides; and the other two hands should be used to apply pressure equally;
and instruct the patient to relax his jaws and move them in all directions. And he applies the cautery evenly until it returns to its place.
And if the reset is painful, especially if both jaws are displaced together, then they should be soothed with hot water and oil until they can be reset gently;Et s’il ne puet endurer la douleur de li ramener, et qu’il soit a grevance de sa vie, si le mets on une corde a l’entorn de li col et tire li cordons tant qu’il se ramene a son chief et qu’
And if he cannot endure the pain of the reset, and it threatens his life, then put a rope around his neck and pull the ropes until his head is
And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the disease is closed well without softening, then place on wet cloths a poultice made of rose oil and wax, then bind it lightly with soft bandages.
and let the patient sleep on his back, and let his shoulders be between two pillows so that he does not move them to the right or left, nor try to move his arms, but eat soft food until the pain is gone and the jaws are numbed.
and then he can eat whatever he wants softly, and not to struggle to open his mouth to eat and drink until the mandibles are well numbed and healed.
And if the two mandibles cannot be reset within an hour and are not converted to their place, then fevers and usual sores come, and possibly stomach problems, and possibly vomiting clear fluid.
And when you see this, then you will know that it is pernicious; and often the person dies within nine days.
The foreskin cannot be cured by cauterization near the glans or foreskin, and sometimes it is cured by cauterization further away, and one feels it well.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies on his back, and extends his arms; and then press the area firmly with your palm, and it will return;
then apply the plaster and bandage, and bind it tightly;
and the shoulder which is towards the neck cannot dislocate; if not, and if it dislocates even once, then reset it to its place as we have said;
then apply the plaster and bandage, and bind it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed;
and in the same way, the shoulder of the spine is reset when it has dislocated from its place.
of shoulder dislocation
You should know that the shoulder can dislocate in three ways:
one is when it dislocates to the part of the axilla below;et l’aultre est qu’ele desalue en haut, selonc la guarde de la chiée, tant qu’ele soit au dessus de la and the second is at the bottom of the foot; and occasionally it dislocates from above, and this rarely happens;
and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, and it does not dislocate within for the nerves;
and sometimes it dislocates underneath towards the armpit, especially in those who are thin, for in them it is very dangerous;
in those who are fat, it dislocates easily, and goes back in easily.
And occasionally it happens to some people that they experience a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells from a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
Therefore, you must test it to be certain;et si tu le veux esprouver adonques faiz ainsi: prends un crot de fer et met il adonques sus li piez ou li main, et and then begin the treatment.
And you will know it is a dislocation when it is lower towards the armpit, and there will be a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear difference between them; you will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder, and underneath it, at the bottom of the socket, the head of the shoulder, as if it were an egg. and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move in any way;
and also, if it is dislocated in the upper part, it will not be hidden, for you will see it clearly at the socket;
and this kind of dislocation is not difficult to fix when it is new, as long as the child is not sick.
And the method is for the minister to lift the hand of the patient up, then place your fingers underneath the socket, and raise the joint forcefully into place. and the minister lifts the hand, and extends it upward, then puts it back under the socket; it will come quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said within a few days after, then the patient must be bathed in warm water. and the administrator should apply softening and soothing ointments, such as a decoction of alder and fenugreek and melilot in water, and it should be applied.
Then the patient should be laid on his back, and a pillow of wool that is neither too soft nor too hard should be placed underneath the shoulder blade, then the patient should put their heel on the pillow, and the practitioner should gently lift the shoulder and pull the hand of the affected arm.
And another assistant holds the head of the patient so that it does not move downward. That shoulder will return immediately, and if you see that it is reset according to this manner:
And you should have a man who is larger than the patient present. and be straight towards the side, and push his shoulder under the armpit of the sick person, and lift the armpit up, so that the sick person hangs from his arm; and another minister pulls the hand of the sick person downward toward the belly. And if the dislocation is too slight, one may use something heavy with it, and the dislocation will return immediately.
And they reset it in another way:
and they put a long charcoal in the ground, so that the shoulder is as hot as a pistol, neither too hot nor too cold; then it is placed under the patient, but he must have a woolen cloth over him, and the patient must be still from the long heat of the fire;
then let his hand be extended downward on the opposite side, and the joint will return to its place gradually;
and if it does not want to return for all the things we have said, then do this treatment: take a brand two arms long and four fingers wide, which has its head pointed to go deep under the shoulder, according to this shape:
then tie woolen cloth over the head of the brand so that the brand does not burn the patient, then put it under the shoulder of the patient;
and extends his arm above the long staff, and rests the shoulder on the staff, and the arm at the head of the hand, then places the arm on the sole of a large shoe, and the hand should be extended downward, and the body hanging from the other side: the joint will now return.
And when it is in place, however it may be, you should place under the shoulder blade a woolen sphere that is equal in size, then apply the prepared plaster of mill powder with incense and egg white over the entire shoulder and around it; then tighten it under the shoulder blade gradually, and tie the string onto the plaster, and hold the hand to their neck, and let the hand remain like this.
And it is necessary that he eats little, until the limbs are comfortable, because he will heal faster;
and then eat more after 5 or 7 days, and move him; and if he is stiff and not relaxed, then he is healed.
And if the joint has been dislocated due to moisture or any other cause, you should apply fire cautery at three openings, as described in the chapter on cautery.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates after 7 days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot raise his arm upward, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint is never completely healed in its place.
Dislocations that are towards the bottom, and in the breasts, or behind, are caused by pushing and stretching with the hands, and they are ministered to elsewhere.
and treat until it is healed.
And if after healing there is stiffness in the limb, and with movement it is delayed, then let the patient use the bath many times until that stiffness is alleviated and returns to its original nature.
from dislocation of the neck
Know that the joint of the neck is dislocated by fingers, and by fingers it is reset;
and if it is dislocated all over, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not reset, for one can see and feel it; and is dislocated according to each form. And when you join the sick armpit with the healthy one, then you can see it clearly. Because the joint is stiff, and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder at all.
And you should reset it as hot abscesses come, for if hot abscesses come, then it will be harmful to reset it;
and by chance it may not be able to be reset completely, especially when it is at the back; It is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and sometimes brings about death.
And the restoration, when it can be performed, is to extend the affected limb with both your hands: and the arms should be stretched out, and the hands turned according to the cut, inside and outside, and the joint pushed back into its socket, or at the root of the palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he bends his hand towards his hand, and stretches from the root of the palm where it is dislocated.
And if it does not return to its place, then apply strong extension:et li tiens la main que tu veis qu’ele soit adonsée de son leu a sa fin,
and let one assistant hold the hand that you see is dislocated from its place to its end, and let two assistants stretch the arm, and let them hold it steady so it does not move during the extension;et li tu tiens la main que te veis qu’ele soit adonsée a son leu, et al
and you hold the hand that you see is dislocated, and then turn the arm in each direction after you have wrapped a long and wide cloth around it;et si est que un le tient en la main et al’auter en la palme, et li tiens les piés ou qu
and when the physician examines a joint in his hand, he should apply oil to soften the joint, then bend it properly until it heals.
and when it is in place, he should apply a dry poultice with egg white, and hold it firmly, and bind the arm to the neck of the patient, and leave it for several days, then loosen it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, he should loosen the binding and leave it.
And if you see that the joint is not setting well, then restart the poultice and binding, and leave it for several days until it is firmly set. Then loosen it.
And if he feels pain after the joint is reset and it moves, then bathe and massage it well, and press until the pain subsides. place a fatty lamb's tail on the joint, then leave it for a day and night, then remove it, and have the patient enter the bath. and when he sweats, gently rub the joint, then put the tail back on, and then enter the bath again; and do this two or three times until he is healed.
if you see, place warm cow manure on it with butter and press it onto the joint;
it will return to its natural state.
dislocation of the hand
Healing of the hand's joint is quick, more so than other joints. Nevertheless, it must be reset gently, in the same hour that it was dislocated, so that the joint does not become swollen or develop a hot abscess.
And the reset is that you place the affected hand on a table, and someone pulls the hand, and you check to make sure it's even, and then press down on the area around the joint so that it returns to its natural state.
Nevertheless, you must check if it is in its proper place. Then have the patient lie on his back on a table and stretch out his arm. And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, then have the patient lay his hand flat on a table, and with his other hand he should press down on the area around the joint.
If it goes back into place now, that is good. If not, apply soothing poultices to the joint and leave it be without moving it again.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back into place after a few days, then the joint will remain dislocated.
And it does not harm the patient as long as the limb is weakened and he cannot use his hand for anything: then you know that the nerves are cut or the arteries.
There is nothing else to do except to cauterize the area around the joint, and perhaps there is no other cure.S’il le fait, il est a l’homme; si non, il doit morier.
And when the hand is in place, then put on the plaster that we have described, then constrict it and leave it for .v. days, then loosen it and leave it thus.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is any swelling, then wet it with warm water and rub it until it is healed.Et s’il en a une grante, si le remede est que li mains se tienne au chaud sus la grieteit, et qu’il soit eslongeit tant qu’il soit sanez; car li membres longes sont plus tost sanaiz que li courts.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on either side, sometimes at the back of the palm or the palm itself.
Then pull on the finger, and push the joint back into place as far as it will go, then hold the head of the finger, and bend it towards the part that is dislocated.
And leave it for two days, then put it in a sling for one day.
And bind it up at night as we have said, and loosen it during the day, and make it move, then rebind it at night.
And do this often until it is healed, and do the same if it is dislocated at the back of the hand, and do as before until it is healed.
And do likewise if it is dislocated elsewhere.
from the dislocation of the skull from the back
When the skull at the back or neck is dislocated, there are several dislocations, and there is no cure, for death hastens the illness.
And the signs are that the bowels move without any voluntary effort, and one cannot hold it back, and often a limb becomes paralysed, in either arm or leg.
And many times there are three openings in the scrotum;
the one that opens at the back is called "gilbositez":
if you find that the gilbositez has come from childhood, then: there is no treatment or cure for it whatsoever.
And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancients described many ways to treat it with great detail, but there is not much benefit in all of that.
But I have summarized it according to my understanding and created instruments in various forms.
I say that there is no healing or health in the gilbositeit that comes on the front toe;
and also that which comes straight in two places, and cannot be cured other than properly cutting away the one that comes on the back, as I said;
and it is that the patient be stretched out on his face in one place, and have a restraint under him so that he does not hurt himself;
then insert a firebrand into the head in the ground, and another at the feet, and tie one string under the armpits of the patient, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
and two attendants hold the strings, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two firebrands;
and they are to be tied firmly, the firebrand as we have said, and the attendant puts his palms on the spine, until it straightens out.
And if it does not straighten out with this treatment, take a table three yards long, and lay it under the patient's back, and the patient should be on his side, and place the head of the table under the back, then place the middle of the table on the spine; and place his feet on the other end of the table, pressing hard until he returns to his original position.
And if you see that it happens in the shoulder joint which turns toward the hand. And you should place two coals on the head of the sick person's shoulder with one arm long, and towards the feet, two others, and there should be between each coal, above and below, a palm width of space.
And in each coal, there should be a hole where the shoulder joint turns, and the coals should be firmly fixed in the ground so that they do not move;
And between each two coals, there should be a turning coal, over which the shoulder joint turns, and there should be two small coals in the turnings, each one a palm's width long, to turn the joint;
Then tie the string which is among the coals to the joint toward the head, and the other string toward the feet to the other joint, and each assistant turns their joint all along the string, and the master puts the spine even as we have said.
And when it is even, then apply a desiccant poultice with an abundance of egg, and then the sponges, and then the cloth of a tablet three fingers wide, which covers the area of the hunchback and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a bandage, as we have said, and use the patient's subtle cooling treatment until he is healed.
And if nothing helps to restore health, then one must administer softening and soothing medicines, with the cloth that we have mentioned earlier. And sometimes a lump appears in the lower spine of the back, and one thinks it is a dislocation. And it is the bone that protrudes, so one must not be presumptuous about it: For perhaps it would bring about death.
Know that only dislocations occur at the hip and shoulder joints, not as in other joints.
and the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts: within and without, and before and behind;
and more within than without, and less dislocated before and behind.
And the recognition of its dislocation within is that when one joins the affected leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the knee of the affected leg appears more open than the healthy one, and the affected person cannot bend their knee towards the fire; and the place that is nearest to them is swollen with a hot abscess, because the shoulder of the thigh comes near it.
And the sign of him to whom it comes in defense, it is that these accidents are contrary to those before.
And the signs of which occurs at the front, are that their leg is well according to its completion; Nevertheless, do not bend the knee without pain, and if one wishes to make it walk, it cannot move forward, and it holds back its urine, and the ankle swells, and when it walks, it drags its foot.
And the signs of him who happens behind, it is that he cannot extend his knee, nor double it, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the veins are softened, and the head of the thigh is at the place below the ribs.
The cause of this kind of dislocation is that you must first examine whether the dislocation is recent or old and remaining in its original position; if there is no treatment, then one should not be careless.
And in those with a recent dislocation, which is one of the four types of dislocations, you should quickly put the joint back into place, and push it inside and out, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will return to its place without needing further treatment.Or si tu voels que li dislocations soit aler a la fin, si covient que li dislocation soit fresche
And if it does not return in this manner, you should prepare a strong bandage and extend the leg strongly with two hands, or tie it to the knee; and another minister extends his hand above it in such a way that he squeezes his hands under his armpits, then tightens a cord around the thigh; and another ties the head with a string;
and they stretch him upwards and downwards all at once, so that the patient is lifted off the ground at once, and remains suspended.
This manner of extension applies to all four appearances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, that is good.
If not, then you must put a bandage on his head.
When the dislocation is in the shoulder, you must support the patient on his healthy side, then place the band around the root of the thigh, and around the area under the armpit; then tighten the band above the armpit, towards the arm pit, and towards the armpit;
then have another minister hold his arms, and embrace the thick part of the dislocated thigh, and stretch it forcefully: then return to its place now;
and this type of dislocation is easier than others.
And if you cannot reset it in the manner we have described, then you should tie the patient's two feet together with a strong silk cord above the heels, and above the knees, and the affected leg should be extended two fingers more than the other;
then let him be hung from the end of a pole, with his arms outstretched for a long time;
then instruct an assistant to grab the top of the thigh, and have another assistant suspend with the patient, holding the thigh firmly, for the joint will return quickly.
And when the dislocation is reset, then have the patient lie down as we have said for those with gout, and tighten the ligature on the affected leg properly, and on the foot as well;
then put two coals, one on the head and one at the feet, then place the coal between the buttocks of the patient in the wound. and have wet cloths placed around it so that the patient does not feel the heat, then extend each limb towards him, and the helper holds the dislocated joint in his hand.
If it returns to its place, that is good.
If not, put him on a table and press it as we have said in the case of dislocation, and lay the patient on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, one should stretch the leg of the patient slowly, and according to what I have said; and the helper puts his weight on the sore joint, then presses with the other hand, and they stretch it down towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is on the outside, one should not stretch it down or lift it up, but it must be as though the hip were dislocated to the outside, as we have said about lying on two hips. and let it be on his face, and the bandage extended as we have said before, and one should press upon the joint at the table; and it will be straight when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even; then adjust the thighs, and apply the ointment, and restrain it with a bandage so that the hip does not move; and let him rest for 3 or 4 days, then release it, and apply the ointment again;
and if you see that they are even, then restrain it as before, and let him be for 3 days;
then release it, and make him walk comfortably until the limb is restored.
On dislocation of the knee:
The knee is dislocated in 3 ways:La prima, quant le capet del la cuisse entre en l’estremeite del gen The first, when the head of the thigh enters into the extreme part of the knee, that is to say, within and without, and behind;La seconde, quant il est
and do not dislodge it beforehand.
And the sign is that you command the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not straighten at the thigh, know that it is dislocated;
and the restoration of all [dislocations] is that you make the patient sit up straight, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back to his face, and put his foot on your feet;
then take his knee in your palms, and pull apart with your fingers, then bend the two sides of the knee joint; and another assistant extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he straightens his leg at the thigh easily;
and put the plaster on, and straighten the leg at the thigh, and bind them together tightly for three or four days, then loosen it;
and do not have the patient exert themselves until their limbs are conforted.
And if the member is not at all, then administer a very strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the heel
Heels are sometimes smashed, and sometimes completely dislocated, both internally and externally.
And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and tender in front at the place where it is dislocated:
the movements are light, and one should slightly extend the wrist in their hands when it is only sprained.
And when it is dislocated from all sides, one must have the patient sit upright, and hold the leg straight by the ankle, above the ankle:
then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left twice, then extend it upwards, and push the foot upwards firmly;
and do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and pulling on the foot;
if it goes back into place, that is good;si elle ne veut revenir, tu le faices aler de
if it does not go back into place, have the patient walk around a bit, then try again, for it will go back into place;si elle ne veut revenir, tu prends
and if he cannot return in this way, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and firmly drive a stake into the ground between his buttocks, and wind cloth around it, so that he does not slip away.
then have one assistant hold the thigh, and another stretch out the leg with his hand or with a cord, tying it around the neck of the foot. then each assistant stretches him equally, and the stake is driven in between the patient's buttocks to hold him when he is stretched.
then put your hands on the dislocation and have one assistant hold the healthy leg, and the dislocation will return easily.
And when it is in place, put the plaster and bandages on tightly, and hold the foot firmly to the leg, being careful not to press too hard on the nerves behind the ankle.
then let it rest for two or three days, and if the ligature softens, then tighten it.
then untie it on the third or fourth day, and let the patient go about their business for four days; and if he goes before that time, it is not certain that he will not relapse.
And if a deep abscess forms, you must calm it down as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
of the armpit When the arms are dislocated, they should be stretched without force, and that is a minor matter.
And if the dislocation is in the lower back or foot, you should have the patient lie flat on his back or on a table, completely straight, and place your foot on the affected area, then press firmly with your foot until it pops back into place;
and when it is even and nothing sticks out, place a two-legged table under the foot, then tighten it firmly, and let it rest for three days, then untie it. and let him rest until he is healed.
of wounds and dislocations together
When a wound occurs with a dislocation, and one wishes to restore it, many times the patient dies.
If you are not presumptuous in the treatment, if you are not wise in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and slow to anger, do not dare to proceed.
And at the beginning of things, apply a hot poultice to an abscess, and leave the patient in God's hand if you see no hope of recovery. And when you see hope, reset the dislocated joint immediately so that the hot abscess can heal.
And when the joint is reset, apply hot poultices to soothe the abscess and treat the wound with drying ointments as appropriate.
And if there is a fracture and small broken bones, set the bones and follow what we have said for simple fractures:Quant li membres est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si
And beware of entering the path of fear, according to what I have said, for it will benefit you according to your creator, and for the safety of your weapons and your body.
