O, sons, as you will have completed this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, by its fulfillment in it, and by its expositions and by its declarations, to me it seems that you complete that for yourselves with this treatise, which is a part of the operation by hand, and is surgery.
For the operation by hand is spread out in our land and in our times of all deprived, while greatly fearing the science of it, its practices are obstructed; and nothing remains of it except some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which altered the most and led to those errors and misunderstandings among those whose understanding of it was closed and its force and art prolonged.
And it seems to me that you vivify that by the arrangement of this treatise in accordance with the way of exposition and declaration and of abbreviation; and so that it comes through the forms of the tools of cautery and other instruments of the work as though it were a preparation of the declaration, which is necessary.
But the cause for which no good artist is found by hand in our time is because the art of medicine is long, and that its practitioner before anything be exercised in the science of anatomy, which knows the joints of the members and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and have knowledge of the bones, of the nerves and of the ligaments, and the number of those, and their discharge; and of the pulsating veins and the quiet ones, and the locations of their exit from them.
And so says Hippocrates that by name is great, yet in work small, and especially in the art of the hand.
But we have already said of that in the introduction to this book; for who is not learned that which we have said of anatomy, it is not vacated that he does not fall into error by which men will die, as I have seen too many of those, for some are formed in this science and throw themselves from it without science or experience.
For I saw a foolish and experienced doctor who pricked an abscess scrofulous on the neck of a woman, and pierced some arteries in the neck so that much blood flowed and the woman died in his arms.
And I saw another doctor who before he swallowed a stone from a man who had a process in his state, and the stone was large, and it came to him and drew that stone with a piece of the vesica, so that the man on the third day died.
And I called out to extract that, and saw that by the size of the stone and by the disposition of the patient over him that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who received stipends from a duke of our land for surgery, and indeed gave to a black slave whose leg was broken by a fall; and prepared the doctor with his ignorance, extracted the fracture above the plague, with powders and splints with great tightness, and did not leave the plague to breathe.
And then he released him according to his desires, and then he layed, and then he released it for several days and commanded that we unbind the bandage; and so it stayed as though the leg and thigh had apostematized, and came to perdition.
And I was called to him, and prepared to unbind the bandage, and obtained tranquillity and ceased from his pains.
But indeed corruption was confirmed in the member, so that I could not restrain it, and the corruption did not cease to wander in the member until the patient perished.
And I saw another doctor who perforated an apostematoid ulcer, and was open for several days, while the wickedness of it magnified with its lord.
The cause of which is that the ulcerative humor is pure of melancholic humor, then it does not come to him by iron from all over, but that there be some member in which he suffers that from all over he is hostile.
And so, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation by hand be divided into two divisions: one in operation to him who is associated with health, and in work with which there is peril in the greater dispositions.
And I have already excused that in all places of this book in which it occurs in operation in which there is error and fear; so that it is necessary for you that you guard that and leave that, so that fools do not obstruct the way to speak and to you discredit.
And so take your arms with solicitude and with protection of God, and your patients with gentleness and with firmness.
And use the better way by the grace of God to health and to laudable success, and lay the terrible diseases of difficult cure, and place your arms from that which causes you to fear, so that solicitude in your faith and in your name does not evade you: for it remains to your glory, and more in the world and lastly to your sanctities.
Gaulish already said in some of his maxims: Do not heal bad diseases, so that bad doctors do not be named.
And I have divided this book according to three chapters.
Begins the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter arranged of the head into feet, in the forms of the tools and in the iron of the cauteries, and of that which is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, of lancing and piercing, and of leeches, and of plasters, and of extraction of thorns and similar to those, all headed and arranged in the forms of the tools.
The third chapter, of restoration and of dislocation, and of cure of torture and similar to those; a chapter arranged of the head into feet, and of the forms of the tools.
I will say the quality of the humors of that cautery and of the pains of it, and in what disposition cautery is prohibited.
Then I say the word of the quality of the humor of cautery and of the pain of it is long and prolix and subtle by science, and secret hidden; and already of it many wise have spoken, and from it are disagreed, and to me suffices a little of the words of them, fearing prolixity.
And so I say that cautery confers with all universal disposition, which is by matter or without matter, excepting two dispositions, which are cold dispositions without matter.
In the cold and dry disposition with matter they disagreed; for some said that cautery is beneficial to it, and others said the contrary of that, that cautery is not convenient in disease which is by quality and by dryness, for the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and convenient is that disease cold and dry be healed by that which is cauted and dry.
And he said the contrary of that, that by cautery there is made humor in all disease cold and dry that one sees in the bodies of men, for when you compare the body of man and its humors to the disposition of fire, you rub the body of man dry.
And I say by the word of that, that experiment that already to me many times have discovered.
However, it is not advisable to venture into this field unless one is already experienced and practiced in the chapter on cauterization, and has knowledge of the variety of human complexions and the disposition of illnesses in their bodies, as well as the causes of these illnesses and their accidental effects, and the span of time during which they occur.
However, in other complexions there is no cause for fear, especially in moist and humid illnesses; indeed all doctors agree that cauterization is beneficial in these cases, and they disagree about the use of cauterization only in certain cases.
And know, children, that the secret of healing with fire cauterization and the goodness of it is that the fire is simple, its action affecting only the part being cauterized and causing little damage to other parts.
But the action of a burning medicine extends to other parts, and it strongly brings on an illness difficult to cure in those parts; it also causes great pain.
But fire, because of its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not do this, but rather exceeds the limits of what is permissible; and it has been proven to us through experience and long study of the art that it is true in all cases, except for those who have not yet understood the secret of using fire, and the quality of its action in the body, and its expulsion of illnesses by philosophical reasoning. If this had not been so, I would not have spoken to you freely about the secret use of fire; nor would I have explained in detail the nature of its action in the body and the method of its use for removing illnesses through philosophical argument.
And know, children, that they disagree about the best time to perform cauterization; and they pause during the springtime.
I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, because the accidental harm caused by the delay in treatment would be greater than the minor harm caused by performing it too soon; and especially if the cauterization is for painful or necessary illnesses, strong and violent ones, which do not tolerate delay because it is feared that they will become worse.
And fear not, children; only the common people and foolish doctors believe that for every illness treated with cauterization there is a specific time of year when it should be done; they pause and wait for that time to come around.
And the reason for their belief is not as they think, because cauterization is not a medicine that alters the complexion and dries out the humors which cause pain.
However, cauterization is superior to medicine because of the swiftness of its action and the strength of its effect, and the grandeur of its Lord.
And it is possible that the illness will return at some time, depending on the complexion of the patient and the location of the illness, and the nature of the cauterization, and what has been prepared in the body through an excess of humors, and what has been acquired through food and similar causes; but if the illness for which the cauterization was performed was a subtle one in a part of the body with few excess humors and moisture, as in a toothache and similar cases, then it is possible that the pain will not return, although this may happen in a small way.
And the common people say that cauterization is the last resort of medicine; and they are right to say so, not because they understand it, but because they believe that there is no cure that benefits from medicine or any other cause except cauterization.
And the reason for this is the opposite; and the belief that cauterization is the last resort of medicine arises when people administer treatments for certain illnesses, but the medicines they use do not work, and so at the end they administer cauterization, which benefits the patient. And so it comes about that cauterization is regarded as the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding of the common people and foolish doctors.
And the ancients said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron; and they did not say this because of the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance.
And they said that the material used for cauterization makes no difference, which is not absolutely true, for I have seen that it does make a difference in some bodies, and cauterization with gold is better than with iron as they say; but when you perform cauterization with fire using gold, it is not declared to you because the strength of the fire depends on the amount of gold used, and because the gold prepares itself to receive the heat; and if the fire is applied to the gold, some laminae are formed which the artisan can see.
And so cauterization with iron must be done more gently and more carefully to maintain the correctness of the operation.
And I have already arranged this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and I have ordered that the feet be treated first, so listen now to what I will say about it.
The first chapter:
This cauterization confers moisture and coldness to the nervous system, of which there are two causes; it is a cause of swelling and many rheumatic pains, called "corissa", in the parts of the head and around the ears, and many other pains, including toothache and jaw pain, and generally any illness caused by cold, such as paralysis, stroke, and similar illnesses.
The procedure for this cauterization is as follows: first, the patient's head should be cleansed with a laxative head poultice for three or four days, depending on the strength of the patient and their age and condition.
Then he should have his head shaved with a razor, and then he should lie down on his back on a warm bed with his feet raised above his head.
Then pause the palm of your hand over the bridge of his nose between his eyebrows. However, if the place where your finger points has become affected, mark that place with a tent and then ignite the cauterization olive; this is its form:
Then hold that over the marked place in such a way that it descends, and your hand should be pressed gently against it little by little as you turn it.
Then lift your hand gently and examine the place; if you see some of the head has been exposed, as much as the amount of bone that was discovered, then lift your hand again, and if it does not return to you with the iron, but with another one, if it is cold, between the time it was exposed to you.
Then take a little salt and dissolve it over the place for three days.
Then hold a cloth soaked in vinegar over it, and let that remain on it until the scale formed by the fire is destroyed. Then heal the place with the four-part salve after it has healed.
And so they say that when Roman plaster is applied wet, it is better and more effective.
And some of them say that the bone should be cauterized within the ear, and the cauterization should be applied where some part of the skull has been removed.
Then it is to be washed with vinegar until the blood stops flowing, and then healed.
And others say that the cauterization should come to the end, where the bone is broken, and that it should pierce the skull until it hits the bone; this is the form of cauterization when there is a small wound: And they believe that from that place vapors are exhaled towards the head.
If the wound is open for a long time, it should be healed by cauterization until it is consolidated.
But I have not seen these two species of cautery at all, except in some men according to a way of fear; and leaving that aside, it is better for health, as it is, because the head is devitalized due to the solution of continuity of it as we have testified in other members, and especially when the patient's head is of a phlegmatic nature.
And the species of cautery is more safe and better for me, and from that use and by that action health is achieved.
Chapter According.
Of cauterization of the head.
When in all the head there occurs chronic and long-lasting pain and this is prolonged in the patient, and he uses garlic and onions and caputalgar and poultices and plasters and bandages and hot stones and woolen pads and similar things, and especially if he has already been cauterized with a cautery which we have recounted and does not benefit from any of those causes, then consider that if the patient's head is of strong creation in its nature and is phlegmatic and finds great heat, then cauterize him with another cautery beneath that one a little. Then cauterize that on the horn of his head so that the membrane is cut. The membrane being cut and the quantity which we have recounted having been discovered and cauterized with a cautery in the part behind the head in the place which is called a foramen — and that is the place in which the windpipe is paused — And move your hand on it and do not uncover the bone because the patient will feel great pain from that unlike the pain of all the other cauterizations of the head.
And I will tell you about this cautery in its place because the cautery with which the horns of the head and the occipital are cauterized is a more subtle cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is the way to do it.
Chapter Third.
Of cauterization for new non-ancient hemorrhoids.
When a sudden pain occurs in the front of the head or a spreading pain enters the eye, evacuate the head with purging medicines and administer the other cure which I have described in the reasons for diseases; and if all does not help then cauterization should be done in two ways: either cauterization with an acute burning medicine or with iron.
But cauterization with a burning medicine is that you take an alder twig and scorch it and smear the ends of it on both sides of the head. Then cut the place of pain in the temple with a pointed lance so that it penetrates into the hole beneath the membrane and is concealed.
Then press tightly on it with a bandage and leave that for three hours; then remove the alder and treat it with water and let the wound heal in two or three days, and place your hand over it while immersing it in hot water so that the spot makes blisters.
Then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
And if you want to do this with some burning medicines which I have written about in the second treatise on burning medicines.
But the cauterization with iron should be done according to this manner: heat up an iron cautery of which this is the form:
and it is called a closed nail because its head is shaped like a nail with some curve and in the middle part of it there is a small protuberance.
Then place it on the site of pain and hold your hand there — so that the cautery underneath is not burned  — and move the iron little by little with speed.
And if the amount of it that is burned by the thickness of the membrane just like its size and raise your hand so that the artery underneath is not burned so that there is no blood flow.
Then soak a cloth in salty water and place that on the spot and let it be for three days; then place a damp cloth with hot water on it and cure it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you want, cauterize with the point of the scalpel according to cautery, and beware of incision into the artery in this new non-ancient hemorrhoid.
Chapter Fourth.
Of cauterization for ancient hemorrhoids.
When you cure hemorrhoids with what we have said about the preceding cure and what we have said in the divisions of diseases, and the cure does not help, and you see by the disease that it is insufficient for it what we have said about the first cauterization with medicine or with fire, then if you ignite the cutellar cautery so that it turns white, mark on the site of pain with a line whose length is equal to its size or almost, and place your hand on one side and press tightly while you pierce the artery and let it flow into the bone.
However it is necessary for you to guard against the continuance of the mandible which is gnawed due to chewing and that the ligament not be burned and the nerve which moves that, and that no spasm occur.
And if it is about the custody and care of flow of blood from the artery that is cut, for there is danger in cutting it and especially to one who ignores what he does and is unskilled and inexperienced; let the operation be done at the beginning.
And I will remind you of the regimen for flow of blood accidentally from the artery according to its way in your own book.
And if you see this disease that does not yield to this cautery and the patient's body tolerates it, cauterize him in the middle part of the head as we have recounted, and cure the wound so that it is healed.
And if you want to administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter about stretching of the artery with cautery having two points, and this cautery is better and more effective.
Chapter Fifth.
Of cauterization for pains in the ears.
When in the ear there is pain due to heat and it is cured by lacractive causes and by the other cure which I have said in the division, and the pain is not relieved, then ignite the cautery and this is the one that has a point, of which this is the form:
Then pierce it and ignite it and let it be borne around the whole ear as a wheel is turned or in the circle of either one if the pain is in one. Lengthen it with the cautery of the root of the ear little by little so that you do not burn the spot with a touch.
And if the cautery is of ten points in the whole ear, and that one, then cure the places so that they are healed.
Chapter Sixth.
Of cauterization for torpor.
Torpor which is cured and by cauterization it is not but of the spices that come through phlegm according to what we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Avoid cauterization of the species which occurs through dryness or by spasm of the nerve.
When you cure that species of torpor with herbs and head-purgatives and your cure does not succeed then when you cauterize the patient in three cauteries: the first should be of the root of the ear, the second a little below his temple, and the third should be the junction of two gums.
And apply your cautery to the contrary side of the sick person, because softening only occurs on the side that is healing.
And the method of cauterization is that you cauterize the patient with the cautery on the right side of the highest part of the ear, and on the temple another one, the length of which should be according to the length of the finger nail, and place your hand with the cautery until half of the amount of the size of a bean is burned.
And this is the form of cauterization, and it is specific to the knife-maker, the shape of which is described in front of the table. But indeed more subtle is that one a little so that you see it, and that it cuts through excessive thickness a little.
Then treat the area with what has been described in front so that it heals.
Chapter 7.
Of cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and you have treated it as we have said and your treatment does not work and the patient has no fever, then cauterize that with four cauteries: on all the horns of his head; and with cautery and the middle part of the head, so as we have said; and with cautery in the groin. And the manner of the cautery is done according to what is written above.
And it has been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and it is more behind; and it should be cured with what has been described.
Chapter 8.
Of cauterization of oblivion caused by flame.
Give the patient at the beginning large jars and pills of the servant purgative.
Then shave the whole head of the patient, and place over his groin an ointment of cedar described in the treatise on ointments.
And apply it several times, for that is the manner of cautery. And do that according to the order which we have already said.
And if he heals well from that, then it is good; and if not, then do to him three cauteries on the back of his head, which descend from the highest part of the head to the lowest part of the neck. And place between each cautery the thickness of a finger nail, and then cure the cautery with what has been described.
But if you think it is tolerable and the patient can take it, then do to him cautery on the middle part; and if you see greater tolerance, then cauterize that on both horns.
Then cure that until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive-colored according to the form described above.
Chapter 9.
Of cauterization of parasites and softening of all the body.
Give the patient purgatives for cleansing of the head as we have said; and then shave his head, and then cauterize that with cautery on the middle part of the head, and with cautery on all the horns of the head, and with cautery on the back of the neck, and with three cauteries on the spines of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the softening of the body for parasites and the patient tolerates it and the sickness is strong, then cauterize that with four cauteries on the spines of the back, and lastly with cautery until half the size of a bean is burned, and raise your hand. Then cure that until it is healed, and let this be the cautery olive-colored.
Chapter 10.
Of cauterization of epilepsy.
The epileptic is not cauterized except for that epilepsy caused by phlegm.
And so, cleanse the brain of him at the beginning with herbs and with the other cure which we have described in the division when the patient is large and tolerates the exception of the medicines.
And if it is a child who does not endure the medicines, then administer warming and chewing remedies by the servant cleansing, before that for several days, with benefit of foods.
Then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that with one cautery on the middle part of the head according to the previous manner, and with another cautery on the back of his neck, and cauterize each horn of his head. And if the patient is strong and tolerates it, then cauterize that with cauteries which I have said, having paralysis and softening of the body on the spines of the neck and the spines of the back.
And let the cautery be olive-colored according to what has preceded it.
But if the patient is a child, then apply the cautery gently according to this manner.
Chapter 11.
Of cauterization of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and gross phlegm, then cauterize that with the cauteries which we have said in having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is excess phlegm declining to melancholy and the body of the patient is moist, then give him to drink what cleanses his brain according to what has preceded in the division.
Then shave the head of the patient, and then make a decently twisted tallow over the circle, and then place it in the middle part of the head.
And let the patient be seated, and let him be held by all parts.
Then apply liniment; and it is more worthy of being boiled of old sheep. And boil that on the fire with moderate heat by measure, which he endures when he is in it. Then pour that into the middle part of his head on the circle, and let him remain until it is cool.
And do that with the patient in a week once a day, and let him have the other regime of him until he is healed; or if you want, cauterize that making small points according to his age, unless you have your hand with a cautery thus ordered: this is a special cautery which moistens the brain with equality.
Then let that be wrapped in cotton wool in a bandage or in gray flannel.
Chapter 12.
Of cauterization of water descending into the throat.
When it is declared that the beginning of water in the throat through the holes which you have said in the division, then begin and give the patient to drink what cleanses his brain, and guard him from all moisture.
And let that boil in a bath for a few days.
Then command him to wash his head, and cauterize that with cautery on the middle part of the head; and then cauterize that with two cauteries on two temples if it is the beginning of moisture in two holes, or of one side if it is the beginning of moisture in one hole.
Pierce with cautery all the veins and arterioles which are under the skin; and let the cauteries be long in that length of the temples.
Guard against bleeding when it is cauterized; and if you see from him bleeding, stop it with some medicine, which is to you possible.
And come with wisdom which is in extraction of arterioles and with pruning of those and cauterization of bleeding of blood.
And some bones are cauterized in the neck below two bones with two cauteries directly produced.
Chapter 13.
Of cauterization of old tears.
When tears from the eyes are old and have spread through the veins and arteries to a visible location on the head, and it is clear that this is caused by an excess of phlegmatic fluids, then cauterize with a cautery as we have described in the chapter on water-fever. Cauterize in the middle of the head, and with two cauteries below the temples, and with two cauteries below the bones. And if there is a need for an additional cautery, then cauterize on all sides of the eye socket at the top of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
Of cauterization for a nose fetor.
When you have treated the patient as we have said in the previous chapter and your treatment does not work, then prepare and give the patient enemas for three nights. Then shave the patient's head and cauterize the middle of the nose with a cautery made from olive oil. Then cauterize the nose bridge with two cauteries below the eyebrows, just under the hairline.
And be careful not to burn the skin.
This is the form of the cautery, or nail cautery:
Chapter XV.
Of cauteries for softening eyelids.
When the eyelid is softened due to illness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a lunar cautery. This is its form:
And if you are cauterizing above the two eyebrows, then do so with small cauteries in a straight line, and have them extend from the temples. And let the length of each cautery depend on the size of the eyebrow.
And do not press your hand too hard with the cautery, but according to how much the upper part of the eyelid is swollen.
Chapter XVI.
Of cauteries for the eyelid when hairs are converted to thorns and punctures the inside of the eye.
When hairs on the eyelid become thorns that puncture the inside of the eye, there are two ways to cauterize them: with a cautery iron or with a burning medicine.
If you cauterize it with fire, tell the patient to look down so that his eyelashes lie flat, and then trim them, pulling them out from their roots while they are being cauterized. If the punctures hurt him, then strengthen his eyes with a bandage so that he does not blink while the hairs are growing back.
Then, when they grow back and curl, place the patient's head in your lap and draw the eyelid of his eyes with a tent, marking its shape according to the pattern of a dead leaf, and let the beginning of the mark be near the hairs.
Then place cotton dipped in white vinegar or in a mullein tea over the eye.
Then heat the cautery, of which this is its form:
Then cauterize over the shape you have drawn, bit by bit, until the surface of the eyelid is burnt and appears like a dead leaf, all appearing healthy and proper.
And a sign of your work' s success is when you see the eyelid drawn up and the hairs raised above the puncture of the eye.
And then raise your hand and leave it alone for three days, and then place a poultice over the area until the scab is healed. Then treat that with ointment until it is healed.
But if the hairs return for any reason and the eyelid is softened, then repeat the cautery over that area again just as you did at first.
But if the hairs are inside the eyelid, then cauterize that area until it is raised to its natural position and curled back so that the hairs do not puncture the eye.
But the burning medicine cautery is done by telling the patient to look down so that his eyelashes are flat and then trim them, pulling them out from their roots while they are being cauterized. Then the shape of a dead leaf is drawn on it.
Then take one part powdered sage and one part live coals. I.e.: Take this mixture and make it into a paste so that it is not too dry; then spread this over the paper which was drawn in the shape of a dead leaf, and place it on one or both eyes. Place cotton dipped in white vinegar over the eye, and let the patient' s head be in your lap.
Then hold the eye over the medicine and press it gently without hurting him until he feels the burning of the medicine, for the burning is like that of fire.
And when he feels the burning, then he should let go of the medicine and press it with his finger; then when the burning stops, remove the medicine and wash the eye with water. Then consider if you see the eyelid lifted as it is washed or cut, for then it is good. And if it does not return to being washed or cut, then do not put the medicine over that area again where the medicine did not take effect and there is no blackness, but wait until your operation has healed and the eye is drawn up.
Then place a poultice over it until the scab of the burning is healed, and then treat that with ointment made from defynikon or another one so that it is healed.
And it is necessary for you, due to your operation, to be very vigilant and careful that the medicine does not drop into the eye. And if the eyelid becomes soft after a few days and for some reason the hairs puncture the eye, then repeat your medicine over that area just as you did at first, and treat him until it is healed.
This is the shape of a dead leaf:
Know that men' s eyelids are diverse in size and smallness, and therefore your operation should be done according to that.
And do not take the way of certainty with one who is ignorant of this art.
Chapter XVII.
Of cauterization for a fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
When you are treating a fistula as we have said in the divisions of illnesses and your treatment does not work, then do this: tell the patient to place his head in your lap and let one of his servants hold his head so that it is not moved or shaken by him.
Then place cotton dipped in white vinegar or in a mullein tea over the eye.
Then heat the cautery, of which this is its form:
Which is hollow, thus in the shape of a straw or a bird' s feather, from one end where the cautery is made.
And if you see that it penetrates into the other end. And if you wish that it come out like a tent.
But what is hollow is better for your work.
Then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out of it pus and dried blood. And if it is not open, then open it and extract its hardness.
Then place the cautery which is well ignited over the fistula, and press it with your finger over the cautery in the nostril, so that your hand does not move or the patient be disturbed, and then place the cautery on the edge of the eye and bend it.
And so if at the beginning of your cautery it enters into the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery one or two times if necessary; and leave it like that for three days, and then place a poultice on that spot and bind it with a dry bandage until it heals.
But if ten days have passed and it has not healed, then place a sharp corrosive medicine on it until the bone is exposed and scrape it according to what is appropriate in its chapter.
And there is another method of cautery for a fistula, which some call the first: enter at the site of the fistula and plug it up, and then place in that crack a fine powder of which its formula is given in its chapter; and melt into that the quantity of half an ounce of lead; and hold your hand with the powder with good retention so that the molten lead does not reach the throat of the patient; and cover what you have placed over the throat of the patient with a poultice of yolk of egg or water, for the lead will close up the site of the fistula and heal it in a wonderful manner.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cautery and treatment, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a nasal speculum and reduce the fistula into the cavity of the nose according to what will be given in its place.
Chapter 18.
Of cautery for a wound in the anus.
Many times fissures occur in the lips, and especially in the lips of infants.
So when you treat these fissures with what we have said in the divisions and your treatment does not help, then light the cautery with a small knife in this way that it is wrapped:
And let its cavity be according to the thinness of the knife.
Then place that gently in those fissures until the cautery reaches the root of the fissures.
And then treat that with ointment until it heals.
Chapter 19.
Of cautery for a fistula in the mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth where there is an abscess and then it becomes inflamed, and then it breaks, and then it becomes old, and becomes inflamed and a fistula is made, and you treat that and your treatment does not help, then when you light cautery according to the quantity that is received in the fistula, then place that fire into the hole of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the iron reaches the root of it, and make that one or two times; and then treat that with what we have said about treatment until it heals.
And so if the pus is discharged and it heals, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to expose the site and remove the corrupted bone according to what is given in its chapter.
Chapter 20.
Of cautery of the teeth and of softening of the gums.
When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are painful, and you treat those with medicines and they do not help, then place the head of the patient in your lap, and light the cautery whose form will be given below, in such a way that you place the probe over the tooth and insert the cautery quickly, and hold your hand gently so that the patient feels the heat of the fire reach the root of the tooth.
And then lift up your hand and repeat the cautery a few times according to what you want.
And then the patient should hold his mouth open with salt water for an hour, and then spit it out, for the painful tooth is firmly closed and the softened gum is tightened and the corrupted humidity is dried up.
Chapter 21.
Of cautery for toothache.
When toothache is due to coldness, or there is pain in it, or the cure with medicine does not help, then cautery for that is according to two methods: either cautery with a cow's udder, or cautery with fire.
Cautery with an udder is that you take a cow's udder and boil it in iron, and then take the tip and wrap it around the end of a needle, and then immerse that in the boiled udder and place it quickly over the painful tooth so that it becomes cold.
And then repeat that a few times until the virtue of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
And if you wish, immerse wool or cloth in the udder above, and place that over the painful tooth, and place a hot iron on it so that the iron reaches the cavity of the tooth.
But cautery with fire is that you take a needle of iron or of steel and let it be in the heart of the fire until it becomes red-hot, and there is no thickness of fire that does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then light the cautery whose form will be given, and place that over the tooth and hold your hand so that the cautery becomes cold; and do that a few times because the pain is increased or in that day or in another day.
And let the patient fill his mouth with good water and hold it for an hour, and then spit it out; and this is the form of the cautery.
And cauterize in whatever way you want according to what is possible for you.
And this is the form of the probe:
Chapter 22.
Of cautery for hernia.
When hernia is of phlegm and cold humors and they are not reduced by digestion with medicines and you see the digestion of those slightly, then you light the cautery in such a way that its form follows, having two ends so that the smoke from one end comes to the other end, and place that fire on the hernia once, and if it does not help, then do that again until it reaches the root of the hernia.
And if the hernia is small, then place the cautery according to the quantity of the hernia, and let it be for three days and hold your hand over it with a poultice so that what has been burnt by fire is softened.
And then treat that with ointment and bandages until it heals.
Chapter 23.
Of cautery for cough and constriction of throat.
When humidity comes over the throat of the lung, and especially when that is due to coldness of constitution, then let the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that after the root of the gullet in the place of spitting.
And be careful that the cautery does not reach the gullet or burn its membrane but only a little.
And cauterize that with another cautery after the joint of the throat at its last vertebra. And let the cautery of that be in the manner preceding.
And then treat that with what precedes until it heals.
Chapter 24.
Of cautery for illness of the lung and cough.
When cough and illness of the lung are due to cold humors and the patient does not have fever or feverishness, and it is an old illness, then cauterize that with two cauteries over the furcula at the places of spitting blood vessels; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest between two nipples; and let the cautery be inserted according to the form preceding.
If you wish, use the pointed cautery called the puncta for your cauterization; its form is described in the section on ear pain.
And make points within those; and then treat that with water which has been previously mixed with something else so that it is therapeutic.
And now take the cautery and perform three cauterizations on it according to this method: with one application you can perform three cauterizations as follows:
Chapter .XXV.
On the cauterization of temblices, which is the head of the helper.
When the helper's head is displaced due to humid lubricous causes and does not return to its proper position when attempted, and it is displaced by a slight movement as we have testified, you must first reduce the displacement, then have the patient lie on his back or side; then lift the nape which is at the front of the temblice up to the upper parts with the fingers of your left hand if the joint is displaced towards the inside.
And take the cautery which has two heads, and this is how it should be used:
Then cauterize the nape so that it penetrates to the other side; then make the cauterization figure from four cauteries.
And sometimes they are used depending on the account, because there are eight cauteries.
And then put salt on the cautery and have the patient lie still, and not move for any length of time until he is comforted.
And if the displacement is to the upper parts and it is done in this way, then cauterize the muscle with a nail-like cautery or with pointed cauteries, because the joint is confirmed and the moisture is driven out and the patient is healed.
Chapter .XXVI.
On the cauterization of the stomach.
When there is pain in the stomach and moisture gathers within it and causes inflammation, and if you continue the methods of treatment and do not use cauterization, then have the patient lie on his back with his legs extended, and stretch out his arms and legs, and cauterize him with three cauteries: one cautery below the feet for the amount of a finger using a nail-like cautery, and two cauteries below the ribs on either side so that they form a triangular figure; lengthen them so that they do not touch and cause burning.
And if the depth of the cautery is the amount of two thirds of the thickness of the nape,
And let the figure of the cautery be according to this shape with an addition, and if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach as follows: and let this be a cautery according to the shape of a circle as follows:
And let the stomach be cauterized with a pointed cautery on that which is frightened by this cautery: and feel for the point in the stomach according to the amount you want with pain, then cauterize it with a cautery at these points; then treat that with the cure that is preceded so that he is healed.
Chapter .XXVII.
On the cauterization of a fretting wound.
When there is pain in the liver due to chafing or moisture or grossness and it is treated with what we have said and does not improve, then have the patient lie on his back with his head raised and feel for pain with three cauteries as follows and make this amount of pressure on the liver below the hypocondrium where a man lies on his side.
And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of a finger, and let the cautery be according to the length of the body sideways.
And do not move your hand with the cautery.
And if the amount of that which is burnt is equal to the thickness of the tip of the nape, and it does not feel tight; and if the patient stands on his feet; and if he does not stand, then let him lie, who has already stretched out his arms and legs and raised his arms.
And it is up to you to cauterize these cauteries with a scalpel when you are skilled and prudent in the art.
And be careful that you do not overdo it in the cauterization and let the tip of all the nape be cauterized so that all of the body is cauterized and it penetrates into the intestines, because the nape here is delicate; and know this.
Chapter .XXVIII.
On the puncturing of an abscess in the liver with a cautery.
When there is a wound or abscess in the liver and you want to know whether the abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its membrane, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient will feel a heavy pressure and pain will be acute.
And if it is in the membrane of the liver, with great pain and many times the doctors have wearied themselves over him.
Therefore let the patient be turned on his back; then feel for the location of the abscess with pain; then take the cautery which is like a needle in appearance, the form of which has been described in the previous page. And cauterize with that cautery so that all of the nape is burnt, so that it penetrates into the diaphragm where there is inflammation.
Then treat him for the cure of other abscesses until he is healed.
And do not use this form of cautery unless he who studies the art of medicine has prolonged it, and in whose hand many diseases have been known; but rather let him practice this operation, but know that you should not use it unless it is absolutely necessary.
Chapter .XXIX.
On the cauterization of a hernia.
I will now describe the old cauteries of the roots of aristology for a hernia caused by cold according to this method, and it is that you take from the roots of aristology a long, dry root which is found, and let it be as thick as a finger.
And then immerse it in oil and heat it in the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery in that place which is between the continuation of the collar bone with the chest; and with two small cauteries below the guider, one slightly inclined towards the part from where the beard grows, and two cauteries on that which is inclined towards the parts behind; and with a cautery in the middle of the feet; and with another cautery on the stomach, and with three cauteries on the back; and with a cautery in that place which is between the two shoulders, and with two cauteries on either side of the leg, from where there is the decline towards the armpit.
And do not move your hand with the cautery, but let it be in the appearance of the nape in its form.
And now they have discovered that some men use cauteries of iron which are like a needle and heat it, and put it in that place which is between the ribs so that they penetrate to the hernia and there is suppuration; therefore as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
But in this piercing with cautery there is no fear, for as soon as humor occurs in the place of a fistula to which there is no cure.
Chapter 30.
Of the cauterization of the vulva.
When you cure the disease of the vulva by what we have said about healing in division and do not trust your cure, then cautery on it is according to three ways, all of which are true, one of which is that you make three cauteries or four lines according to the length of the vulva according to the figure of the cauteries of the liver, the figure of which has preceded.
And let there be between each cautery the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery is the manner which we have said in the cautery of the liver equally.
And do not press your hand with the cautery; and let the patient be lying on his back.
And another way to cauterize is that you ignite the cautery having two remedies, the cause of which we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and raise the tendon which is in the side of the vulva through which passes the vein of the left leg of the patient.
And let your elevation by which you raise the tendon be according to the length of the body, so that cauteries are made according to the width of the body.
Then insert both remedies, ignite them, into that opening through which you penetrate the tendon from the other side.
And then withdraw the cautery; and thus are made four cauteries.
And if you want, cauterize with a cautery having three remedies.
And then you cure the cautery once it has stopped burning for several days, for it is better than the other causes which have preceded in the healing.
Chapter 31.
Of cauterization of hydrops.
Cautery does not cauterize in hydrops but properly in the rectum.
When you heal hydrops by the ways of healing which we have said in division and do not trust your healing, then let it be that you cauterize with four cauteries around the anus and with one cautery on the stomach, and with another cautery on the liver, and with another cautery on the vulva, and with two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and with one cautery in the right leg, and with another cautery on the stomach. And let the quantity of the depth of the cautery be proportional to the thickness of the tendon.
And then withdraw the cautery so that it burns for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient from healing after cautery with that which causes it to be added to him two tendencies and heal him with help of healing.
The form of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be claw-shaped according to that which is above it previously, and that with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped according to that which is above it previously.
Chapter 32.
Of cauterization of feet and thighs.
When the feet are swollen with hydrops and filled with yellow water, let it be that you cauterize the feet on the instep of the foot in the nerve which is between the auricular and the annular, and raise your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; and then raise your hand, and do not return it at all, for the yellow water will flow out.
It is the cautery according to this form: And then make two cauteries over both thighs, and in each thigh let there be made a cautery with the end of the cautery-knife. And let the cautery be according to the length of the thigh: one from below the groin and the other just above the middle part of the thigh; and over each thigh two cauteries.
And withdraw the plague open without healing for a long time so that some water flows from it.
And then heal them with those causes which we have said.
Chapter 33.
Of cauterization of body of belly.
When the body of the belly is from rubbing and from moisture within which weakens the vessels, it is the digestive and retentive virtue, which are in the stomach and intestines, and it is healed with those ways of healing which we do not trust, and sometimes the patient suffers cautery from excessive heat, then cauterize that with a large cautery over his stomach according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cautery of the circle and with four cauteries around the anus subtly, with a subtle claw-shaped cautery; and with cautery on the rectum over Aloes, or with two cauteries.
And if you see excessive moisture and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize that on the penis and intestines, and tightly around two cauteries over the stomach and near the groins, for it is a perfect cure of generation from which there is no error.
Chapter 34.
Of cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
When there is in nature a posterior ancient hemorrhoid or of thick humors rubbed or of corrupted moisture, and it is healed with that which we have said in division and do not trust your healing, then cauterize with three cauteries over the most lower vertebra of the back small and triangular, and cauterize above the navel with two needles.
And if his stomach is swollen and his food is not digested, and his face is sometimes swollen, then cauterize that on the stomach with a large cautery according to what has preceded; and with one cautery on the liver, and with another cautery on the vulva with a claw-shaped cautery, and withdraw the cautery for some time open, and then heal it when it is healed.
Chapter 35.
Of cauterization of the eye near its incision.
When you incision the eye, then heat the cautery which is assembled to light. Then insert that ignited into that eye which is incisioned, and close your hand over it so that the cautery reaches the hole of the vein from which the blood flows.
And do it once or twice, for if they are many, then cauterize each of them according to what we have recounted, and then heal those with that which you trust in them when the gum is healed.
And if you cauterize on Aloe, it is better for generation.
Chapter 36.
Of cauterization of fistulas which are made in nature coming out from him.
When nature does not obey the work which we have commanded in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, then let him be healed by cautery.
Then when you see a fistula in nature coming out, and it is old, draw its moisture from him and corrupted humidity, and therefore what is best to do is to probe it with a subtle probe, and then know the quantity of its depth with that which has been said previously.
Then heat the cautery which is like light. And then put that cautery ignited into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which it pierces the probe.
And repeat over that cautery until those corrupted bodies are burnt one time or two or three, according to the quantity of your need.
And beware of burning the nerves and veins; or if a fistula goes into the body of the bladder or the intestines, then beware of all those places; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think it is not penetrating.
Then heal the area inside that has been healed.
And if the place is sealed, and the materials are cut off from it, and it remains like this for a long time, then you should know that it is completely healed.
And if the materials are not removed from it, then you should know that they are penetrating into the bone or causing corruption there, or that this happens for one of the reasons that will be mentioned later in its place.
Chapter 37.
On cauterization of warts.
When there is pain in warts because of friction or because of a strong wind, and because of this the patient's skin is damaged, then you should cauterize that place on the warts with a cautery nail, for which I will give you instructions.
And then quickly cauterize it with a second small one, so that three cauteries will come out like threads, and then the back ones will go up in smoke.
Chapter 38.
On cauterization of the bladder.
When there is weakness and softening in the bladder because of friction and humidity, so that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize that place below the bladder, where the hairs of the penis begin, and cauterize with a cautery on the right side of it, and with another on its left.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the amount of hair; and cauterize that place with a cautery below the anus, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And let the cautery nail be according to how it proceeds.
Chapter 39.
On cauterization of the hernia.
When there is friction and humidity in the hernia, and because of this impregnation is prohibited, and its menstruation is corrupted, and their provocation is delayed, and pain occurs because of their retention, then you should cauterize that place with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder; and with a cautery on the lowest part of the anus, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery nail be.
Chapter 40.
On cauterization of the dislocation of the elbow.
When moist humors are secreted at the part of the elbow, and these are caused by the movement of its joint, and a sign of this is that the bone is prolonged beyond the other when they are compared to each other. And the place of the dislocation is blocked in where it bends.
So you should cauterize the patient on the part of the elbow with a cautery in a ring-like shape, because you have marked it with a tent around the part as it is turned, and because the part falls the middle place of the circle.
And let the cautery be of the shape which was preceded in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize that place with three cauteries with a large olive-shaped cautery.
And let the cautery be made according to the quantity of the thickness of all the tendons; and then heal that place inside which has been healed.
Chapter 41.
On cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain comes in the part of the elbow, and its cause is friction and humidity, and the patient is cured by what we have said and does not confer with it, and this is old, then you should loosen the patient's humors with fetid pills or artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize that place.
And the manner of the cautery in this is according to two manners: either cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
They go according to two known manners, the first of which is that you cauterize that place on the part of the hip with three triangular cauteries according to this shape; and make good depth with them. And let the space between each cautery be the quantity of the thickness of the finger, and if the cautery is olive-shaped or large.
Sometimes let the cautery be on the middle place on the head of the elbow, so that there are four cauteries.
And if you want, cauterize with the circle of which the shape is preceded in the cauterization of the dislocation of the elbow, so that it is a containing circle and burns the thickness of all the tendons.
And this is the manner of cautery in sciatica when pain is adherent to the elbow and it is not extended within the thigh.
But if it is extended within the thigh, then cauterize that place with two cauteries on the thigh over the place towards which the pain goes; and with one cautery over the ankle, four inches away from the hairy part.
And if the cautery cuts, then let the depth of the cautery be according to the quantity of the thickness of the tendon.
And if the pain goes that the pain is extended within the place towards the toes, then cauterize that place where it goes with a cautery through three points or four or more if you need to.
And if the pain goes from below the knee towards the thigh, then cauterize that place there with a cutting cautery.
And beware in all cauterization that you do not go too far with the cautery so as to burn nerve or large artery, and because of this to you is harm or contraction on the patient.
And now you have seen one of those who cauterized on the ankle and finished in the cauterization, and the fire inflamed within that the tumor was conquered to the foot, and the fire perforated and corrupted all the foot. And then strong solution of the belly occurred, and then that death.
And if the pain is in two parts together cauterize each according to this manner.
And the wise say in the cauterization of the elbow that this is the manner of cautery: make a ring-like iron, of which the circuit be the measure of a palm; and let its orifices be according to the thickness of an almond or more than a little.
And within that circle let there be another third; and let the space between them be the quantity of the finger; and may those circles be bent at two parts; and let the length of those be an inch or two, and make in those edges of iron decently bent in the circles; and this is its shape:
Then let it be ignited in the fire so that it bends and gives off sparks, and then let it be laid upon the part of the elbow, the patient lying on his side. And then cauterize that place with three cauteries around in one go.
And then let it be laid for three days; and then dress that place with plaster and let the wound heal for several days; and then heal that place as it has been healed.
Albucasis says: Oh son, we have used this kind of cautery for the sake of guarding him, and because of this we have found few which guard over him.
But from those cauteries to him who suffers them, and he is bitten by that place of his.
May cautery with medicines burning is that you make two circles having perforated armor in which the jaw of the iron door; let the length of the parties in their nature are two nuts or ways those.
And if the space which is between each the amount of the thickness of the finger; and are open below and above, and are that contain themselves according to this form:
Then pause over the part of the hip the patient is on his side, and press your hand over the part of the hip; and take a water tail and put it between two circles, and the quality of that be with fire gradually, and have that for the quantity of one hour, and suffer the patient the biting and the compression of him — for that throb biting so with fire — until the biting cease.
And then raise your hand with the instrument and wash away the water tail from all of the hip with warm water.
And then let that be for three days and put the poultice over the wound until the blackness of the compression is gone, and let it be for a few days, and run from him pus; this is last in healing.
And then heal that with ointment until it is whole.
And if the pain is extended within the thigh or leg, make him lie in that which contains water according to what is done in the hip.
And this is the manner of water tail, and I have already written that in the treatise of the rectification of medicines. Take of alkali and of non-extinguished ashes of both ends a part, and grind them and put in a new pot whose bottom is perforated with a small hole, according to the quantity that goes into him.
And put below the bottom of the other pot an inverted pot, and pour over that alkali and live ashes with warm water which covers those by a finger, and after you compress those with your hand with good compression, and let the hot water that descends from him into the pot below.
And then gather all that water, and pour it over the other live ashes and renewed alkali, for that time will go of very strong acridity, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, for that operation makes fire.
And some medicines are cauterized broadly, as with theriac and honey of anacreon and ashes with soap that are mixed.
And Gualia reports from a man of the ancients the operation and the cure by which is cured pain of hip and sciatic vein, and magnifies much to be of that, and says that it does not need another cure, and which is healed by one bleeding as well as cauterization, for that quickly goes into bath and sweat he already knows of that.
And let it be pressed with a certain rag wrung out, and if not squeezed out, let it be used fig juice; and let it be ground with a little grease and be put on the hip where there is pain, or in the thigh, or in the leg, and let it be bound.
And let it be left for the quantity of three hours or for the amount that the patient tolerates biting of the compression.
And then put him in a bath and when his body is heated, immerse him in the sun, for the pain ceases and he is healed.
And know that there is not who uses cauterization with these medicines but the evacuation of the body.
May Escorides say that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with kid-leather, it would be better; and let the cautery be with him according to this manner: take wool and be dipped in old oil, and be put between the foot of the leg and between the bone.
And then take dry kid-leather and inflame that with fire until it is made charcoal; and then put that over the wool and let it be until it is extinguished. And then repeat that, and do not cease doing that until the biting sensation of the compression comes into the hip and rests the pain.
And this manner of cautery is called cauterization of cows.
Chapter 42.
Of cauterization of pain of two.
Some times pain is in the back for many causes, as by chafing or by piercing or by superfluous evacuation, and for those similar causes, by infusion of matter rubbed and moist.
And cauterization does not work except in this only species which is made by effusion of matter rubbed.
Therefore, let the patient, appropriate evacuation of the patient with pilled pills and similar to them, that are made over the back in which there is pain three lines according to the width of him, since marks with a tent in each line cauterize or more, according to the amount that comes from the tolerance of the patient and his strength.
And let cauterization be made with pointed cautery.
And if you want, cauterize with three cauteries or four with a middle nail cautery according to this form:
Chapter 43.
Of cauterization at the beginning of goutiness.
Many times this ill happens to little children; and sign of the beginning in children is that they cry over their stiffness in the back by lifting up and moving.
And you will feel it in the last vertebra of the back and of the bones of him that already begins to rise above the others.
And therefore when you see that and want to prevent it, then cauterize that with cautery that is circular according to this form: that the cautery be put over all part of the vertebra evenly.
And if you want, cauterize in the circuit of the vertebra with pointed cautery two lines or three. And let the points be near to each other.
And then heal the place until it is healed with what we have said.
May beware that cautery not be administered in goutiness that is made by spasm of nerve.
Chapter 44.
Of cauterization of podagra and of joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And therefore when podagra of cause rubbed is healed with manner of cure and the pains are not gone, then let it be cauterized.
And let you cauterize that after evacuation in the circuit of the joint of the leg with many cauteries.
And let cautery be olive oil of which this is the form of it:
And if it is necessary that points be made on the surface of the leg, then do with pointed cautery. And if the pains spread into the tendons or other joints, and that many times it comes from there, then cauterize that over each tendon with three cauteries or four of all part with this olive oil cautery.
And if you are necessary that these cauteries be to you, then cauterize that and do not press too much your hand on the cautery before, let it only surround the edge of the nail.
And if the pains spread into the tendon and the back, then administer the cautery which we have said in its chapter.
And if the pain is only in the hands, and it is called sciatica, then point on the circumference of the eyes as they turn, point on those two lines.
And if there is remaining pain in the fingers, then point on the circumference of the eyes at every knuckle and on the palm of the hand.
And if the pain can go towards the joints or the muscles, then cauterize each of them in every part of the affected area.
And do not evacuate the patient if there is good digestion and reception of medicine, for if there is good digestion and the heat is evacuated by this cautery, they will be healed, God willing.
Chapter 45
On cauterization of broken bones.
When there is a broken bone in the joints and hernia protrudes through the tissue into the abdomen, and this is where it starts, then you should order the patient to stop eating for that day and to use mild laxatives so that the hernia will descend from his belly.
Then follow the patient between your hands on his back, and order him to hold his breath until the hernia is pushed in or the intestine appears.
Then return that with your fingers and signal the broken bone over the bone of the elbow by indicating the extremity which is similar to half of a circle at the ascending parts of the body.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the shape:
until it moves in a circle and sends out sparks. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And then place the cautery over that signal with your hand holding the cautery straight, and aim it towards the bone of the elbow between the muscle and the tendon; and repeat with another application if you haven't achieved it in the first application to the bone.
And carefully observe the movement of the hernia during the cauterization, so that you do not burn it to the point that it brings death or another great harm to the patient.
And know that when you with the cautery do not touch the bone, your operation is not complete.
And know that the cautery for children should be subtile according to their size and measure.
And then treat the place of the cauterization with ointment for three days until the scar of the fire is healed.
And then treat that with other remedies until it is healed.
And let the patient lie on his back for 40 days while the place and wound are sealed.
And know that you should regulate his diet according to the length of time of his cure which the bandages around his belly will tell you, and let the hernia not come out due to the effort of healing.
And then when he wants to get up after 40 days, then administer to him a decently made ointment and have that for another 40 days.
And let him be tired from work and from filling himself with food and drink, and from violent movement, for when he uses this cure of healing entirely, he will be healed.
And I will tell of the cure for hernia in other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, and you should not be impatient, then cauterize the hernia with a round cautery according to its quantity, and it is that which comes from the coccyx like the third part of him; and then treat that as we have said, and if it is not adjusted.
And now I will say some first things that hernia should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this shape, for it is probed with a probe:
and is marked by a line that goes through the breadth on the lower side of the hernia, and another line above it; and place your hand with a nail-shaped cautery, but the first cautery is easier and better.
Chapter 46
On cauterization of torque.
When pain occurs in any part due to inflammation or impact and the pain persists for a long time and does not yield to any cure with medicine, then you should cauterize it with a pointed cautery.
And let the cautery be of any member according to its size and smallness, and its straightness and crookedness, and the location of torque and pain.
So if he is healed by the first cautery, then it is good; and if not, then do it again on him the cautery, for usually those pains are punctured at a member near to which member it hurts most, so that you find them with the cautery until the patient is healed.
Chapter 47
On cauterization for leprosy.
The lepers some times are cauterized for great healing, and especially if the kind of leprosy is caused by putrefaction of heat and melancholic humour.
And so when you want to cauterize it, consider if the leprosy is consumptive and as that cured by what we said in the division and do not use it, nor that, and fear about the patient that the corruption spreads through all his body and all its complecion, then cauterize him on the head with v cauteries: one in the middle place of the head, and the second lower on him, moving from the forehead to the end of the hair; and both on the horns; and one behind, on the nape or neck.
And finally place your hand with the cautery a little on the bone to make a small impression, and from him are displaced the scars, so that the expiration of thick vapours is relieved from him; and cauterize over the melons according to what it prescribes.
And if the leprosy has spread over the body and appears manifestly, then you should cauterize it with those cauteries which we said to do on the head; and cauterize on the end of the nose, and two cauteries on the two nostrils, and two cauteries on the two collarbones of the neck, and six cauteries over the collarbones of the chest, and one large cautery over the collarbone near the armpit, and one cautery over the breastbone, and two cauteries over the ribs, and one over each rib, and two cauteries over the elbows, and one over each elbow, and two cauteries over the hips, and one over each hip, and two cauteries over the knees, and one over each knee, and two cauteries over the shins, and one over each shin, and two cauteries over the heels, and one over each heel, and two cauteries over the big toes, and one over each toe, and two cauteries over the small toes, and one over each toe.
And be careful of the nerves which are over the talus that you do not burn them.
And some times it is cauterized with one cautery over the bone of the elbow and another over the mouth of the stomach, and another over the jawbone.
And know that how much you adjust cauteries, as much is more beneficial and more effective; and know that the patient has no pain in the cautery, thus as they have it in the spots, because the body of him is already stunned.
And know that the cauteries are large or small according to the members and joints according to which they are preceded by the humour of the tools.
And then cure the cautery wound with flour mixed with honey and the other ointment until it is healed.
Chapter 48.
Of cauterization for stupor.
When a limb is numb or asleep and is not healed by medicines, oils, and plasters, then you should cauterize the numb limb with a cautery according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
And let your cautery enter the thickness of the skin a little. Then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
And sometimes a stupor is cauterized where the nerve endings are in the hands and feet, and in the spine, and feels the movement of the nerves which move that limb, and the stupor is relieved.
But do not presume on this unless he is skilled in the anatomy of the limbs and the exit of the nerves throughout the body moving.
Chapter 49.
Of cauterization for white spots that are morphea.
When white spots are old and do not respond to any of the ointments of medicine, then you should cauterize them with a cautery lightly according to the thickness of the skin so that the whiteness and color is relieved, and the color changed.
Then cure that with flour of err and lentils, and roasted oil and leaves of wild rosemary, and pigeon's blood or turtle dove's blood, let each be one part and all mixed together, then line a cloth and over the spot it is placed until it is healed.
Chapter 50.
Of cauterization for warts.
When cancer begins and you want to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its edge as it rotates.
And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in its middle; but I have not seen this, because I am afraid it will become ulcerated, and I have seen it happen sometimes.
And it is more proper that it be cauterized around its edge with a circular cautery as we have said, or with pointed cauteries.
Chapter 51.
Of cauterization for discolored spots.
When discoloration is delayed in ripening, and that is because of the surplus making it, or because of the state of the patient, whether he is old and decrepit, or poor of blood, or because of the season, and you want to hasten its ripening; then cauterize around it with small pointed cauteries; and then let it ripen.
But if you want to pierce it with a cautery, then heat the cautery of which this is the shape of it: and place that in the middle of the discolored spot so that it penetrates the skin.
And if the cautery is in that place which is lower, because the body of the arm is drawn away; then cure that until it is healed.
Chapter 52.
Of cauterization for corrosion.
Corrosion is a moving corruption in the limb, which corrodes like fire eating dry wood.
So if you see that corrosion in a place which suffers cautery by fire, then heat small pin-point cauteries, and larger ones according to what is convenient in that place where the corrosion is.
Then cauterize all of it evenly so that you eradicate all the corrosion and do not leave any cause for it.
Then let it be for three days, and place over the cauterized spots a poultice of soft linen dipped in mixed oil so that the scars are all eradicated and all the corruption.
Then cure that with ointments that generate flesh.
But if after three days the flesh does not grow healthy in that place where there is no corruption, then it is good; but if not, repeat the cautery over it where it is rotten in the discolored spots.
And corrosion is sometimes treated with a sharp medicine because that is midway between cautery and medicine. But however, cautery by fire is the quickest remedy.
And I have already said of its cure with sharp medicine in the division, and so take that when you will have indigence.
Chapter 53.
Of cauterization for warts and of others alike.
Sometimes there are bumps under the skin of the foot caused by an ulcer, and is a great cause, deep, which penetrates the foot; and cautery on them is according to two manners, that is cautery by fire and cautery by water.
But cautery by fire is that you ignite the cautery iron like a pencil of a quill pen, which is made of steel according to the thickness containing the wart all around, and it has fine points.
Then place that ignited over the wart, and then rotate your hand with the cautery around the edge of the wart so that the cautery reaches to the depth of the wart. Then let it be for three days until the arm starts swelling. Then poultice that with wild mallows bruised with salt, and let the poultice be over that for one night, for that will eradicate it from its roots.
Then cure that place with a generative flesh ointment until it is healed.
And if it does not convert, and sometimes it penetrates the surface of the body, mostly in the hands and feet, then know that you should administer on them cautery by water, and it is that you take a cannula made of horn or of steel or of quill pen, and place that over the wart; then drop a little quantity of water into the cannula, and rotate your hand, and you press all around with the pressure of your hand, and let the cannula be inserted to the depth of the root of the wart, and wait for the patient one hour with the biting of the water, then remove that, for the wart with its roots is eradicated.
And so do to them all the others likewise that are in the body.
Then cure those also whose roots of warts are eradicated with those ointments which generate flesh.
Chapter 54.
Of cauterization for tremors.
When there is a tremor caused by rubbing the nerve or by fever from a rub or by some other like cause, then know that you cauterize that with four cauteries or with V-shaped cauteries over the spine, between each pair of vertebrae with one cautery; and cauterize on the feet, and over the stomach with a cautery made of olive oil.
And if his tremor rests and hastens the sickness of the rubbed disease.
Chapter 55.
Of cauterization for accidental wounds to the body.
When there are blisters in the body that are broken and pustules that are made of corrupt thick matter; therefore cover at the beginning when it appears, let it be cauterized over all the top of the fistula with a subtle cautery made of mirt wood, the end of which is extended by fire; or with long razors; or with a cautery drawn out slowly.
And sometimes it is cauterized with a stone chisel at the beginning of its expulsion according to this manner; and not being split, the surplus is broken and makes them heal from that.
However, make sure that this is done by means of phlebotomy.
Chapter 66.
Of cautery for the flow of blood accidentally through an incision of an artery.
Troops seen there flow of artery which is cut below the wound, or below the incision of abscesses or cautery of the limb, and similar things, and it is difficult to cure that.
Therefore when it happens to someone, then you put your hand on the opening of the artery and hold there with your finger until that spot becomes narrow so that the flow of blood is stopped below your finger and does not come out.
And then place over the wound a few large olive cauteries, by many numbers, and breathe into them until they are many small fires.
And then take from those one small or large according to the spot and the wound where the artery is broken, over that vein quickly while you have held your finger, and put the cautery on it until it is bound and restricted that blood.
And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you hold your finger and squeeze the cautery, then take another cautery prepared in the fire and therefore do not cease doing this one after another until the blood is restricted.
And guard yourself that you may not burn the nerve which is here, and that it comes upon the patient some other evil.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible in those to restrict the blood, and especially when the artery is large if not by one of four manners: or by cautery as we have said, or by extraction when it is not extracted for when it is extracted its ends are burnt and the blood is restricted, or that it be bound with a ligature or with a bandage through strong constriction, or that medicines whose virtue is to restrict the blood be placed on it; and it be pressed by a poultice with decent constriction.
But he who administers decent restriction of it by bandage and constriction with cloth or through position of burning causes and of similar things does not confer but tarry.
But if this happens to someone and the physician is not present or there is no medicine, then open with your finger on the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand it in great constriction of it until the blood is stopped from the main part of the wound; and on the artery let your finger not be held, and over the artery let it be sprinkled with water rubbed with much coolness so that the blood may congeal and thicken; and indeed if there is need of cautery or medicine.
Of incision and piercing and fenestration and phlebotomy and of wounds and their likes.
We have already said in the first chapter all the illnesses in which it is convenient to use cautery with fire and medicine, and their occasions and causes, and the instruments in which they are necessary, and we have ordered the chapters from the superior part of the head until the feet.
And I shall proceed in this chapter through that medical manner, so that it may be alleviated to the seeker; then concerning that which he has demanded.
And before I begin that, know, brothers, that in this chapter is for terror that which is in the first chapter of cautery.
And for that know that it should be in great caution, for in the operation which is in this chapter many times there is an evacuation by blood from which life is taken away by the sprinkling of the vein or incision upon the abscess or opening of the wound or purification of the wound or extraction of arrow or incision of stone and their likes. And from all those are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in their hands death.
And I admonish you that upon you does not fall that in which there is a situation, for some times chance due to the methods of men with many illnesses. And from them is he who is carried away by his illness and is easier due to him the death, and so because of the vehemence of that which finds of his illness, and because of the length of his illness, and by the illness there is fear which signifies death.
And from those is he who gives to you his word and advice, you expecting with that health, and his illness is perilous.
And therefore know that you consent to him who comes to you of whom there is this manner; and your caution be greater than confidence and your greediness, and do not presume any cause over it unless by certain science which verifies it over you, and to which good success follows.
And use in the curing of all your illnesses from prognosis and indication of him to whom health is converted; for in him are you aided over acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
O children, God give to you his understanding and not hide from you direction and protection, for he is in his hand.
And I have ordered this chapter distinguishing by chapters according as it precedes in the chapter of cauteries, of the cure of the head until the feet, so that it may be alleviated to you what you demanded of that and of which you have need.
First chapter.
Of the cure of water which is contained in the head of infants.
Know that this illness many times happens to infants because of childbirth and when the mother stretches the head of the infant it feels light.
And some times because of hidden cause which is not discovered.
But I have not seen this illness except in infants, and to all those whom I have seen it is brought the death, and by such it is revealed action in them.
And I have seen that an infant whose head was full of water and the head of him was always magnified until a nurse could not bear on him because of the greatness of his head, and but the humidity was augmented so that it died with fire.
And this humidity or is added between the membrane and the bone, or is added below the bone upon the skull.
Because the operation in that if the humidity is between the membrane and the bone and the abscess is slight, then know that you cut in the middle place of the head with a slit in its breadth, and let the length of the slit be two notches so that the humidity runs, and this is the form of the spatum:
And therefore if the humidity is more augmented and the abscess is greater, then are here two slits according to this manner:
And if the humidity is below the bone, sign of it is that you see the edges of the head swollen all around and the water is oozing when you compress it with your hand at the edges in between your fingers and it is not hidden to you. Know that you cut in the middle place of the head with three slits according to this manner:
And then extract all the humidity; and then strengthen the slits with cloth and plasters; and then put on it vinegar and oil on the fifth day, and then loosen the bandage and cure the wound with tentas and unguents, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little humidity so that the limb is comforted and healed.
There is another method of incision which considers the size of the abscess and the collection of pus, as sometimes it is larger at the back of the head, or in front, or on the right or left side; therefore, make the incision where the abscess appears and the pus collects, and finish it in the best way possible.
And be aware not to cut any artery and cause a flow of blood, which might result in the patient's death due to that blood loss along with the discharge of fluids.
Chapter 2.
When there is a wound or an ulcer on the legs or feet, and it becomes old, and medicine doesn't help, then the best cure in this case is to make an incision on those two arteries.
And thus, when you want to cut the arteries which are near the ears, first clean the area with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and then press it tightly with some cloth; also, look for the pulse, and the places above and below the ears, because they sometimes hide in some people.
And then feel the artery with your fingers, and cut each one with a sharp knife, entering into the bone, and let it be according to the width of the head.
And if you want, insert the knife under the artery and cut through it to the bone above.
And let the length of the incision be about two digits apart, because when a vein is cut, blood emerges with a pulsating discharge, which shoots out frequently.
But if the artery doesn't appear by feeling around, then measure three digits from the ear and feel with your fingers, and insert into the bone.
And what comes out of the blood is the quantity of wine unces., And the blood flows out very slowly or quickly, and all that is according to the amount that appears from the strength of the patient and the flow of the artery.
And consider the skull, and if something remains on the bone that causes headache, then cut it so that it doesn't cause an abscess.
And strengthen the skull with plasters and bandages, and cure it with ointments until it is healed.
Chapter 3.
Of extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When there is a headache or ulcers caused by cold and dampness, and it becomes chronic, and medicine doesn't help, then we have experienced in these illnesses extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those veins as we have shown.
And the way of operating and extracting them is that the patient raises his hair which are in the temples; and understand the artery appears in the temple because it is shown to you by the pulse, and it is hidden except in a few people due to the strength of the pulse.
And if it is hidden from you, then press the patient's neck with some cloth; and clean the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with warm water until you see the artery clearly. And then take the knife, which has this shape: And press some cloth against the patient's neck, and approach from each side of the ears so that a nerve or vein appears; and bring the knife closer between those parts. And then cut it easily until you reach the artery; and draw out from there, and extract it from the upper parts until you have pulled it out from the vein, and discovered it from under the tunics.
But if the artery is thin, then wrap it with a thread, and cut from one part according to the amount by which they are lengthened and shortened, and there will be no blood flow. Because if they are not cut, the blood won't come out at all.
And let the blood flow out for wine unces. For three.
And if the artery is large, then tie it in two places with strong threads made of cotton or cords long, and don't allow putrefaction before the consolidation of the skull and blood flow.
And cut the superfluous part which is between two bandages; and do it in that hour or another hour.
And if you want, cauterize it with a cautery into the bone at the place where the ends of it are cut, and it will remain in place of that work.
And it is better that the patient has no fever or is of hot constitution; because cauterization is of those causes that help to dry up moist humors, and therefore it is better in youthfulness.
And let the extraction of the arteries that affect the ancient wound, and they are placed over it with decently made powders, and let it be cured with dry medicines making the flesh and bones heal.
And if while you are operating another vein appears causing blood flow from the artery, then tie that blood with a thread or cauterize it, or press the wound, and strengthen your hand over it until the blood is restricted. And if any of those causes is not present to you, then place your finger over the vein where the blood is coagulated, and wet the area with warm water of strong heat until the sharpness is relieved, and strengthen it according to how you can.
And what is easier in extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery which has two edges, because you have felt the two places with your fingers, and put them down, ignite them, until they reach the bone and cut the vein into two places, so that it is lengthened by what is between its ends, because it is not consolidated at all by this cauterization.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And let the sharpness of the two edges be sharp. But if the sharpness of two edges is better, because if they are sharp with two edges approaching each other and not cutting into the flesh quickly.
Therefore, when there is some thickness, the heat of the fire is held in them and the flesh is cut more gently.
And this work is better in all works and more gentle.
And let the space between the two edges be the quantity of the thickness of the finger.
Chapter 4.
Of the cure of acute and sour wounds in the throat.
When they are acute and sour, and it is the veins of those which are on top of the head, and there doesn't help any cause of the cure by medicine, and sometimes the face of that person turns yellow and he feels in his front as if it was a walking of ants, and the ears of him are exhausted, moist heat which is applied to them as if the hairs were known, and the eyelids are swollen by the sharpness of tears, the old ones who are experienced in the cure of those, and they call that cure with sponge.
And you command the patient to shave the hairs on his forehead, and then make three evenly spaced incisions in his forehead according to its length. And if the length of the incision falls into two parts: the first incision should be evenly spaced according to the length of the nose in the middle part of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little movement of the tears that are in the tear gland, and the third from the other side.
And be careful of the arteries which are on both sides; lengthen your hand in the continuation of both mandibles. And if the space of each incision is the quantity of three fingers, adjust it.
And if you have a piece of prepared sponge or dry rags with which to absorb the blood.
And insert the spatula from two acute ends, of which this is the shape of its incision: that is from the top of the temple to the second incision. Excorse with that all the gum which is between two incisions with the scalpel which is over the bone, and then do the same thing with the midline incision into the second incision. And place the spatula there and insert into the first incision again another instrument which is called a curette, sharp on one side and dull on the other.
And pause the side of that sharp against the flesh next to the gum, and the other side against the bone, and push it in as far as it will go towards the midline incision, and cut with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the arms.
Let the incision be continued towards the gum, and then do the same thing in the midline incision into the other incision.
And after blood comes out in equal quantity from both sides, squeeze the places where the clotted blood is.
And then place in each incision a piece of dry cotton wool, and apply over that powders mixed with vinegar and oil and sweet wine, so that an ulcer may not form there.
And on the third day loosen the bandage and give a large poultice of warm water or tea, and then treat that with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil and other things so that the wounds may heal.
CHAPTER 5.V.
OF THE CURE OF SORES BY CAUTERIZATION AND THE ARTERIES DESCENDING FROM THE TOP OF THE HEAD.
When to someone come cauteries which are drawn and continued, and you see the veins of the patient emaciated little, and already the guarding of them is weakened, and the eyelids are ulcerated and from there hair falls out, and in the top of the head there is acute pain and consequent tension, then know through these accidents that the matter and cauteries do not come except from few veins of the parts within.
And the best cure for them is this: command the patient to shave his forehead, and then make an incision in that place in the middle of the forehead, a little according to its width (and begin with the incision of the left temple into the right temple; and may the incision be into the bone; and lengthen your hand from the tears of the temples which are hurt because of chewing), while the bone is uncovered.
Absorb all the blood with sponge or dry cloth, and then fill up between the two lips of the incision with dry cotton wool or with linen. And then tighten it over that with powders mixed with vinegar and oil so that an ulcer may not form there.
And when you loosen that and see that the ulcer is diminished, then know that it rubs the bone where the flesh begins to grow again, and then treat that with an astringent poultice which dries up the flesh, as if you take of wheat flour two parts and of rosin four parts and mix them together, and from that make a plaster and apply it to these wounds from the flesh.
CHAPTER 5.VI.
OF THE CURE OF THAT WHICH CAUSES SORES IN THE EARS.
Every cause which causes sores in the ears is one of four kinds: either it is mineral stone or similar to stone, as iron and glass; or from plant, as celery or bean; or fluidic, as water and sweet wine and their likenesses, or some beast.
And therefore when stone causes a sore in the ear or some other cause similar to those which do not increase it in the ear, and the ear is turned towards the sun, and if you see the stone, then distil into that some cause of oil of violets or sizami, and then administer its extraction, and make him sneeze with a sniffing motion, and stop up the nostrils because of the sneezing. And then place in the circle of the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear towards its ends, because many times it is pierced by these causes.
And if it is not pierced, then administer its extraction with the instrument called a subtle hook for which this is the shape:
And if it is pierced by the hook, well and good; but if not, then administer its extraction with a subtle needle of few folds.
And therefore if it is not pierced by that, then make a tube of brass and insert the end of the tube into the hole of the ear, and close around the tube with wax and softened oil so that nothing else may be open except the tube. And then extract by your mouth with a strong吸引, because many times things are carried along with that which we have recounted.
But if it is not pierced in that manner, then take a piece of hollow reed or of a hollow vessel with which are pressed the ears, one finger's length, and place that in the end of the ear, and then wrap around that decently placed gauze. And then insert that into the hole of the ear with ease, and then dry the ear from its moisture.
And therefore if it is not pierced by all the causes which we have recounted, then you cut away that in front so that it may not form an ulcer or a spasm.
And the manner of cutting away that is that you first cut off the blood vessels of the sephasic vein and extract the blood according to the nature of it, and then do that cutting between your fingers and turn the ear towards its ends, and make a little incision in the edge of the ear because of the greys of it in the place which was pressed by it. And let the incision be in the shape of a crescent so that it may come to the stone; and if the stone is hard, stop it with appropriate instruments; then close up the incision at that time with speed, and treat that so that it may heal.
And if the cause is in the ear from one of the graces which grow and are inflated, then administer its cure and extraction; but if it does not obey your command, then take a slender spatula according to this shape: and administer with that the incision of that grace which is fallen in the ear.
And do not do that when you think it is already wetted by the vapor of the ear; place that in several pieces, and then extract from those with pincers or with a slender hook, or cut it away as we have said before, because the extraction from it is eased.
But if the water which has entered the ear, due to the yawning of the patient, is not expelled at the beginning and fills his ear with some old cloth, and he spits on that ear in which there is water; and if it is expelled, well; but if not, take small stones according to the length of the finger, and warm them in the fire a little, and let the patient insert one of those into the hole of his ear, and suck on it with his own mouth from that side, and strike with another stone on the stone which is in the ear. Do this until all the water is expelled.
Do this until all the water is expelled. And if the water is expelled in such a way that you take paper or linen, and put one end of it into the ear and extend the other end with fire until its middle is burnt.
And then put in another piece of linen and do this as many times until all the water is expelled; and put on that a cannula as it has been said about the stone extractor.
But in the extraction of an insect entering that ear, if it is a small thing, pierce and treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large thing which causes apoplexy, then administer its extraction with tweezers and nails, and the cause of it is farther away from all other causes that enter the ear.
But in the extraction of a worm engendered in the ear, when you treat it with what we have said in the division and in the tract on distillation and you do not achieve a cure, then you should look at the ear towards the sun.
And therefore if some cause of the worm appears, then extract it with tweezers or with fine nails; but if nothing appears, then take a cannula, tightly bound below and ample above, of which this is the shape: And insert the slender end into the ear according to the amount which the patient can endure; and then suck strongly with it, doing this several times until all the worms are expelled.
But if he does not obey you in this, then stop up and seal the opening of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been tried by the ancients in the cure of worms, and you will find them in the tract on distillation.
And let your effusion with which you pour the medical oils into the ear be through this instrument of which this is the shape: And make it of silver or brass, tightly bound below and flat above, with a small hole in it.
And therefore it must be as if it were plastered to that which is in the cavity of the cannula of containing. And if you wish, take the rod and wind the end of it with a cloth decently; then pour oil into the cavity of the instrument, or sap of some herb, or whatever you wish of these medicines into the cannula — and that is in the ear — then insert the rod with cloth above it and squeeze with your hand that cloth tightly until the oil is expelled from the cavity of the instrument so that the patient feels the oil inside.
And what has been poured into the ear must already be warmed by fire a little. And beware that the cause which you distill in the ear is not too strong, for the medicines of the ear do not endure that.
Chapter 7.
On the cure of inflammation of the ears.
Some children are born from the bellies of their mothers not-perforated, and this happens in some men, inflammation in the middle of the ear due to pus or due to meat stuck in that; and this inflammation sometimes occurs in the hole of the eardrum which does not affect the brain, and sometimes it is in the external parts.
And that which occurs in the middle of it, which does not affect the brain, is in the major dispositions of difficult cure.
And in that in which you achieve the brain, you should hold the ear of the patient towards the sun and look at it. And therefore if inflammation is apparent, open that with subtle spatula of which this is the shape:
If the end of it in which there is a small breadth, of which one party be acute and the other not; and let the spatula be of two edges smooth so that it does not harm the ear.
And if the inflammation is due to flesh born in the ear or in the middle of it, then open that with subtle nails and pierce it energetically until all the flesh is torn.
And if the inflammation is in the eardrum, then take a slender rod of brass and warm it in the fire a little, and then insert that in the middle of the ear.
And therefore if you have sensed inflammation with that which the patient feels with ease due to the gravity of hearing, relieve the pressure of it with ease; and beware that you do not harm the nerves of the ear.
And then hold to the ear cloth of linen according to the quantity of the breadth of the hole which you have wound in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are certain of the hardening of the plaster, or take some and soak that in water and sprinkle it over that after it has been ground and use it; and if you see the ear already pustulated, then beware that you remove that which you have wound in cloth and replace that with another cloth which you have wound around cerot that is made of rose oil, until the pustule scabs away; and then cure that until it is healed.
But if blood flow occurs, then soak sponge or cloth in cold water and hold it to the ear; and use the other cure which constricts the flow of blood, which is said in the tract on distillation.
Chapter 8.
On the cure of athecal which causes dimness to the eyelids.
Athecal which causes dimness to the eyelids of men sometimes moist, and sometimes dry.
Therefore hold those with tongs or with nails, and cut those with spatulas of their roots, and then hold it to the places ground.
But if pain with flow of blood comes, then cauterize those with a small slender cautery.
And the best cauterization is then to cut off and to return the incisions several times when any cause of them remains; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burnt and do not return.
Chapter 9.
On the cure of grandeyssa which comes to the eyelids of men.
Many times it occurs in the eyelids of men some cause which is similar to grandeyssa in its strength and hardness, and therefore grandeyssa is called.
And it is an accumulation of dense humidity in the eyelid below and above.
And the appearance in them is that you should consider if the grandeyssa comes from that which appears of the eyelid and is swollen in all parts; and the cause of it is distant.
Therefore open that with a slit through the breadth, and then dig that in all parts with ease until it drains, and then hold that with tongs and cut off that.
And if the wound is large, then you stitch it up, and cure that within which is healed.
And if it is small, then you shall not be harmed through it because the blood of it heals itself and becomes flesh again.
And if the growth is declining towards the inner parts of the eyelid from within, then cut off the eyelid and suspend the growth with a thread; another option is that you make an incision, and press it from all sides, and if the eyelid is elongated by incision, then this is not noted in any cause.
Then wash the wound with salt water, and cure the site so that it heals within.
Chapter 10.
Of the cure of an ulcer in the eyelid above the wound.
Ulcers are grey in color and are engendered in the membranes of the eyelid from above, and mostly affect infants, aggravate the eyes of those and cause pain to their sight because of it; and they cannot bear to look at the brightness of the sun because of this.
And because of this they always squint their eyes, and sleep with their eyes closed; and so the eyelids are humid beneath the eyebrows, which have already been covered in inflammation, and the imminence of growth is apparent in the eye; and when you press on the location with your fingers, you feel growth within them.
And some type of operation is performed on the patient who rests his head in your lap, and you prepare a cloth and make him take a hot bath, and make a circle according to the quantity that contains arternach from all sides, and then place that over it and press with your fingers all around so that growth may be brought together within the circle; then pierce in the middle of that humid area with a spatula through the incision made in flabotomy, and the incision should not be larger than the incision made in flabotomy.
But in the anterior cowl, you must split the membrane all the way through so that you arrive at the growth, for in the most disposed processes, the growth comes through the incision according to the form of whiteness.
Then pull it out with cloths which you have wrapped between your fingers at the outer edges and revolve between the right and left hand until it is released.
And be careful that you do not pierce into the wound with the spatula so that with the spatula you may not come to the wound and loosen it.
But if you do not encounter arternach at the beginning of the incision, but you pierce into the incision a little with ease so that arternach may process; then pull it out as we have said; and then moisten the cloths in water and wine and place them over the site and tighten those with poweder.
And so that salt is scattered and placed in the cavity of the incision so that what remains of that humidity.
Then cure it until it is healed.
But if an ulcer occurs in the site, then cure that with soft bandages until it is healed.
Chapter 11.
Of manners of touching the eye.
When within the eyelids of wounds are born beneath the natural hairs and are drawn out, then these touch our eye and make manners of illnesses thus with constant tears and softening of eyelids and membrane so that this is cause of destruction of the eye which is called tactinir of the eye, and it is cured in four ways: or by cautery with fire; or with acute medicine according to what was said before in the chapter on cautery; or tactinir is made through incision and suturing; or with reeds according to how he will direct.
And then place the patient's head in your lap; then lift up the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is lifted, all is well; if not, insert a needle into that from which pus flows beneath the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate above with the eyelid, and this must be close to the margin of the eyelid where the hairs grow — close to the hairs — and pull the needle towards the upper part of the eyelid, and lift up that with the eyelid, and convert it towards the nose.
Then pierce into the inner part of the eyelid from beneath the hairs with a spatula of the major tear duct into the minor tear duct; then pull out the fiel and place beneath the eyelid small balls of cotton or cloth, and then mark over the eyelid with tenting, and let it be thus with the form of a leaf of mirt.
But however, let the form be according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, for that is diverse in men, for from those it is required that there be a great quantity inscribed on the eyelid according to the quantity by which the eyelid is softened.
Then pierce with the spatula over the two lines which you have marked, and commence from the major tear duct into the minor tear duct. And if your incision is close to the natural hairs thus with the thickness of a hair.
And then place the thread in one of the two angles of the membrane, and then excoriate it all, and then tie with the suture the two lips with a gum or fine woolen thread, and wipe away the blood, and make adhere what superfluous of the membranes above two eyebrows with some causes viscous, if you wish to do so, and if not, you will not cure.
Then let the suture of the membranes be three or four days, and then cure it.
And if you wish, remove the plaster after its suture, and cure that with what dries and tightens, for the eyelid is raised because of the sealing of the plaster and the gathering of it; but the suture is better. And therefore we say thus to the ancients of tactinir.
But however, there be solicitude over the patient and it is good operation, and there is not fear in it.
And there is another way in tactmyr, and it is that you mark over the eyelid the form thus with a leaf of mirt, and then lift up the eyelid with three segregated and gathered hooks according to this form:
But if it is not possible with the hooks, and that is not gnatched, then take a needle in which there is thread, and place that in the middle of the figure, and insert the other fiel close to the major tear duct, and the fiel according to the minor tear duct, and tie between your fingers the membranes with equality, and then with those raise up your hand with equal elevation, raise all the membrane over which has been marked as we have recommended.
Then tie the two lips of the plaster with a suture and cure that until it is healed.
But if an ulcer occurs because of your incision or your piercing, treat that ulcer with cerate and its similars, and with unguents.
And some times the eyelids are drawn towards their hairs, therefore use in that what we have said of incision; but the suture in each is more artificial.
Tactmyr with reeds is according to this form: And it is that you lift up the eyelid and split the figure which is within according to what is recounted; then with art make two reeds or two astles of which the length be according to the length of the eyelid, and the width of those be smaller than the width of the spatula. And you have already cut into the ends of each part, where you have the threads.
Then add each one with subtlety below what is superfluous on the eyelid of the eye, and constrict the canals of each part with a strong constriction, and leave it for several days, because the vein will die by constriction, turn black and rot within while it falls out on its own.
But if it is delayed, then break the vein at the temples, and apply a poultice over the wound until it is healed.
Thus when it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the hair does not sting.
And this is the form of two canals which you will make according to this form: and have the quantity of length and breadth neither more nor less.
Chapter .xii.
Of the pustules that come from the head and of their remedy.
When they are non-natural hairs, tough, rough and stinging the eyes, then the operation on them is that you take a thin needle and place it in that vein of fine thread and lion, and then tie the ends of it very finely. And let the length of the hairs be a palm's quantity.
And then you twist another fine thread beneath it quickly, and tie the ends of that if you wish.
And then place the patient's head in your lap, and be near the sun so that your work is revealed, for it is a subtle and delicate operation.
And then insert the needle into the root of the hair which needs skill, and make it penetrate the eyelid hurriedly while pulling that one out above the natural hair.
And then pull the hair out from above and insert that one into the lye, and let there be only one or two or three hairs and not more.
And then pull your hand away so that the hair is pulled out by the lye in the eyelid with the natural hair.
But if it is pulled out by the lye and not pushed out, then pull the lye to the sides below with the thread which you have tied so that in being pushed out, the lye of the trave is above.
And wash that with the vision of the eye, for then you will pull out the lye and the thread, and cut each and close the eye, and leave the cuts for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place and grows good flesh over it.
And if the hair is longer, then tie a long one of the natural hairs, and it is elevated with that one, or the thread which you have tied so that in being pulled out, it is elevated to some space, and then you elevate that one.
Chapter .xiii.
Of the elevation of stinging hairs in the eye when the hair is very fine and delicate.
When there comes in the eye a pustule and there is contraction of the eyelid when it is drawn to one side or the other, by bad consolidation of flesh or by sectioning or cauterization, and it is called leporina, and this pustule or it is natural or accidental, and it is made by consolidation of flesh or of sections or cauterizations, or by similar ones to them badly cured.
The manner of the operation on it is that you split that consolidation and separate its lips, and place in it what is between those a piece of linen thread, and tie those so that they are healed.
And do not forget to use in its cure of the causes which dry out, constriction; for if you do that, it will return pustule worse than at any time before.
Use in that one causes which soften, like fenugreek, and cook with the water in which there are seeds of hemp, or unguent of diaquinon, which is liquefied with some of the oils, and soak in it the piece, and cure with it.
And the secret of your cure is that you pierce with great skill so that it is not consolidated according to the form that it was at the beginning.
And this operation which we have said is not anything other than a rectification of ehacratir that does not return the form of the place according to what it was before.
Chapter .xiiii.
Of the pustules that come from the head and of their remedy.
This ehacratir which is made in the eyelid below, which is properly named ehacratir; and it is of one natural, another accidental.
But accidental is made by flesh or by sectioning or cauterization, or by other likenesses.
And the way of the operation on it is that you take a needle in which there are two threads, and put that in the flesh, and make it pass from the tear duct of the left into the tear duct of the right, until the thread comes to both ends of the flesh.
And then extend the flesh to the sides above with the needle and cut that with the needle, and insert it with spatulum ample. And then if the shape of the eyelid returns according to how it should be, it is good; and if not, take the needle and place that in the split figure, and with that turn the eyelid, and split the two fissures on the side of the eyelid below.
And let the ends of the two fissures be two angles of the incision which you have made so that they meet, and let an angle be made between them when they come together and a figure is made from them.
And this figure is Greek letter: the delta.
And then push that flesh in by the quantity that it is the side of it beneath it, which cuts the eyelid.
And then tie the separated parts and sew those with the thread of wool; and then cure those with what we have said of the softening medicines and of the poultices until it is healed.
And if ehacratir comes through sectioning or cauterization, then split it with a flat incision over the hairs of the eyelid according to how it precedes. And then separate with the poultice between two lips as we have said.
In the sum of the speech of the cure of ehacratir when it is above or below, let the operation run in it according to how it is prepared of the form of ehacratir, and that one is in form of many diverse shapes.
And the wise artisans prepare skill in every way which is possible to it so that it makes the figure return to its natural form, or near to that one, and the patient according to how it agrees with the operation and the instruments in the best dispositions.
Chapter .xv.
Of the pestilences that come from the head and of their remedy.
When this consolidation happens to many men who are so young that the eyelid is very solid above the white of the eye, and it is prohibited from the facility of movement and of its natural works, then insert the end of the needle below the eyelid, and elevate it on that one, or extend that one with the unguent.
And then insert the adhesion with spatulum subtle, which is not at all acute from the incisions, and let the patient not be worried after the operation, and remove the spatulum which does not irritate the eye by its acuity.
And it should be your intention to cut away that adhesion with ease so that the eyelid may return to its natural shape and all the adhesion healed.
And then you should put in the eye a saline wash, or distil on it a solution of vitriol dissolved in water.
And then separate the eyelid from the eyeball with tweezers and place over the eyeball wool soaked in white of egg, and on the third day use solidifying remedies until it is healed.
Chapter 16.
Of incisions around the nail and the fleshy protuberance of the tear ducts.
Know that there are two kinds of nail: one is nervous and resembles a thin hard cipolla; the other is non-nervous, resembling a white congelated humidity which, when pierced by an iron, either takes on a red color and is not removed from it, or is cut out and the iron is not left in it.
And both these conditions do not improve except by means of the larger tear duct, as it gradually covers the sight and blocks out the light and movement of the eyeball.
The manner of making the incision is for the patient to rest his head in your lap, opening his eyes and raising the eyelid with your hand, then taking up the nail with a pair of tweezers, pulling it gently upwards from above. And then take a needle and thread it with a hair of horse or ox or cow or similar, or a strong gut, doubling over the tip of the needle several times, and pierce the nail with the needle, binding the nail with the thread; pull the hair upwards from above and cut off the hair at the tip of the nail, which is causing the pupil to be affected. And in this way you should draw it through to the back of the eye.
And then you should incise the remaining part in the root of the tear duct with a fine spatula or small forceps, and cut away the flesh of the tear duct naturally so that it does not produce continuous tears as a result of the incision.
And sometimes the nail is extended only with the iron or with thread, as we have said; and then it is cut away with an iron spatula of which this is its form:
And take care not to touch the cornea with the spatula and cause rupture, and that the pupil be perforated.
Then pour into the eye a little ground salt or vinegar made from wine lees, and let it run out the next day; then wash the eye with water until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the iron or thread it, then this kind of nail is cured with remedies, and it is healed in the same way as an eye that has been cut, as will be described below.
And if you wish to incise it, then open the patient's eye and take a fine iron spatula sharpened according to this shape: with thinness. And if it is enlarged and has retreated into the root, then distill wine lees or vinegar made from wine or rose water or salt dissolved in water into the eye, letting it run out the next day.
And then repeat the operation until everything that is of it has been discharged, unless an ulcerated pustule appears in the eye, for then you should let it discharge and heal at the beginning by applying the remedy until it is healed.
And then repeat your operation on it with caution until it is healed.
The fleshy protuberance of the tear duct, if noticed in the eye causing great harm, should be suspended with an iron; then incise it from one side, not finishing the incision so that tears do not flow out.
Then distill wine made from grape must into it until it is healed.
Chapter 17.
Of the incision of the white of the eye and what is born of flesh compressed in the eyeball.
Sometimes in the eyes of some is born red flesh which covers the pupil, or it approaches or presses upon the eyelids and strongly compresses the eyelids against the edges outside and is attached like a warts.
But the operation on it is for the patient to rest his head in your lap, opening his eyes and taking up all the flesh with convenient tweezers or forceps; then incising the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished by means of the incision tool, take care not to injure the eye by your operation.
And your incision should be by which you incised the nail or by spatula as we recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small forceps with which it is collected like an onion according to its form, refer to that chapter.
So when your incision is finished and all the flesh has been discharged, then fill the eye with ground salt or vinegar made from wine, or sprinkle in it red powder resembling that of corrosive medicines, and place over the eyeball a bandage soaked in white of egg until it is secured against an ulcerated pustule.
And if any cause of the white of the eye becomes inflamed and there is a pustule, then let the eye discharge and cure that pustule with what reduces it; then repeat your operation on it until it is healed, and similarly do in the compressed flesh which occurs in this kind of eye.
However, you should know that you prevent all cure of the eye by natural or accidental way, done with an iron, and not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that this member is suffering from that operation.
Chapter 18.
Of the gathering of pus in the eye.
Red veins which are swollen over the eye and prevent its operation, and open the eye for a length of days.
So it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the eye in which there is pus is strong and there is not another illness, then collect that pus.
And it is that you command the patient to rest his head in your lap, then suspend those veins with an iron or two according to your prudence; and let the iron be of fine double wire according to this form:
or two irons sloping into one body according to this form:
And then let those veins be bound with fine cords, with thinness, and wash the blood now and then, until you see those veins become discharged from the eye and are reduced.
And take care not to injure the eye with the tip of the spatula; and if your operation is on the evening side in front of the sun, and keep it steady in your operation that you do not incise except those veins.
And when you have finished, then distill into the eye wine made from grape must or vinegar so that it has an astringent action on what has been discharged from the pus.
But if it is not possible for you to collect everything in that hour, then apply a poultice over everything which relieves the pain of it, and let it remain for several days until the pain of it is appeased and secured against an ulcerated pustule.
Then repeat on it according to the mother method until it is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps:
Chapter 19.
Of the reduction of hernia to the nose.
When you cure arisati with cautery or with sharp medicine burning according as it is preceded by its description and is not healed, then do not enter into it but split the pustule after the maturity of it has been discovered and all the humidity which is in it and the puss has been extracted so that the bone is uncovered.
And when you see that the bones are exposed and blackened by corruption, then you should treat them with an instrument of this shape.
It is called an astringent head, and it should be made of iron, and the head should be round like the eye of a needle, punctured by liming or cauterized by a sublimate (as shown in the following figure).
And apply it to the腐敗 part of the bone, and gently move it around between your fingers, and press your hand gently over it until you feel that the腐敗 is removed.
And this should be done several times, then restore the area with astringent and drying causes.
If the area is consolidated and there is good flesh grown over it, and the body has been healed of the ulcer and remains so for 40 days, and there is no recurrence or incident in that area, then you should know that it is healed.
And if not, then it is not healed but you should reduce the fissure to its natural shape, and according to this method: you should expose the bone with iron or a sharp medicine, and when the bone is exposed, you should take a tribe according to this form:
The tip of the iron should be triangular, and its shaft should taper toward the tip as shown.
Then apply it to the bone, and let it be near the tear; lengthen your arm a little bit, and gently move your hand with the tribe so that it penetrates all the way into the bone, and the patient will feel the pain as you push out the wind through him with your hand.
Then restore the area with astringent, drying medicines just as you healed it.
Then when the flesh and area are hardened, then the matter that was effused to the parts around the wound returns to the nose; therefore, there is pus over the patient.
Chapter .XX.
Of the reduction of a protrusion from the nose.
If it is necessary to reduce the protrusion of the nose, and if there is a fissure, and you find that the protrusion is not good, then you should expose the bone with iron or a sharp medicine according to this shape.
And the way of making these powders is to take pieces of linen cloth and double each piece into four folds; make those pieces.
Then apply them one over another according to the amount that the nose needs. Then tightly bind them with a tough cloth with strong compression; repeat the cupping glasses with sucking while you scarify; then remove the cupping glasses and let the patient lie tightly all day and night.
But if in between, the ligament becomes soft, then let it be somewhat loose.
Then remove the bandage during the day and night as we have said.
And if you see that the nose has been reduced, good; and if not, then repeat the bandage with the powders and compression, and the cupping glasses until it is healed.
Chapter .XXI.
Of the beginning of a protrusion of the tunica uvnea.
If you see that the pain of the head extends from the head to the feet, and if you see that the beginning of the protrusion is in the tunica uvnea, then you should expose all the bones with iron or a sharp medicine according to this shape:
Then remove the needle and apply wool soaked in egg white over the nose and let it lie until the thread falls down with the uvea.
And then heal the nose with that which comforts it until the wound is healed.
And several times gather from all around with a circle of cloth over the nose where there is great protrusion, and let it be pierced with the spatulum which comes to the preon of the nose, and let the white humidity flow, and the nose will descend and in that time.
Then tightly bind until it is healed.
Chapter .XXII.
Of the cure of alconatis.
This illness that is called alconatis is not anything other than an ulcer which is settled in the nose like water flowing down and it is not that.
But the way of working on it is that you make the patient sit up straight and lean forward, and then take his head in your hands from two sides and move it so that you see the ulcer coming to the upper parts; then let it be dried and not flow down, and let there be light, and the patient sees the causes as he looks.
And if it does not flow down below, you should know that it is water.
But if the flow of the ulcer is not prepared with what we have said, then let the patient sit up between your hands and then take a sharp spatulum and fen it over the panniculus covering a little below the continuation of the conjunctiva at the edge of the cornea in the corona (in the area where it is bulging out), so that the ulcer is pushed out.
So when it is pushed out, then you distill water over the nose in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
Then let it be healed with the other causes until it is healed.
Chapter .XXII.
Of the cure of water flowing from the nose.
We have already said about the spices of the water in the division and which agrees to pierce with salt declaring, then that according to health.
Then let the patient sit up straight between your hands over a basket and lean his nose forward, it bent.
Then apply your left hand over the eyelid of his nose, if the nose in which there is water is the left one; or with your right hand, if it is the right one.
Then take alum with your right hand if it is on the left; or with your left hand if it is on the right.
Then place the end of the alum near the edge of the socket by the thickness of the tear in the eyelid of the smaller tear, and apply the alum with strength and rotate your hand with it.
Then enter into the socket of the eye and feel that the alum has already arrived at the lens because you can see clearly.
And it is necessary that the path of alum pass through the space from the pupil to the end of the darkness, and it is the socket of the eye; for you will see with that pupil with the vision of the eye by the clarity of the tunica cornea.
Then place alum within the socket where the water is, and then pull it down from above to below repeatedly; and if the water descends immediately, then the patient will see immediately over which eye he has broken his vision, and alum in the eye.
Then rest a little; therefore, if the water has descended, then you release that other one before alum is thrown out.
And then when it is dried and does not descend, then you extract the alum with ease, and rotate your hand little by little, and then dissolve in the water a little white salt of gemma and wash the eye within; and then place outside the eye a cotton pad or stopped wool or cloth infused in rose oil and albumen of egg and tongue with that.
But we and those who are of our time put on that a trassated comi with albumen of egg.
And if it does not obey you to alum the interior of the eye due to its hardness — for there are some people whose eyes are hard —, then you should take the spatula which is called 'alberid', and this is its form:
Then pierce with that the junction, and do not push your hand into the wound, and it is only so that you make way for alum to reach its location subtly.
And then put in alum as we have said.
And when you have finished your work, the patient's sleeping quarters should be prepared in a dark room where he sleeps on his back in total darkness and all movement prohibited.
And place in nature something so that its nature is smooth, and do not turn his head to the right or left at all.
And let the bandage be according to his disposition on the third day.
And then release that in that dark room and examine his vision, and make him see some causes, and then return the bandage on the seventh day.
And do not do this at the time of the cure or immediately after the infusion. Before you leave, ensure that the water is completely drained so that the eye can recover quickly and completely.
But if inflammation occurs, then you should release the eye on the seventh day, and rectify that with water that reduces inflammation.
Then you should clear his vision and place a poultice on his face orally so that the inflammation of his eye decreases down to him for several days, existing in the dark room.
And then let it be treated in that room gradually and conversed about its causes.
And know that in some cases vision is not restored to the disciple, and then you should be confident about the operation.
And it has come to us from some of those who are the Artach , and some say that it is made by fire in Ayrac magnified perforated with which water is sucked out.
However, I have not seen this done in our land, nor has it been recorded in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of spices so that it be on those who ignore them:
And they are made of gold or silver properly, and they are the extremities of them with this subtle triangular shape, the acute extremity like that is its form.
Chapter 24.
Of the cure of nose pain.
When in the nose are grown various meats united of which is some cause which is assembled to scorpion of words weight, or to polyp stone; and this illness is called polypus because it is like that stone represented. And from it is cancerous meat, scaly, of dusky color; and from it is that there is lion meat not of dusky color.
Then in that which is in these meats not fraudulent nor cancerous, you should make the patient sneeze between your fingers and set him in the sun, and open his nostrils, and prick his nose in those meats. And then extract that to the divided foramen, and then scorch it with something you have understood with a pointed spatula from one foramen inside which you know all the meat has been removed; if he sneezes from it due to any cause for which abscission is possible, then you strike it with one of the subtle instruments with ease so that he sneezes. But if he bleeds or inflammation occurs, then you place on it something that it covers; or if they are malignant ulcers, then you cut and cauterize them so that the bleeding is stopped and all the holes are closed.
And then let it be applied to the nose after incision wine vinegar and water or wine. But if the nose is open and from it flows humidity into the palate, then you know that it has healed.
But if the humidity does not penetrate as you know it, then let it be known that within him is meat in the nose in which there has been no healing of the holes.
Then let it be known that you put oil of the dog in which there is thickness, and wet in him words of a nosebleed, and place between each nose the quantity of a finger or less, and rub the patient's face and insert one extremity of the oil into the nostrils with the ray or for any other cause which it is possible to him.
And then having done this, let him breathe in his odorant so that it reaches the canals of the nostrils, and let him spit out onto his palm, for the children at school do the same, and it is a mild cause to him who wants to do so.
And then place the two extremities of the oil, one extremity that drips on the nose and the other that pierces into the nose, and then administer a cauterization of meat with the nostrils that are in the oil, and do this so that you know the meat has been cauterized.
And then extract the oil, and place in the nose after abscission of blood a cold poultice, and do this for three days or more until you see that it has healed completely.
And then at the end of the cause, place in the nose a lead pipe for several days until it has healed.
But if it is difficult to cure that which has been squashed, use it.
And this is the form of the instrument for cleansing nosebleeds with which are distilled oils and medicines in the nostrils:
And do this with silver or gold, which is like a little open lantern, likewise with little heat, and the meat likewise.
And if you want to, make a closed pipe likewise with reed, and the socket of the instrument for cleansing nosebleeds is flat, uncovered; to which there is handle on it, with which you hold it in him, pouring oil or what you want from the sucks and the causes sucking.
Chapter 25.
Of warts on the ends of the nose:
A brown spot appears on the ends of the nose, and it grows larger in a few days unless the patient is given a cure.
And because of this, you should cut off that spot at its very beginning and remove it all. Then place on the spot a cautery or burning medicine which will remain in place of the spot.
But if its growth has been delayed until it becomes hard and dark-coloured, with little feeling in it, then do not touch that spot with an iron, because such spots usually cause great harm to the person on whom they are.
And if the spot is soft and not dark-coloured, and its growth seems possible in all, then evacuate the patient and cut that spot out without fear, and cure the wound with something that will dry it and draw it together until it is healed.
Chapter 26.
Of the stitching of the nose and the lips and the ears when their continuity is dissolved by a ulcer or a similar wound.
Know that whenever there is an accident of discontinuity in one of these cartilage structures, there are few who perform the operation successfully.
So, whenever for any cause, you find that there is a fresh ulcer with its blood, then bring together the two lips of the ulcer with a suture, and then cure it until it is healed.
And if the lips of the discontinuity of the wound are already separated and each has healed by itself, then cut off each part of the wound that is exposed until its blood issues. Then bring together the two lips with a suture and strengthen them, and over that sprinkle dragon's blood and fine-ground iron pyrites, and place on the powder some of the emollient plaster, or one of the other consolidative plasters, and let it lie for two days or three, and then take off the plaster and change the ointment, and let it lie until the scabs have fallen off by themselves, and then cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
But the manner of the stitching is that you put together the discontinuity with needles as we have recommended in the stitching of the belly, or put together the discontinuity with pitch as we have told you and make known.
Chapter 27.
Of the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips on the parts within.
Many people have in the inner lips of their mouths hard warts resembling the skin of a hornet, and some are small and others large.
So cut through the lips and open up each of those hard growths all around, and then fill the opening with finely-ground sage until the blood is stopped, and then wash it with wine vinegar and cure the wound with something that constricts, until it is healed.
Chapter 28.
Of the cutting of the meat which is attached to the gums.
Often there is on the gum a piece of meat attached which the ancients called albus, so you should suspend that with wax or have it held with tweezers and cut that from its root, and let the blood or sap run out.
Then place on the spot finely-ground sage or other constrictive or astringent powders.
And if that meat returns, then cut it again and cauterize it, for the cautery will not return.
Chapter 29.
Of the reason of teeth with an iron.
When in the surface of the teeth on the inner and outer lips and between the gums are attached rough, sharp, black or green spots which corrupt the gum and make the teeth loose.
So take a sharp knife and make an incision in the patient's mouth, and press on his head with your thumb, and scrape away the teeth where these rough spots appear, and remove their causes, which will resemble sand, so that no cause remains, and this will remove the blackness and the greeness and the other things until they are clean.
So if what is in those at the beginning of the cause is good, so much the better; and if not, then do the cause again on those on another day, and on the second and on the third until it comes to the final point where you want.
And know that teeth have need of many razors of diverse forms and shapes according to your operation. And therefore the razor with which the tooth is scraped from the inner lip is different from the razor with which it is scraped between the teeth, and these forms of razors should be prepared as follows:
Chapter 30.
Of the eradication of teeth.
You should cure the tooth of its pain with every artifice and delay in complete eradication of it, for there is no cause that excuses it when it becomes visible as soon as it is eradicated, for it is a sublimated substance which causes excuse in its eradication.
But if the patient is forced to have that tooth eradicated, you must be certain which is the painful tooth, for many times pain deceives the patient and remains while the tooth is healthy, and you eradicate it and then the pain does not cease until the painful and sick tooth has been eradicated, for we have already seen this through operation of the barbarians.
So when you are certain which is the painful tooth, and that you know it, then cut around the circuit of the tooth with a chisel in which there is some vertidity, so that it is dissolved from the gum on all sides, and then maul it with your fingers or with fine pincers little by little until you concuss it.
Then put in it strong tenacles with great force or grip strongly, and press the head of the patient between your teeth which do not hurt him, and then pull the tooth according to rectitude in a manner that you do not break it, nor give the patient major pain.
And if it is not loose, then take one of those instruments and put that down all around with ease and effort the removal of it in such a way as it was done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is cracked or hollow, then fill that crack and tighten it with a subtle wire on the end so that it does not loosen when you apply your constriction to it while you are holding it.
And you should open widely with scraping around the circuit of all parts of the gum and keep your strength so that you do not break it, and return to the patient for the malice which is greater than the first pain of him.
And beware that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their audacity about the eradication of them, for they do not administer what we have recommended; for many times great sicknesses come upon men which are very difficult to loosen, and their teeth are very hollow or all rotten, or they extract it with some bones from the mandible as we have often witnessed.
Then the patient's mouth should be washed with wine vinegar or wine mixed with salt.
And if blood flows from the wound, as well as several vesicles, then sprinkle some powdered vitriol over the wound and if it does not stop, cauterize.
The shape of the tweezers and thin tongs with which a tooth is extracted at the beginning should have a long shaft, a short handle, and be thick so that they do not bend when you are working with them.
And let the tweezers have such a thick shaft that when you are pulling with them they do not bend, and short shafts.
And let them be made of iron from India descending from straight shafts, and at the ends of those there are teeth which fit into each other and extract by strong compression, and sometimes the ends of those are in the shape of a stork's beak, which is hooked, and they are of strong compression.
Chapter 31.
Of the extraction of teeth and of the dislocation of the bones of the jaw when it is broken.
When you need to extract a tooth which is broken due to some cause, then you should apply a poultice over the site for one or two days until the site is softened; and then insert tweezers or tongs, the ends of which are like the beak of an owl called a stork, or hooked, in the shape of forceps:
The ends of them are made flat like a file or an alfileter.
And if it does not obey you with these forceps or tongs, then you should cut above the gum and uncover all the flesh and insert the instrument which is called a lever, a small one of which the shape is as follows:
And let it be short and thick at one end, and not bent so that it does not break.
Therefore if through this the gum is pierced, that is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the shapes: the shape of the first instrument is triangular at one end, in which there should be some thickness:
The shape of the second instrument is that it is triangular and very thin at the end.
And you are helped with this instrument having two ramps, of which this is the shape, properly following: and with other instruments which are used in the extraction of teeth; for help is done with this instrument which is like a wild ox, and this is the shape:
of the triangular end bent or short, which should have some thickness, and not bent so that it does not break.
And another wisdom is that the instruments for teeth are many and similar to the other instruments.
But the wise and skilled artist in the art finds for himself materials according to what he understands from the operation and various illnesses; for there are illnesses to which the ancients did not give or assign proper instruments because of the forms of diverse species.
But if the bone of the jaw or of the other bones of the mouth is broken, or if it is dislocated, then let the foot be treated in its place with what is convenient for him from the instruments and forceps which we have said in the extraction of the gums of teeth; and help yourself with a gesture of which this is the shape:
And let there be some thickness added to it little by little, and let it be pressed or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or slip until the bone of all is softened; and then restore the site with suitable medicines for it.
But if there is a little dislocation in the bone, then scrape away that dislocation and its darkness, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter 32.
Of the cure of teeth which project above others.
When teeth are prominent not according to their natural form because of that shape, and especially when it happens to women, and especially to old women; therefore you should consider: if a tooth is adjacent to another tooth, and there is no possibility of lancing or lining it, then extract that tooth; but if it is not adjacent to another tooth, then you insert that tooth with this instrument of which this is the shape; and it is like the jaw of a pig, and let it be made of iron from India, of very acute form.
And let your insertion with which you insert that be in turns for the hardness of the tooth, and let it not be broken by another of the teeth.
And if the prominent tooth is worn away to a file, then file that with an iron file from India of which this is the shape:
And let all of it be of iron from India, and the edge evenly; and let it be of very fine points like a file with which needles are made, with which the tooth is filed little by little in a few days with ease, so that no other tooth is broken or chipped. And then line it at the edge, and scrape it away with some razor.
And if a tooth of which one part is broken and lacerated the tongue, then let you smooth that until the roughness of that fracture is worn away and dulled, and let it be flattened so that the tongue is not cut or the speech impaired.
Chapter 33.
Of the restoration of worn teeth with gold or silver wire.
When it happens to the teeth before concussion and removal by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot bear what he eats, and you have treated that with astringent medicines, and your treatment has not availed, then because they do not close up, there is wire made of gold and not of silver; for silver becomes blackened and then dislocates after some days, but gold never changes.
And let the wire be of such fineness and thickness according to the quantity which can enter between the teeth; and the shape of the restoration is that you take the wire and wrap it around the double of its width between two healthy teeth, and then that it grows with two tortuosity of the wire between two worn teeth, or if one or many, until it reaches the gum on the healthy tooth from the other broken part. And then tighten the wire around the part from which you begin, and strengthen your work with ease and skill so that it is not worn.
And let your tightening of the wire around which you tighten the wire, so that the teeth do not escape.
And then insert the ends of the excess wire with tweezers or tongs, and add those in every site with a gesture, and fold them and conceal them between the healthy tooth and the worn tooth, so that it does not harm the tongue. And then let it be as tight as possible like Roman.
But if it is loose or jagged, tighten that or those with another wire in the same way at all times.
And this is the form of teeth and the figure of the restoration of two healthy teeth and two worn teeth, as follows:
And when a tooth or two return to their place after the falling of any of them in their sites, and they are restored as we have described, and they are worn again.
And it is not done except by wise artists.
And sometimes it happens because of some cause of the bones of a cow, and it is made like a tooth in form, and it is placed in the site where the tooth failed, and it is tightened as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
Of the beginning of the disease that affects the tongue and prohibits speech.
This condition that affects the tongue can be either innate or accidental and caused by a plague which has already become consolidated.
The operation on the patient is to open his mouth, lift up his head and elevate his tongue, then cut that nervous ligament according to the width through which the tongue has become detached from its attachment.
But if there is any hardness or knotting, and this is due to the consolidation of a plague, then you shall cut it with a knife and split it up to the width at which you split the ligament and the knot has been dissolved.
And take care that there is not made a fissure in the muscle of the jaw, and that you split up the artery and cause a flow of blood.
Then the trace of the incision is to be washed with wine or vinegar, or with water, and a linen cloth is to be placed beneath the tongue; if there is any swelling which the patient has under his tongue on any night and it has not become consolidated in another way, then this should be done.
But if blood flows, then apply powdered vitriol to the spot; but if it oozes out, then cauterize the spot with a cautery which is suitable for this purpose. And let that be treated with the other remedies until it is healed.
Chapter XXXV.
Of the extraction of a ranula beneath the tongue.
Sometimes beneath the tongue there occurs an abscess resembling a small onion, which prevents the tongue from performing its natural function, and it grows larger as it fills up the mouth.
The operation is to open the patient's mouth facing towards the sun and examine the abscess.
And if you see it of a dusky colour or black, hard, and the patient feels nothing when you touch it, then do not touch that because it is deadly.
And if it is white and moist, then put a knife in it and cut it all the way through; and if blood flows during the time of your operation, then put powdered vitriol on it so that the blood is staunched.
Then return to your work and treat it as you would have done if there had been no bleeding; after washing it with vinegar and salt, let the wound be treated with the other treatment for this disease until it is healed.
Chapter XXXVI.
Of the extraction of an abscess between two ears, and that which is found in the neck, and of the other abscesses.
When there is swelling in the neck, it consists of glands which are united like cotton; these become inflamed and are named two ears, and when you treat them as we have said in the previous chapter, if they are not healed, then consider whether the abscess is hard, dusky in colour, with little feeling, then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of a red colour and the root is thick, then do not touch it with iron because of the flow of blood; before you leave it, either you will draw it out or it will break open by itself.
And if it is of a white colour, soft, and the root thin, then that is what should be cut.
And the operation is that you should consider before your operation whether the abscess has already been cauterized to completion or has decreased by any decrease; and then cause the patient, facing towards the sun, his head in your lap, to open his mouth, and the assistant taking hold of his hands press his tongue down below with a noble instrument, of which this is the shape:
And it should be made of silver or brass, and be fine with a point.
Then when you press the tongue down with that and the abscess is shown to you, and you put your instrument over it, then take a knife and stab that in the centre outward as far as you can. Another which pierces through the tunics, and then cut that with an instrument of which this is the shape:
Another which pierces through the tunics, and then cut that with an instrument of which this is the shape: It is like forceps but its ends are bent inwards so that the orifice of each is towards the other, and it is sharp and made of iron, tempered and greased.
But if that instrument is not available to you, then cut it with a knife of which this is the shape: It should be sharp on one side but blunt on the other.
And after you have cut one vein, cut the other according to this method of cutting; and then have the patient guard his mouth with water.
But if blood flows, guard it with water of a decoction of bark of pomegranate or of bay-leaf in the same way as for the causes which are constrictive so that the flow of blood is staunched; and then let that be treated in the same way as the others until it is healed.
And sometimes there occur in the neck other abscesses besides those two ears, and cut them according to what you see and say about the cutting of two veins equally.
And there was once treated a woman of an abscess which was found in the neck, which abscess was dusky in colour and had little feeling; it closed the neck of her throat, and the woman breathed with difficulty and was prohibited from eating or drinking water, and she had reached death if she had lived for one day or two.
And the abscess had grown so large that it had reached to her two ribs on either side.
Then he cut it with a knife and took it out, and it came away as a great lump; then he opened the mouth of the patient, and pressed his tongue down, and then he put the knife in that abscess.
And then he cut a large piece out of it, and not much blood flowed from it. Then the neck of that woman was entirely closed up and she began to drink water immediately, and then he ate food; therefore he did not cease cutting that abscess many times over a long time, and afterwards another abscess occurred in place of it which he cut so that it is prolonged.
Then he bled and cauterized the neck of her, then she died on the spot; and afterwards he walked about for a long time but I did not know what God did to her.
Chapter XXXVII.
Of the cutting of the uvula when it is abscessed.
When mucous matter flows from the uvula and it is abscessed and long, then that is called perpendicular; and if at its base it is thick and rounded, then it is called a buba.
But if it is cured by what we said in the previous chapter and does not comply with your treatment, and afterwards you see that the abscess cauterized has become small and thin; and if it is towards the length, and is sanguineous, of dusky colour or black, and the patient feels nothing there, then fear that you touch the patient.
And when you see it according to the way that I have said of its whiteness and length, then make the patient open his mouth and press his tongue down with an instrument of which we have said the shape and put a knife in the new one, and draw that towards you and cut it with one of two instruments which are bent like a pair of tongs.
And you should not cut anything except what is over the natural limit, for if you cut more, you will harm their speech.
Then the incision, use that which we have recommended in the incision of two holes, and heal inside what is healed.
But if the patient was frightened by the incision, use trickery in his cauterization to reduce their fear, and the method of the cautery on him is simply a sharp instrument; then place the patient's head on your lap, and firmly press their tongue with the tool which we mentioned, then take the water which we mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and mix it with some live charcoal, and pour it into the hollow of the instrument of which this is the shape:
Let the end of it be hollowed out like a spoon, and place the medicine inside as well as the concavity of the spoon, then place the instrument with the medicine over the wound; the patient should lie on their side so that saliva or mucous from their mouth runs down due to the intense medicine, so that none of it falls back into their throat and chokes them.
Then hold the medicine in your hand, and squeeze it onto the uvula through a space of about half an hour until you see it become blackened and numbed by the medicine.
And if you wish, take a needle and wrap it in the medicine at its end, then immerse the needle in the medicine and insert the needle with the cotton into the uvula until the cotton adheres to the uvula inside; do this as many times as needed until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, then let it be for three or four days until it dries up and falls off.
And if you see that the medicine needs to be reapplied, then do so; and after the cauterization, wipe the area around the uvula with a cotton swab dipped in a bowl of water, then cleanse it with whatever is in the bowl of water, then wash it with warm water, and dress the wound outside with ointment, and inside with unguents until it heals.
And this type of treatment is more safe than incision and less frightening.
Sometimes the uvula is healed by something more subtle than cauterization or incision, for it is cured by fumigation in this manner: take calamus, hyssop, oregano, rue, Arabic thistles, chamomile, broom and similar plants to those herbs, and put all of these ingredients, or some of them, into a bowl, then immerse them in boiling wine; let the bowl be warmed with decent heat, and there should be a hole in the middle of the bowl on which to place an hollow instrument made of silver or copper.
Then insert the end into the patient's mouth so that the steam reaches their uvula through the tube, until the uvula is very foggy.
Then do this several times until it is dry; and beware of doing this cure at the beginning of an apoplectic fit, for it would push the apoplexy too far into the brain, and you should not do this, but wait until the apoplexy has subsided.
But if you do not have this instrument at hand, then take a reed and fix a plug of wool at its end so that the patient's mouth is closed off; for the wool plug prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is beneficial to health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
Of the extraction of thorns and of what adheres in the throat, and of other causes.
Many times something adheres in the throat or a thorn from the foot or some other cause.
Then you must extract what is visible from it, then press the tongue with an instrument in front of your eyes, so that you see what is in the throat.
And what is hidden in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food becomes digested in the stomach, for the cause of the throat often resides there; or the patient should swallow a piece of napkin or a ball of lettuce or a loaf of dry bread; or they could swallow a piece of dry sea sponge, and then chew it with their teeth, then they should swallow it, for when it reaches the spot in the throat where the thorns are, they will be driven out. Or take an eel and chew it with their teeth, then swallow it, or take a pig's tail and chew it and spit it out.
But if they are not driven out by those causes which we have mentioned, then use an instrument made of lead in this shape:
And it should be bigger than a small needle, and at its end there should be a hollow which you insert into the patient's throat with ease.
And let the patient hold their head up, and beware of touching their bones in the throat, so that it does not move them or touch the thorn or anything else; then let the doctor hold his hand there.
But if the patient wants to insert it themselves due to their knowledge of the location of the cause and they push it in and pull out their hand according to the amount that is prepared for them, then it will be driven out.
Chapter XXXIX.
Of the extraction of blood which adheres in the throat.
When the blood is stopped by what we have said in the division of treatment with medicines and does not respond, then consider the throat of the patient when you press their tongue with the instrument which we have recommended.
Therefore if you see the blood, extract it with a small needle or a very thin and decently pointed one.
And if you are unable to extract it with that, then take a hollow tube and insert it into the patient's throat; then place a hot iron in the hollow of the tube, and do this several times until the blood is dead and comes out of their throat; then the patient should abstain from all water for the whole day.
Then take a pitcher full of warm water, and pour it into their mouth, then rinse their mouth with it; do not swallow any of the water, just spit it out after an hour has passed, then hold your hand over their mouth again for another hour, for when the blood is dead, it will come out immediately.
But if it is not driven out by what we have recommended, then smoke the patient's throat with camphor or asafoetida through the instrument which we recommended for smoking the uvula.
Do this until it falls.
And there is another way to smoke it: take a bowl in which there are burning coals and the bowl should be covered with a lid that has a hole in it; then place the end of the instrument in the hole, and let the smoke out through the instrument; then hold the patient's mouth over the end of the tube, and close their mouth so that the smoke does not escape until you know that the smoke has reached the blood, for the blood will fall immediately.
And if it does not work, then do the smoking many times; and let the patient abstain from drinking, and eat salt causes and eggs, and drink no water; and by this regimen it will be driven out.
This is the shape of the instrument with which blood is drawn from the vein when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps except that there is some curvature in it. which is placed on the vein, and its end is similar to a stork's beak, which is gloved, in which it is tightened with a file, so that when we press for any reason, it does not slip.
Chapter 40.
In which is the sum of the speech in the opening of abscesses and their section.
Abscesses are of many kinds, according to what is remembered about them, of each one in this book.
And they are diverse in their puncturing and sectioning in two ways, of which one is by the species of abscesses themselves; and because we compress them by the moisture.
And the second way is by the places in which they occur in the body, for the abscess that occurs in the head is different from that in the buttocks; and the abscess in the fleshy part is different from that in the joint; and each of them is treated by operation.
And some abscesses there are which must not be punctured but rather matured in the pus in them, or completed.
And other abscesses there are which must not be punctured when they are tough, and not matured according to their complement, as well as abscesses which are near the joints; for an abscess which comes near a joint prolongs its being in that it affects the ligaments or nerves of that joint, through which there is contraction of that member; or it is an abscess near a principal member, and if you delay its puncturing when it is mature it will harm the principal member; or it is near the buttocks, and one must not let it mature, but rather to puncture it, so that the pressure on it may not be prolonged and it elongated to the parts within the buttocks, and a fistula made, or that it be done in its term so that it will not be healed. But you must know the hour of the puncturing of the abscess, and that is when it is mature.
And you should know that it is mature when there is the ceasing of the pain and the fever, and moreover the lessening of the heat and the pulse, and the acute feeling of the head of the abscess, and the other signs.
And because you should know the puncturing to occur in the place where there is pus below the abscess, and also pus coming from the healing of the eminence.
And the puncturing is always through the length of the flesh or body if the abscesses are in the parts of the hands or feet, and in the place of the tendons, of the cords of the nerves, of the grooves; and, at last, in all places alike in which there is no reflection; for in those where it is reflected, use puncturing according to that member.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to let its puncturing be so that its digestion is confirmed according to its complement, as we have said; for if you puncture it before that, the course of the pus of it is prolonged and much filthiness comes from it, and moreover its lips are hardened and its depth.
But some abscesses are punctured according to the latitude of the flesh or body by reason of necessity, or according to that by which the member needs.
And you should administer a small puncturing in small abscesses, and in large abscesses great puncturing and ample or many sections according to the diversity of the sizes of the abscesses.
And some are of abscesses in which the vein is hollowed out and cut into, when it is made thus so that bread and made is in term that it already is, as well as that which occurs in trops of dubelec and of buboes.
And of those some are that are cut into with three angles; and of those is the one in which it is cut as the shape of a leaf of mirtle, as well as the abscesses of the angle-makers.
And of those some are in which round section and lunar section is administered, and like those.
But that to which there is not head as with its abscesses superficial, you should puncture it with superficial puncturing, or plane only.
And when the abscess is large and has collected much pus, you should puncture it and not be afraid to draw out all the pus in that hour; having drawn from it a part, then plug up the abscess for another day, and moreover draw a larger part, and do this many times according to degree until it is hole-gutted.
And especially if the patient is of cold nature, or woman in labour, or small child, or old person in decrepitude, for the animal spirit many times is resolved by the egress of pus, and very often the patient dies, and you operate on them.
Therefore keep this chapter with great caution, and moreover your puncturing in which you puncture these abscesses, you should wash the plagues and consider then if the plague of the abscess is little, or a flat section, then you administer lambs' wool or old linen; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the puncturing are many, then you must pause a moment in each piercing until they come out.
And if in the abscess a part of the vein is cut into or hollowed out in its circuit, then you must complete it with old linen or thread made from cloth of lamb's wool, as well as when you have drawn pans or roots, without moisture; and plug up that for the third day; and moreover process it and heal it by what means of enguentz within that it is healed.
But if blood flow occurs in the hour of your operation, then you should administer water and wine mixed in which lamb's wool is dipped, and pause that over the place of the blood flow many times.
But if the blood flow persists, then you must administer remedy and healing, and powder which I have recommended in many places of this our book and division.
But if it is in the winter time, and the place of the abscess is the place of many nerves, then you should dip wool in wine and oil cautery, and pause that over the places.
And if it is in summer, and the places are fleshy, then you should pause wool wetted with water and oil or wine and oil, and all that be rubbed within that it is the third day as we have said, and moreover you unbind the abscess and wash that and administer in its healing what to it befits within that it is healed.
And that is what is necessary for the knowledge of the healing of abscesses generally, but according to the way of distinction I have said of each abscess in what manner its way of cure is by chapters singularly.
Chapter 41.
Of section of abscesses which come in the vein of the head.
In the vein of the head small abscesses, and they are of species of knots which contain membranes that they are to them made; and their species is many.
And of them there are bumps, and some contain moisture similar to lime. And of those some contain moisture similar to dust, and like it; and of those some are scaly, hard.
And in the section of all these, and in the extraction of them there is not fear, as you must extract those it does not contradict artery.
And the operation in section of those is that you expect those with an instrument, the shape of which comes to light, which is called a trocar, while you know it contains.
For if that which is contained is humidity, then cut that with a section according to length by superficial section according to this form:
And begin the section of the line from B to G. Therefore when the humidity is evacuated, then you should open that which contains the humidity, and not leave any cause behind, for if any remains, it will return.
Then submerge the wound in Egyptian ointment, if available, and if not, in water and salt; fill that with it and let it remain for another day, for with that you will腐蝕腐蝕 everything that is left of that membrane.
Then apply Egyptian ointment to the wound a second and third time if you need to, while ensuring that there is no cause of that membrane left; then cure the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if an abscess contains a fatty nodule, then you should cut that according to this form: with a section having the form of a cross, and cut off the edges between the two lips of the section and cut that all the way through, and use your strength in pulling out the membrane which contains that.
But if your bowstring causes you difficulty, then do what I told you at first.
And similarly do with the suppurating abscess in terms of section and cure according as we have told you; and a section on a suppurating abscess is easier, for it contains little blood and little humidity.
And some times there are some of these abscesses in the head in certain people with which there is no humidity at all; the cause of that is when one has struck an abscess on the head of an old woman and found the abscess like dumb, rough, white stone, which could not be pierced, and if one hits it, it hurts.
But with the other accidents of abscesses in the head there is not this matter, as with the abscesses that come to the heads of children and from the roots of the ears; but the section of these should be superficial sections.
And make the opening of those from their lowest part so that the body is separated from the putridity at its lower parts.
Then cure those with whatever is appropriate for that cure.
Chapter .XLI.
Of sections of scrofula which occurs in the neck.
Many times these abscesses occur in the neck and armpits and angles; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those which occur in the neck, and some are engendered between them, and all scrofula of these is within its own membrane, and similarly with the nodules and abscesses of the head as we have related.
And the species of these scrofula are many, for some are stony, and some contain humidity, and some are malignant and do not obey cure.
Therefore with that which you see of good disposition in the Touching, of which the colour of what is manifest is close to the colour of the skin, and is swollen throughout all parts, and is not annexed by the nerves of the neck or the veins or the bowstring, and is not deep, so that you open that with a superficial cut from above down from the part above the body from the line of G. between the line of B., and scorch that all over, and cut off its edges from two lips of the skin with an incision, or with many incisions if you have need of them, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and pull that out little by little.
And it is more careful that the vein or nerve not be cut.
And be careful that your hand not move with the incision or disturb the patient, and cut what is not necessary to be cut; for if you cut a vein or bowstring and forbid yourself from your operation, then apply to the wound vitriol triturated or other powders which stop fluxes of blood, and tightly bind the wound, and let that remain until the acuteness of the abscess is relaxed and the wound softened and begins to suppurate. When the blood is abstained.
Therefore return to your operation until you have completed it.
Then inquire with your finger whether any cause of the other small scrofula is left; therefore cut those and clean those.
And if there is a large vein in the root of the scrofula, so that you do not cut that scrofula from its root. Beforehand so that you hold that with strong folded cloth and let that remain until it falls down without doing harm.
Then fill the wound with old dung which you have already immersed in Egyptian ointment, and then cure that.
And if you cut that scrofula all the way through, then so that you press the two lips of the wound and suck it at once so that no superfluity remains.
But if you see that there is superfluity due to the size of the scrofula, so that you intend to cut its root, and open that and administer cauterization and what has been said.
And that of the scrofula which contains humidity, pierce that with a superficial piercing where you see to you the place of its maturity, and make the piercing of that which is lowest in the body as we have said.
Then administer cauterization, and apply ointment and similarly to those for so that it corrodes what is left of the corrosion. Then when you see the wound already cleaned, then cure that with ointment of generative flesh until it is healed.
Chapter .XLI.
Of section of the pustule of the suppurating abscess within the gullet.
They have not yet seen this section in the pilhot, and there has been no man in our land who that has done that.
And this is the inscription of the term of those.
But with men having scurvy, so that the extraction of the pilhot is avoided, for by that not being done there is not made ease for so that all the veins and the major nerves of the patient are here.
But with those who have suppurating abscesses in the mouth or gullet or two ears, when the illness is not in the throat, so use the section of pilhot to avoid the peril which is done by piercing.
So therefore when we want that, let us cut the pilhot beneath three circles of the circles of the pilhot, or four with small section for its breadth in him which is between two circles for quantity, and the section is in pharynx, not in the cartilage, and that place is appropriate to section, for it is deprived of flesh and the vessels of blood from there are drawn.
And if the patient is pallid, so that he extends the skin of the gullet with an incision, and then split the skin so that it arrives to the canal, but avoid the vessels of blood if you see any cause from those.
Then cut the septum according as we have recommended; and it is signified about the section of the gullet by the flame which is from there exhaled and by the breath from there abstained.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Thus when the hour arrives in which piercing is feared, cut two lips from the edge of the wound and sew them up to the cartilage only.
Then administer medicines that promote the growth of new flesh where it is healthy.
And Al-Bukasi says that the gist of what we have narrated is simply that some people have seen patients who have suffered from this type of abscess and the patient has died, and the flesh has become necrotic, and some try to insert a tube into the glottis so that the patient can breathe through the wound to save them from death.
And for this reason he commanded that the wound be left open until the evil of the illness is consumed, and its evil lasts three days; then afterwards, he commanded to sew up the wound, and heal it once it is healthy.
And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant held a hot cloth to his throat and inserted the end of a cane into his glottis, and I was called to treat him; then I discovered the abscess and found blood which had oozed from the abscess.
Then he confessed that he hadn't pierced any vein or artery; rather, the pus had come out of the abscess and I treated it until it was healed.
And the servant didn't feel any pain except when he spoke; then after a few days he returned to his usual state.
And now I say that in the section of the glottis there is no fear.
Chapter 44.
Of an incision on an abscess which occurs in the exterior glottis and is called a glottal hernia.
This hernia of the glottis is a large abscess according to the colour of the body and occurs in women.
And it occurs in two ways: either naturally or accidentally.
The natural type is incurable.
And the accidental type occurs in two ways: one is like fatty lumps and the other type is like an abscess caused by arterial congestion; there is danger in that. And do not use a needle on it unless it is small. And examine it and investigate it with your finger, and if you find it like a fatty lump and not suspended by any vein, then pierce it in the same way as nodules; extract its contents along with the skin and bursa; otherwise, probe throughout its entire extent, and treat the area with something that promotes healing until it is healthy.
Chapter 45.
Of incisions on nodules.
Nodules have different types and I have already discussed all of their types in Division.
And you should also know the difference between a nodule and an ulcer if you are in doubt.
Therefore I say that an ulcer is hot and painful with a violent fever until the ebullition of the superfluity ceases; then when the fever, pain, and heat cease, it is complete putrefaction.
But a nodule does not have heat or fever or pain, and it contains the lion's tooth which is a proper sac.
And it is according to the colour of the body; its beginning is with a boil and it is caused in the same way as a boil, whether major or minor; and there are two types, either fatty and containing humidity, and the colours of humidity vary, as I discussed in Division.
Therefore, when you come to treat a nodule, open it and probe its beginning with the instrument that is called an introducer, according to the form that will appear in the chapter that follows.
And this is the way to probe abscesses and all nodules: take this instrument and insert it into the moist part which you find in the abscess, and rotate your fingers with it little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the edge.
Then close your hand around it according to the size of the abscess; then extract the introducer and examine what has oozed from it.
And if the pus is flowing out, whatever its colour, then you shall pierce it superficially as I have said regarding other abscesses.
And if there is no pus flowing from the introducer, then you shall know that it is fatty.
And dry it by piercing in a cross shape according to this shape: And if it is fatty and dry, then you shall dry it by cutting the sac of the nodule.
But if it is ruptured in the operation, then it is not possible to extract that pus; rather, many times it goes back inside, and then you shall extract it in small amounts until it doesn't go back inside for any reason.
For if from it anything goes back inside, little or a lot, the nodule returns according to the cause.
And if you see that anything small goes back inside, then complete the wound with some sharp corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, and place your hand over it so that there is no abscess; then heal it by another treatment until it is healthy.
And if it is a large nodule, then cut its two lips and heal it with that which makes it grow inside.
But if there is a pulsating vein on it, or a non-pulsating one, then bind and fill the area with bloodletting that is mild and let it flow for two or three days until the wound stops ebullition and the blood; then return to piercing where it has ruptured.
Chapter 46.
Of the forms of necessary instruments in incision and piercing.
Those are the forms of introducers; they are of three types: one is large, one medium, and one small.
The form of a large introducer is thus:
And the form of a small introducer is thus:
They are made of iron, brass, or extreme tips tipped evenly so that the instrument pierces the abscesses.
And these are the forms of experienced introducers and one is called a probe.
And they are of three types: large, medium, and small.
The form of an experienced large introducer is thus:
And the form of a medium probe is thus:
And the form of a small probe is thus:
And take care to insert the introducers according to the type of nodule, and whether it is fatty or humid.
And do not pierce around, large, long, in the same way as large needles with which the stitches are sewn; they are made of ram citrine, or brass, or iron, and the needles are when they are made of ram citrine.
And they are made the experiments of black feathers, which are agreed that through these there be openings in the cavities of which are reflections, that are reflected by their levity to those reflections.
And they are of three kinds, for some of them are long, and others smaller, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and its tightness.
The shape of the great experiment of lead:
The shape of the smaller experiment of lead:
The shape of the small experiment of lead:
The shapes of the hunchbacks are of many kinds, for some of them are simple, having only one curve, and they are of three kinds: large, few and small.
And their bodies are unciform, and they are of three kinds.
And some have two curves, and they are of three kinds.
And some have three curves, and they are of three kinds.
And all these are necessary in their place.
The shape of a rare simple hunchback, its shape is:
The shape of a large hunchback having two curves: The shape of a small hunchback having two curves: The shape of a rare hunchback having two curves:
The shape of a large hunchback having three curves:
The shape of a small hunchback having three curves:
And these are the shapes of the scalpels with which they are dried and cut out the nodes and the apostemes, and they are of three kinds: large, small, and rare.
The shape of a large scalpel:
The shape of a small scalpel:
The shape of a rare scalpel:
The ends of those with which the section is made are acute and the other ends are not acute, and they are not placed in such a way, but that it is made gently in the scraping of the nodes for fear of cutting a vein or nerve, and by these the patient is healed and a little peace is given by the burning which gives peace to the excoriation of the aposteme.
And these are the shapes of bandages, and they are of three kinds: large, small, and rare, as well as with plasters.
They are made of linen and are similar to a web with which is made a splint.
And it is in the pointed end punctured with spathium obscured and in that which runs to the sides within and without, when you will, as well as with vision.
The shapes of spathiums, which are obscured between the fingers for fear of piercing the apostemes and not perceiving the patients, and they are of three kinds: large, small, and rare. And these are the shapes of those:
The shapes of woundings with which is abstained the flow of blood, and they are of three kinds: large, small, and rare; their shapes are:
They are made of citron wood, round with no length, and they are subtle.
And if these species of woundings are great, small and rare, that by them you abstain the flow of blood with velocity in necessity, and then when first there is no medicine.
However, do not use these to abstain blood in any part of the body, and do not use them except in fleshy parts, as well as in the spots of the hands and feet, and in the spots of the arms, and of the breasts and of the belly and of the armpits, and like their spots fleshy moist.
And some are made of those instruments other small ones like slices of fruits according to this form; by which blood is abstained when it is done by phlebitis, or for fear of cutting a vein or an artery.
And some are made round according to this form:
Chapter XLVII.
Of the cure of the breasts of men which are like women's.
Some men's breasts are swollen because of the habit of sleeping with their bellies pressed against something, and then they are swollen, and their breasts are like women' breasts, and Roman apostemes.
And for him who eats that, when you pierce those with lunar section according to this form, from the line of B. to the line of G., and then scrape away all the thickness, and then fill the wound with medicine of embodiment, and then sew together the two lips of the wound, and cure what is healed.
But if the breast declines to the sides and is softened by its size as well as in women, then let it be split into two parts below its sides, with two sections similar to a lunar figure, of which each contains the other according to its end, with the major line containing the minor one according to this form from the line of B. to the line of G. And then scrape away the cord which is between the lips of the wound, and the pingueza, and administer what we have said about the sewing and the powders that are necessary in the cure until it is healed.
And if you do not complete the piercing of what there is to be pierced for the uneasiness of the patient, and for the flow of blood, then let it be filled with a cut of cotton submerged in corrosive ointment and leave that wound until it corrodes what is roms of the gray one, and then cure what is healed.
Chapter XLVIII.
Of piercing of apostemes that come from below the tittles.
Those apostemes that come from below the tittles are of the species of scrophulas, hard, which contain one membrane that is dry.
And of those some contain moisture; and of those which contain moisture let them be pierced with lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G. to the line of B. And when all that is evacuated which is in the aposteme of the pus, then fill it with cotton wool and wash the wound on the other day.
And then let the cotton be worn out and healed with ointment convenient to that, until it is healed.
And if the aposteme of the species of nodes and of scrophulas, then let them be split over that as we have said in the section about scrophulas.
But if the wound is extended into that which causes burning pain, then administer in it cautery according to what we have said before.
Chapter XLIX.
Of section of apostemes that happen by artery or vein.
When the artery is broken and the vein is consolidated which is over that, then let many woundings happen to the aposteme by the nerves: for when the aposteme is by artery it is long aggregated in the fibre of the body; and when pressed by the ties of the nerve, it feels in the body as if it were stridor.
And that which is through the vein is returned to the front of the body.
And an ulcer on this boil is an error, and especially in those that are below the armpits, and in the angles, and in the neck, and in many parts of the body; and it is very great, therefore one must avoid its cure with iron, and that which is in the extremities, or on the head, should be avoided.
But for that which is through inflammation of the orifice of the artery, split in the long section in the neck; and then open the section with nails and the artery, and free the tissues within so that it is exposed.
And then place a needle over it and make it penetrate into the other side, and tighten the artery with a double thread in two places, — which causes you to feel pain in extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
And then puncture the place that is between two tendons with a spatula so that blood comes out of it, and the ulcer is dissolved.
And then administer treatment in which pus is generated so that the tendons fall away; and then cure that with convenient ointment until it is healed.
And if it is an ulcer through a section of a vein, then you must hold with your hand what is possible of the ulcer with the tendon, and then insert the needle below the place which you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and let there be double thread in that so that you extract that from the other side, and then tie the ulcer with a good tendon according to what I have told you in the tendon of grapevines with two parts with two extremities of the thread.
But if you fear that you will extract the thread, then insert the needle below all of the ulcer opposite to the first needle, and tighten your threads in four places.
Then dry the ulcer in the middle of it so that when it is dried up you cut away the superfluity of the tendon, and leave what is tied to it.
And then place upon it powder which you have submerged in wine and oil, and then administer the treatment which is made with leaches and ointment until it is healed.
Chapter 1 of the ulcer which occurs through twisting of nerves.
So when there is an ulcer in the artery and in the vein, and similarly there is an ulcer in the nerves through their impact or through similar excess,
And it is made in places of the helpers or the heel, or in any place in which there are pained joints.
And it is a grave ulcer, and it is similar to the color of the rest of the body, and in its major parts there are no pulse beats from them, and when it is pressed with force, the patient feels like he is stunned.
And it is not an ulcer accumulated in the front of the body, and for that reason it is below the tendon, and it is pained in all parts and does not go to the parts in front or behind.
Therefore of those that are in the joints one should not think it will be cured with iron, for it will quickly cause contraction.
But he who is on the head or on the forehead let him split the tendon with a spatula. But if it is a small ulcer, then cut that with knives and extract it from its roots.
And if it is large, then you suspend it with a hook and scrape that, and then dress that wound; and attach the bandage with sutures, and cure that until it is healed.
Chapter .11.
Of section of an ulcer which occurs in the jaw that occurs in the abdomen.
It happens to some men many times in their bellies and in the other parts of their bodies from those whose names are called funguals for their similarity to mushrooms, of which the roots are subtle and the tops are large; and already the lips of those are twisted, and it is in those who are small, and it is in those who are much magnified.
And I have already seen one, and in his belly there were two which were similar to mushrooms, and there was no difference between those white ones, of fine roots.
And already the lips of those were inverted and split, and moisture ran from that all the time.
Therefore I opened up those and found in one in the feet 18 inches. and the other 6 inches.
And the operation at its opening is that you consider if the patient is humid, and if the color of the ulcer is white, humid, with subtle roots; then you open it up with a spatula lengthwise, and let there be cauteries in the fire, for many times after the section of it is expelled much blood; and if you see the blood, cauterize that.
And if you see the patient fearful and anxious, guard against opening with iron; but take a recently made lead-tipped nail, and tighten on that ulcer, the manner of which we have told; and let there be that for two days.
And then tighten in the constriction of the lead thread; therefore do not cease to tighten the large lead needle on the ulcer until it is cut off and falls away by itself.
But if the ulcer is of thick roots, then in its section there is some cause for fear and for dread, and especially in that which is in the abdomen.
But it is possible that you split its top, and then cauterize that so that it does not return.
And then cure that until the bandage is healed.
And guard against opening an ulcer which is of dusky color, of little feeling, of weak protection, for that one is full of cancers.
And I will come again with reminder of tooth.
Chapter .22.
Of outstanding cure of the navel.
Eminence of the navel is made for several reasons; or through fissures of the abdomen which is over the belly, and there of it the tissue or intestine according to where it goes into other ruptures; or by blood which flows from artery or vein according to what is in front, or by constriction narrowed on it.
But if it is through fissure of the abdomen and by moisture of the tissue, then the color of the ulcer is similar to the color of the body; and there is little pain in it, and then appears from diverse locations. And if it is by passage of the intestine, then the location of that with respect to what we have told you is very violent, and when you press that with your fingers there is hiding, and then it returns; and it is very strong in it, and it is magnified much because of the intake of bath and violent work.
But if it is by moisture, then there is little pain and it is not hidden when you press with your hand, nor is constricted, nor is burned.
And if it is by blood, then with these signs appears the ulcer declining to blackness.
But if it is by flesh, then there is grave ulcer, large and hard, and it is made according to a quantity.
But if it is by constriction, then the touch of it is painful.
And the operation on it is that you consider if the eminence of the navel is by blood from artery or vein, or through constriction; then there is a prohibition against its cure, for in that one is fear and dread as we taught in the chapter in which we said about ulcers by artery and by vein.
Here is my translation: "And if the protrusion of the navel is by the intestine or by the hernia, then you should order the patient to hold his breath and be standing upright; and then sign with your finger around the entire navel, and order him to lean forward between your hands on his chest, and then surround with a wide sponge around the navel where you have signed with your finger; and then extend half of the abscess to the parts above with a large needle; and then bind around with strong thread or with linen in the decent manner of binding."
And then cut the membrane of the extended abscess over the ligament and insert your finger into that place and seek the intestine; and if you have caught it or held it by the ligament, then you extract it quickly and push the intestine back inside the abdominal cavity.
And if you have caught the hernia, then take hold of it with a needle; and pierce the superfluities of it.
But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then surround that spot and then return to your operation; and take two needles and put on them two strong threads and insert the two needles around the circuit which you have made around the abscess in the manner of a cross, making the needles penetrate; and then tighten the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and let the flesh extend and fall by itself; or pierce what is sottile and let it be healed with water that is warm enough to heal the wound.
And if the protrusion of the navel is from meat in him or from humidity, then you should reduce the abscess as we have said and draw out the blood or humidity which you find in it, and then heal that with water that covers and hardens the spot.
Chapter 53:
Of the cure for a hernia.
We have already said, in the division, about the kind of hernia and how it is healed by medicines, and that it is to be cured by iron if it is not ulcerated; we have also said where a hernia is generated and what are its precautions for curing it.
And the ancients said that sometimes a hernia can be in a place where its removal is possible, like one in the breasts or in the groin and similar places of the limbs, and they are inclined to extract all of it, especially when it begins small.
But when it is old and large, then one should not touch it, for I have not seen anyone healed of such nor have I heard of anyone being healed.
And the operation on it, when it is located as we have said, is that you precede and let the patient fast and purge black bile sometimes, and then bleed him if there is found a full pulse.
And then prepare the patient with a preparation in which he is located for operation, and then push in nails into the wound which cover that; and then hollow out every part with a good saw without piercing any root of it. And let the blood flow and do not cut it off quickly, and squeeze out the places and wipe away the clotted blood with your hand or with an instrument by which it is possible for you to do so.
But if it causes you distress of clotted blood from a vein or artery, then cauterize that until the flow of blood is stopped and then heal that with the other cure until it is healed.
Chapter 54:
Of the cure for dropsy.
We have already recommended, in the division, about the kinds of dropsy from water and the signs of each kind, about its cure by medicines.
And that which is cured by iron is nothing but the kind of althitas alone, and it is not approached by iron to the kind of tympany or to the kind of hyposarka, for these are lethal.
And when you have treated this kind of dropsy timpany with medicines and it does not respond to your medicine, then consider that if the patient already has weakness or another illness of dropsy, like one in the chest or abdomen, then beware from healing him with iron, for there is fear over that.
But if you see the patient with abundant strength and there is no other illness in him but dropsy alone, and he is not an infant or old, then the manner of operating on him is that you elevate the patient between your hands and the minister then squeeze his abdomen with his hand, pushing out the water to the part below the navel, and then take a pointed sponge according to this form:
It should be of two sharp parts long, with an acute end like a sponge; but it should have in it some small brevity bit by bit, so that in the operation with that you do not pass into the hernia and that you apply it.
And then consider if the generation of dropsy is from parts of the bowels, for then you should with the section lengthen the navel by the quantity of three digits to the part below on the right of him over the abdomen.
But if the generation of dropsy is from illness of the liver, then your section should be left of the navel by three digits.
And if its generation is from phlegm, then your section should be on the right.
And do not let your section be over the side where the patient wants to lie so that the superfluities do not run to that place.
And then pierce with the instrument through the membrane and insert into that section and elevate your hand with the sponge between the membrane and the abdomen, and then squeeze it out; and if the quantity of a fingernail or more runs out.
And then pierce the abdomen so that the sponge reaches the desired place, which is where the water is. And then extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the form: and is like a tube of fine silver; it is made of silver or brass or lead, to which at the lower end there is a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and its end is split according to the manner of a feather, thus:
And at the end of it there is an eye, for when the instrument reaches the water, then that immediately falls upon the instrument and evacuates the water in a momentary quantity, for if you evacuate from that more than what covers it in the moment, then the patient dies by resolution of his animal spirit or accedes to him five-fold which is near death.
But evacuate from that according to the quantity of the strength of him and according to what signifies to you the dispositions of the strength of his pulse and of his goodness.
And then extract the instrument and remove the water which causes it for as soon as it is removed the membrane which holds it, you have recommended to pierce that according to that manner.
And then return the instrument on the other day if you see the patient tolerating that, and extract from the water a little quantity and do that for several days over fear, and beware of error so that it does not burst with too much water.
But if you fear for the patient and let out great quantity of water, then heal that with burial in dry sand, and move sweat upon it in a bath, and keep him away from the sun for long time; and heal that with desiccative medicines until he is healed.
And cauterize over the stomach, and the liver and the gallbladder are next to the extraction of the water, as I have recounted in what precedes.
Here is chapter 55.
Of the treatment of children who are born with a blockage in the urethra.
Sometimes children are born from the womb of their mother, and the foreskin is not pierced (or it is drawn back tightly or not in its place).
Therefore one should pierce him immediately after he is born with a very sharp spit, according to this form:
And place in the foreskin a subtle lead nail and ligature it, and let him be for three days or for .iiii.three.
And when he wants to urinate, he should be squashed and urine; and then return that.
And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes over the spot, will not harm this closure.
But he of whom the foreskin is tight, should be treated with a lead nail as we have said, for several days until it is enlarged.
But those of whom the foreskin is not in its place, are weak, and this cause is because of that one, which is born and the foreskin is drawn towards the end of the penis so he cannot urinate to the sides inside, until he lifts the penis with his hand to the sides above; and there is no generation for him, because the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a very bad disease.
And the manner of the operation in him is that the patient be laid on his back, and then extend the head of the penis with your left hand with violent extraction, and insert the head of the head of the penis of the foreskin's location with a sharp spit, as it is split with a feather, or that you scrape some part, so that the skin of him comes like the head of the penis and that the foreskin falls into its proper place according to how one wishes.
And beware in your operation of flowing blood, for sometimes this happens; and place on him that which stops the blood, and heal the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 56.
Of whitening which happens in the foreskin on the head of the penis, and of corruption and blackness, and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Sometimes this whitening happens in the penis and it is an excess of flesh.
And one is malignant and the other is not malignant.
Not-malignant, one that you suspend with a subtle ointment and cut out all of it; and then place on that spot which is submerged in Egyptian unguent; and let him, cure with the ointment diafinicon until he is healed.
And if the whitening is malignant, of pale color, then one should administer cautery over its incision and over its root.
But if the whitening is in the foreskin of the head of the penis and not circumcised, and one part of the whitening is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then one should treat the whitening which is inside at the beginning until it is consolidated; and then you heal that outside, because when you heal that both the foreskin will not be torn.
And sometimes it happens in the testicles and in the foreskin blackness and corruption, then one should excavate all that which is blackened and wants to be corrupted or that which is already corrupted; and then wash over that with water, which is ground from peel of pomegranate and ground and sifted.
And then heal that with the other cure until it is healed.
But if blood flows, then administer lunar cautery according to this form:
Because lunar cautery has two uses together, that is for blood flow and for the wound when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corrupted and destroyed all at once, then one should insert into the meat of the foreskin a lead cannula so that the patient urinates through it.
On the adhesion of the foreskin with the head of the penis  (and this adhesion does not happen except in that one of whom the foreskin is loose, and on him circumcision is not required; and when it happens by wound or by pustule), then one should cut with a blunt spit until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is freed from all sides.
And if it is difficult to pull them off painfully, then one should cut with a spit some cause of the head of the penis and foreskin, and therefore is because the foreskin when it is subtle, easily pierces the penis more subtly.
And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a subtle cloth which is wet in warm water so that they do not adhere again.
And then let him be healed with styptic wine until it is consolidated.
Chapter 57.
Of the purification of children and the cure of what happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a cure of continence like the other wounds: but however it is from our operation and our will, and its use is more properly in children; therefore we should assign to it better operation and by a longer way lose less health.
Therefore we say that the ancients did not prescribe circumcision in any of their free ones, because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired through experience, which cause is that we have observed the greatest part of the artisans and barbers using circumcision and purification with a knife and with torches; and they use adhesive with pitch and incision with the nail.
And I have already proven all these manners and not found better purification with forceps, with adhesive with pitch that in purification with the nail, because sometimes the thread escapes above, because the thread of the foreskin is on two tunics, and the tunic pushes from below, and it is very likely to another incision and sure pain. And with purification which is made by aphexin, and it is digital, of which the sabatiers use, is not secure the incision of the extremity of the male member, because it often enters in its wound.
But in the operation with the nail, very often you will get iron and corrupt your operation. And the thread of the child is short by nature, and sometimes it happens in such a way that he has not needed purification, and I have seen this.
But of the purification which is made by forceps and adhesive with pitch, the goodness, I have discovered through experience that the forceps are equally proportional incision, therefore that the acuteness which is above is also with the acuteness which is below; and then when you measure your hand so proportionally two acuteness, and insert according to a comparison in one time; and it is made compression of the pitch which contains the figure containing the thread of the penis from all sides, with which there is no error at all.
And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child lie down mostly if he is one of those who understand a little, and do not but that you tie the pitch in his penis only, and then let him lie for another day.
And then make him cheer up in all that way which is possible for you by receiving his intelligence. Then have the patient lie between your knees, fully exposed and not covered; hide the forceps in your hand or under your foot so that the child does not see them or any of the other instruments.
Then insert your hand into the vagina and blow into the cervix, and draw out whatever is inside so that the head of the cervix comes out, and then clean it of any dirt that has accumulated there.
The shape of the forceps for cleaning, this is their shape:
Let one end of the forceps be blunt and the other pointed, so that the nerve in the claw is not cut; and let the length of both jaws be equal to the length of two fingers joined together.
The mistake in cleaning is that often the cervix itself escapes completely, or part of it escapes from the incision.
Therefore, you must carefully insert your finger into the aperture and push it forward until you feel resistance, then insert the forceps according to its equal length.
And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then grab it with a hook and insert it.
But if it has passed three days, and the swelling under the cervix remains, then you must insert it so that the apostome gives way, and cut it out easily, and insert it according to how it is prepared for you.
And beware of the head of the cervix, for it will not tolerate that.
And so treat that with the powders we have recounted in the treatise on powders, to promote healing.
And if it is cut beyond measure, and obeys the rules above, then it will be fine.
But treat that with what we have said earlier, so that it heals.
Chapter .LVIII.
Of the treatment of urine retained in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction caused by a stone, or by congealed blood, or by swelling or by growths; and it is treated similarly to what we have said about treatments in the division above.
And if it is not dissolved by what we have said earlier and the cause of it is vehement upon the patient, then have extraction performed on him with an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the form: Let it be made of silver and let it be hollow like a reed made of aspen wood with a slender hole in its tip, about the thickness of a long finger, to which there is attached a slender cane about the length of a palm and a half, to whose end there is attached a hollow cane.
And the method of removing urine with it is to take the thread and soak it in the end of the syringe in wool or cloth with a good grip; and insert the ends of the thread into the opening at the tip of the syringe, and with the forceps, if there is any excess caused by the wool, but otherwise insert it into the cane with force. Then push the syringe in with force and with the white of an egg.
And have the patient lie down on his back, and open his bladder and cervix with oils, and olive oil and water.
Then insert the syringe with ease until it reaches the root of the cervix; then bend the cervix above at the point of the embelic; and squeeze the syringe within that; and squeeze it until it reaches the bladder, and let the patient be bent so that the cause is vacated, and not done according to this order, but the part in which there is tortuosity.
Then slowly pull out the thread with the wool, for the urine will suck up the wool.
Then pull it out and let the urine be passed through treatment; use the syringe, do not stop using it until the bladder is evacuated and the patient feels relief.
Chapter .LIX.
Of the quality of catheterization of the bladder with a syringe and similar instruments that are suited to it.
When there occurs in the bladder ulceration or apostome, or congealed blood in it, or swelling is constricted, and you want to distil waters and medicines into it, then have it done with an instrument called a syringe, and this is its form:
Except that in its tip there is no hole, it is closed. And in it are three holes: two on one side, thus alternately.
In its beginning there is a hollow place, in which it is inserted, and let the amount of fluid opilate that, when a cause is added to it, then it is drawn up; and when it is expelled, with it is expelled, and when it is pushed out from far within, according to how the syringe is pushed with the hand that holds it.
Therefore, when you want to inject fluid into the bladder, insert the tip of the syringe into the opening, and push with that which is pushed from above, for the fluid is drawn up into the hollow of the syringe.
Then insert the tip of the syringe into the cervix according to what we have said about the syringe; and squeeze the fluid with that which is squeezed, for that fluid will pass at once into the bladder, and the patient will feel it.
Form of the hollow needle with which the bladder is catheterized, and this is its form:
And let it be made of silver or brass, the tip of which is like a little feather, and below that there is a cane.
Then take the bladder and place in it the fluid that you want to inject into the bladder; then insert it between two with a strong ligature with a thread, and heat that fluid over the fire.
Then insert the tip of the needle into the cervix.
Then squeeze your hand over the bladder with the fluid with firm pressure until the patient feels that the fluid has reached the bladder.
But if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make it into a ring; and perforate it all around its circumference; then insert a strong thread through those holes, so that it is wound tightly; and add the ring thus made as you would also add a ball, by pushing it in where you want to inject the fluids, oils, and water.
Then you hold that in the instrument and do with it as you would have done with the bladder, and express it with your hand until the fluid reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
Of the Extraction of Stone.
We have already spoken in the division of the species of stone and its cure by medicine, and the difference between stone generated in the kidneys and stone generated in the bladder, and their signs.
And we have spoken of the stone for which cauterization is used, and incision.
And the stone generated in the bladder properly speaking is that which is lodged in the bladder.
And I have given an explicit account and summary of this.
Therefore I say that stone generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and of its signs are that the urine which is passed from the bladder is like water in its thinness, and appears to be sand; and the patient grinds his loins, and often passes water, and is frequently erect; and with this there are pains in many parts of the body.
And the cure is easier in children who have reached the age of 14; and it is difficult to cure the old. But in the young it may be cured by cauterization, which is suitable for them.
And if the stone is large and its cure more difficult, then it is otherwise.
Therefore when we come to the cure of this, it is advisable at the beginning that we cleanse the patient by cauterization in order to open up the passage which is in his intestines; for this passage sometimes blocks the expulsion of the stone as a result of the examination.
And then let him be placed on his feet and made to move about and jump up and down in order that the stone may descend into the bottom of the bladder, or that it may drop out by itself at some other place.
And then let the patient lie on his back with his thighs drawn up and his legs bent under him, in order that the whole bladder may be made to decline towards its lower parts.
And then let him void all of this.
Therefore if you feel the stone in the passage, then immediately cauterize it there.
And if it does not come out by itself, then let you smear your left forefinger with oil (if the patient is a child) or your middle finger (if he is grown up), and insert that into his anus. And push the stone out by means of your finger. And gradually draw it into the neck of the bladder.
And then press on that with your finger and expel it through the lower opening by means of the place where you cauterized.
And order the assistant to press on the bladder with his hand; and order another assistant that with his right hand to extend the scrotum upwards, and with his other hand to massage the cord which is below the scrotum in the place where you are cauterizing.
And then insert a piece of sponge in the passage, the shape of which is as follows: and cut through it where it is between the anus and scrotum, not in the middle part, but on the left side of the scrotum; and let the cauterization be over that stone, and let your finger be in the anus, and let the incision be transverse so that the opening outwards may be wide and the opening inwards narrow according to the amount of stone which can be expelled without difficulty, and not larger, for fear it should close up again.
And take note that some stone has corners and edges, in consequence of which the expulsion is made difficult thereby.
And some are like a onion, round and easy to expel.
Therefore if it is one of those which have corners and edges, adjust the cautery in the fissure.
And if it is not expelled, then let you press on that, or that you press upon it gently with a suitable instrument, the end of which is curved, and do not allow it to slip out; or insert below it a thin instrument with a curved end.
But if you cannot reach it, then let you enlarge the hole a little, and if you see any bleeding, bind up that tightly with powdered vitriol.
But if it is larger than one, then at the beginning push your finger towards the mouth of the bladder, and then insert a small instrument into it; and act in the same way if there are more than two.
And if the stone is very large, then it is foolishness to insert it with a wide incision, for two causes may occur: either it will stay there or it will cause continuous discharge of urine, because the passage has not healed completely.
But let the assistant expel it once it is pushed out, or force it in the fracture with pincers in order to extract that into pieces.
Therefore when you have finished your operation, then fill the wound with cotton wool soaked in aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it up tightly. And place over that a cloth which has been dipped in oil and wine, or in rose oil and water, in order that the wound may heal quickly.
And then bind up the patient over his navel, and do not loosen the bandage for three days.
And when you have loosened it, wash the wound with water and oil, and then cure that with ointment of diaphenicon and ointment of diabasilicon until it is healed.
But if in the wound there occurs an abscess, hard and ulcerous, and this is like a congelation of the blood in the bladder so that passage of urine is prevented  (and this is called by some the exit of blood through the urethra), then let you insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it becomes putrid and rotten it will provoke corruption of the bladder.
And then wash the wound with sweet wine, water and salt, and apply all remedies which seem suitable for its cure until it is healed.
And throughout the whole of the cure let you press both scrota and apply remedies which are laid on the wound.
And if the stone is small and lodged in the middle of the urethra so that passage of urine is prohibited, then cure it by cauterizing there, for troops have often been seen to be cured by this cure; and I have also tried it, and it has been found effective, and you should use a piercing instrument of iron, the shape of which is as follows:
triangular in cross-section, pointed, set in a handle.
And then take a hammer and hit the urethra below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the urethra, piercing with ease so that the piercing instrument reaches that stone. And turn the piercing instrument with your hand on that small stone little by little, and pierce through it so that you make the passage on the other side as well, for urine is immediately expelled.
And then press your hand over that which is broken from the stone in the passage of the urethra, for it is clenched and the passage is closed by the urine, and the patient is cured.
But if this cure is not equipped for some cause which prevents it, then strike a hammer below the stone and another hammer above it. And then close upon that stone in the urethra between two ligatures. And then you extract it. Then cut the ligament and clean the clotted blood that has accumulated in the wound.
And it is not necessary to cut the ligament of the gallbladder below the stone, but so that it does not return to the bladder; and the other ligament above, for when the gallbladder is removed and the stone comes out, the bladder returns to its place and the wound heals.
And for this reason, when you tie the gallbladder above, you must lift the bladder up to the opening above, or it will return to its original position and the wound will not heal as we have said.
Chapter 61:
On the extraction of stones from women.
Stones are rarely formed in women.
However, if a stone is found in one of them, then its cure is difficult and prohibited by many methods.
One of these is that the woman is very young.
And the second is that you do not find a woman who is willing to reveal if she has had sexual intercourse or is married.
The third is that you cannot find a woman skilled in this art, especially one who performs the operation with her hands.
And the fourth is that the site of incision for removing a stone in women is distant from the location of the stone; therefore, it requires a long incision, and there is fear in that.
However, if necessity compels you to do this, then know that you must take a female doctor who is very skilled, and she is rarely found.
But if you lack such a woman, then seek a subtle and skilled male doctor, or present a female midwife who is experienced in the affairs of women, or a woman who has some knowledge of this art.
Then have her present and command him to do everything that you tell him, from the examination for the stone to the beginning; the purpose of this is to determine whether the woman is a virgin, then have her insert her finger into the anus and feel for the stone.
Then if she finds it, hold it back with her finger, and then command him to insert his hand into her.
But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the vagina and feel for the stone; then have her pause her left hand over the bladder and press it firmly with good grip.
Then if she finds it, then have her gradually push the stone from the opening of the bladder to the parts below until it comes out at the root of the thigh.
Then insert your finger into the vagina above the root of the thigh from whichever side it is found, and center the stone in that part, and his finger should not be pushed back by the stone as he holds it.
And the incision should be small at first; then insert your finger into that incision and if he feels the stone, then widen the incision according to the size of the stone he knows will come out.
And know that there are many kinds of stones: some are small and large, smooth and rough, long and round, and they have projections.
Therefore you should know how many types there are so that you can indicate what you want.
And if you see bleeding, apply crushed vitriol to the wound and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your operation and finish removing the stone.
And prepare the instruments which you use in extracting stones from men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
And if you see bleeding and know that the flow of blood is from an artery that has been cut, then you must pause powder over the wound and bind it tightly with a bandage; do not repeat this; remove the stone and do not extract it, for the patient will surely die. Then heal the wound.
So when the sharpness of the bleeding has ceased and the wound is closed, then return to your operation and finish removing the stone.
Chapter 62:
On incision for hernia in women.
Hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white membrane below the diaphragm that contains the bowels; it is named ciphax.
And in some cases it is in the lower part of the peritoneum that nature prepares it in the part of the bowels where there are other bowels; and it is the diaphragm below the white membrane that we have said earlier, and it is not anything else but hernia.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the bowels, because this matter flows into them; and sometimes it occurs due to a blow made on the bowels.
And this moisture has many colors; for the color of it is either inclining towards yellowish or blood-red, or red, or is dark and foul, or it is watery white, and that is what is most common.
And the signs by which one knows that this accumulation of moisture is in the white diaphragm that we have said earlier are: for if it is in the white diaphragm, then the hernia is round and declining a little towards length with the figure of the bowels, and covering the bowel; for the moisture contains all around.
And if the moisture is in the peritoneum itself, then the hernia is round with the part of the bowels and one estimates that it is another bowel.
And if the moisture is between the diaphragm of the bowels and the white diaphragm, then cut below the center.
And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then test the color of the moisture in the hernia with a needle from which the thread has been removed; and according to what is seen in the marks of the needle, judge what is inside it.
Therefore when we come to the treatment of it with iron, then have the patient lie on his back if that is possible for him, and see his chest.
Then let him be reclined on his back for some reason a little higher, and place underneath him several folded sheets.
Then stand to the left of him, and command the assistant to stand to the right of him, who should extend his arm to one side of the bowels and to the top of the navel.
Then take a pointed instrument and cut the diaphragm of the bowels in the middle part, cutting it along its length through the pentangular.
And let the incision be made according to the straightness equally distant from the line that must be observed between the skin of the bowels, so that it reaches the white diaphragm.
Excorate it, and observe, and be careful so that you do not insert anything into it; and your excising with which you exciate it according to the part that is suspended by the bowels, examine closely by excising according to the amount that is possible for you.
Then pierce the lower diaphragm with a wide incision, and extract all the moisture.
Then separate between the two lips of the incision with hooks, and stretch the diaphragm above them; and do not touch the bowels contained, and insert the diaphragm in that way that is possible for you. Then insert it completely or in pieces, and especially with its sides very fine; for if you do not examine the incision of it thoroughly, there is no security that the moisture will not return.
But if you notice that it has protruded beyond the edge of its sheath during your operation, then when you have finished cutting the scrotum, return it inside and sew up the two lips of the scrotum of the testicles with a suture, and treat it as you would any other wound until it is healed.
And if you find the testicle corrupted by some other disease, then cut the vessels which are above the suspensory ligament, extract the testicle and treat it as we have said.
But if the hernia is divided into two parts, then know that there are two hernias; therefore incise that part according as you have done in the other, and if it appears to you to be one operation, then perform it.
And you should clean the blood and insert into the incisions wool which is soaked in oil or rose oil; and place outside another piece of wool which is soaked in wine and oil, and spread this over both testicles and the abdomen; and place over it folded sheets and powdery lint, and tie those over with a ligature which is according to this form:
and two sheets should be pressed and filled with wool dyed red according to this shape; and the extremities with which it is tied up should be made of gut or of wet wool, and they should be attached by a string to the waistband of the trousers, and one extremity should go from behind between the buttocks and the second should go to the front part of the scrotum, and two extremities on each thigh and two other extremities on both sides of the groin, and all of the string should be tightened at the waistband of the trousers.
And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially by cautery instead of cutting with an iron; and you should take a thin scalpel and cut the scrotum of the testicles, and ignite it according to what we have recommended until the white sac containing the testicle is uncovered, and then you should apply cautery according to this form: and it is similar to the Greek letter alpha.
And you should pierce with that scalpel and ignite it until all of the moisture has been driven out.
And you should extend the scrotum with tongs and scrape it with tongs, and scrape with a small cautery which is ignited; and incise it according as it is possible for you to do so until you have eradicated all of it; and beware that the fire does not touch the testicle.
And know that this operation is more safe and more distant from blood flow, and better than an operation with cutting.
But if you experience an ulcer during cutting or cautery, or blood flow, then know that you should treat the ulcer according to what it requires with treatment which is suitable for it according to what has been said.
But if the patient is cowardly and does not expect a second operation because of its horrible nature, then you should perform piercing according to what I have recommended when it has been certified by you, through what has been said about the signs, that the hernia is fluid.
Then you should have the patient lie on his back on a high bed, and pierce the ulcer in the lowest part of it with a broad spear, and make the piercing according to the length of the body.
And the aperture should be ample so that all of the fluid runs out.
And you should place gut and ligature over it and leave it there so that the rest of the fluid runs out. And you should treat it until the wound is healed.
But if there is resistance to the discharge of the fluid when you pierce it: and this does not occur unless the white membrane in the orifice of the wound causes resistance and prohibits the exit of the fluid, then you should insert into the wound a peg or instrument by which the fluid is extracted from the hydrocele, the shape of which has been described; or attach to the compression of the hydrocele a small.
And know that the fluid returns and is accumulated again after about a month or so; and when it has been accumulated, then it should be pierced according to that same manner, for the patient will pass his days like this.
Chapter 63.
On cutting on a fleshy hernia and its treatment.
Know that in cutting on this hernia there is great fear of death in the greater dispositions; for I have seen the discharge of it and the patient saved by it.
And I am remembering the operation on that one and the properties of ulcers.
Therefore, I say that ulcers arise in the bodies of which the testicles are composed and are caused by many causes: or by acute sharp superfluity, which is distributed to the testicles, or by impact.
And the color of the ulcer is according to the color of the body, and there is not pain in it, and it is a heavy ulcer.
And its surface is smooth, of which the color is dark, and there is no feeling to it.
And sometimes it is caused by constriction of the vessels, and by inflammation of those thus, as has been perceived by memory of it, or by inflammation of veins.
But that which is caused by inflammation of vessels is known by the distribution of the ulcer when you compress it with your fingers; and there should not be touch to it.
But that which is caused by inflammation of a vein is not distributed from it because of compression with the fingers.
And it is possible that on this kind there should be cutting and on the other meats; and you should cut the scrotum of the testicles, and then extend the testicle to the parts above it, and extract it from the white sac, and ligate the suspensory ligament of the vessels, and incise the suspensory more so that you can extract it from all parts of the testicle.
Therefore if the hydrocele has become consolidated with those meats, then you should extract the hydrocele and incise it.
And if there is adhesions for some cause from the scrotum, or between that which is between the vessels, then you should loosen all of that adhesion and incise it with a round incision.
But if there is generation of flesh in the place of the adhesions which are behind, then you should incise all that is of it and extract the hydrocele as we have said.
Therefore when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine; and you should treat it with the other treatment until it is healed.
Chapter 64.
On the treatment of a hernia which is of veins.
Vein is an ulcer wrapped by some wrapper like a bud with softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult movement exercise and walking on the patient.
And in the treatment of this disease there is fear because of that by which memory precedes it.
However, you should apply treatment to it according to what they did at first.
And I say that you should have the patient lie on his back on a high bed, and compress the suspensory ligament of the testicles at the parts below; and then you should touch the scrotum of the testicles with your fingers at the vessels which have been proven to the staff, and extend those with violent extension.
And you should incise with a broad spear piercing across the right of the vessels so that the vessels are uncovered.
Then you will cut away any extra skin as we have said in the extraction of an arrow, which is found in the temples.
Then you will put an needle in those spots, with one thread doubled over it, and tie the first one in the place where the wound occurred, and the other one at the back of the wound. Then you will cut them in the middle according to the length of the body, and extract what is aggregated from the putrid and corrupt humidity.
Then you will cure the ulcer with a cure for other ulcers where you want pus to be generated so that the vessels which have become black from one of two things, for it is not harmful by that.
But if the wound occurs in all the passages, then you must extract the testicles or that the testicles by that are withdrawn from the vessels, so that it is deprived of all nourishment by the incision of the vessels, and that they are atrophied, or that it is useless by that.
Chapter 65:
On the treatment of intestinal hernias.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to an opening that extends in the chest towards the abdomen from the angles of the navel, so that when the intestines are pushed through that rupture into any of the intestines.
And this rupture is either from the chest or from an opening in it, and these two species occur for various reasons: by percussion, or by blows, or by crying, or by the elevation of some heavy cause, or by similarities.
And the sign of this, when it is from the extension of the chest, is that it occurs gradually over a long time, and does not occur suddenly, and it is a suppurative ulcer inside the abdomen because the chest compresses the intestine.
And the sign of it is when it is from an opening in the chest; because at the beginning it causes violent pain suddenly; and it is a diverse ulcer apparent below the apparent armpit, and this is due to the displacement of the intestine, and its body towards the parts outside the chest.
And sometimes it is pushed out with the intestine, and this hernia is called intestinal hernia.
And sometimes it is made with a hernia sac, and sometimes a hole in the intestine, and here it is retained, and this causes great harm to the patient, and sometimes it causes bad pain and especially when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of these species of this illness with iron there is fear, because one must avoid the formation in it.
And the way of performing this operation is to command the patient to draw in the intestine with his hand towards its cavity if he obeys its return, and then let him lie on his side between your hands, and lift his legs.
And then you will bring the armpit which connects with the armpit of the testicles upwards, and you will open the armpit entirely throughout its length; and you will put nails in two lips of the opening according to what you command them to open it with.
And if the opening according to the quantity that is possible for you, that from that the sac is pushed out.
And then you will cut away those chest muscles which are under the armpit of the testicles, until the white hard chest muscle is uncovered in each part.
Then you will put your finger into that which connects the testicle, in that which is between the white chest and the second chest, and you will free with it the adhesion which is in the part behind the sac.
And then you will draw with your hand the armpit of the testicles upwards, and you will extend the white chest towards it with your left hand, and lift the sac with the chest to the opening of the incision; and you will command the assistant to extend the sac towards you, and you will dissolve the adhesion behind it with a completed solution.
And you must pay attention with your fingers that there is no cause for the intestine to be wrapped in the white hard chest. But if you find any cause for it, then you will push it back down into the abdomen.
And then you will insert in the part under the armpit of the testicles by an incision from which blood and pus flow as we have mentioned in what we have said.
And then you will administer wool soaked in oil, and pause it over the ulcer; and administer the ligature which we have recommended (and sometimes the white chest is cauterized, which we have said about the incision of it fears a flow of blood, because many times they occur there), and let the ligature fall so that by itself it will close.
But if its closing is delayed, then have water heated, and pause it over that so that it falls according to what we have said.
And then cure the ulcer with the other cure of ulcers where it is healthy.
Chapter 66:
On hernia sac.
In this hernia, there is no one who has been cured with the treatment of it with iron.
And the first thing that is done as we have recommended in the hernia which is with a sac; and then you will tie the intestines over that incision with ease of it; and then dry in the middle around the ulcer with that which causes that, from which the intestines fall out.
And cure the ulcer as we have said so that it is healthy.
Chapter 67:
On the rupture which is made in the angles.
Sometimes there is a rupture in the angles as we have said, and it emerges from the place.
And do not allow any cause of the intestines to the genitals; and if it occurs, that is rare; and return it in all hours.
But if the time is prolonged with that, it is a fracture in the chest from which the intestine emerges in the chest; and this occurs because of the extension of the chest which is in the angles as we have said, which cause is because the chest is extended, and then it becomes soft and the place is suppurative and emerges.
And its cure is with cautery as it is preceded by the narratio of it.
And sometimes it is cured with iron in this way: and the patient hangs over his chest between your hands, and then drys the place of the rupture of the suppuratives emerging from incision according to the length of three fingers.
And then tightly tie the white bandage that is under the cord until it is exposed.
And then take the thread and place it over the prominent part of the wound, and press it to the abdomen.
And then sew the two prominent ends of the wound with the thread, joining one end to the other.
And then pull the end of the thread, but do not cut the bandage at all, nor stretch it out, nor any other cause that you know about in the treatment of intestinal hernias.
And then treat that with the treatment of ulcers, and when you insert the gallbladder, cleanse it and restore the ulcer until it is consolidated; for the bandage is contracted and the prominence of the rupture is not tightened.
And cautery is better in this place, because it is closer to health.
Chapter 68:
On the softening of the cords of the testes.
Many times the cords of the testes in some men are softened because the flesh that is between them is softened, and the guarding of it is weakened.
Therefore, it is necessary for the person treating the patient to make him lie on his back, and insert all of the softened cord along the natural cord; and then sew two lips with thread.
And if you want, sew up the superfluity of the softened cord in three or four places and with a firm stitch.
And then insert between the stitches; and then treat by the treatment of other ulcers until it is healed and the gallbladders fall out.
Chapter 69:
On castration.
Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but for two reasons it has been related to me in this book: the first is so that the doctor who is questioned about it knows its treatment, and the second reason is that many times we have needed to castrate other beasts for our own purposes, like horses, oxen, pigs, and similar animals.
And so I say that castration is done in two ways: either by crushing or by cutting through.
But in the method that is done by crushing, the procedure is to make the beast defecate in warm water until its testicles are softened and hang down. And then grab those with your hand until they are dissolved and do not appear below the touch.
But in castration done by cutting and sectioning, you must hold the beast and squeeze the cord of its testicles with your left hand.
And then cut through the suspensory ligament and insert between each pair of processes with one cut until there are two holes.
And then insert those more that you have cut off. And do not leave any cause on the bandage over them, but only the thin bandage which is over the veins.
And this method of castration is better which is done by crushing, because crushing strongly leaves no cause in the testicles so that the beast desires copulation.
And then treat the ulcer until it is healed.
Chapter 70:
On the treatment of hermaphrodites.
Hermaphrodites in men are of two kinds: the first is when there appears an orifice between the cords of the testes, where there is a figure like that of a woman’s vulva between the two testicles.
And sometimes from it urine flows from the cord of the testicles.
But in women there is only one type: and it is that the clitoris on the foreskin is like two testicles of a man, a little of everything at the beginning of the foreskin like the foreskin of a man and two testicles.
And the treatment is of three kinds: two from men and one from women. And it is that you insert those tight flesh until the impression of that flows out, and then treat those with the treatment of other ulcers.
And in the second kind of men from whom urine flows from the cord of the testicles, there is no treatment or operation for it.
Chapter 71:
On the hymen and prominent flesh due to causes in women.
The strong hymen is tightly attached to natural causes so that it is pressed and made thin the guarding; and in some women it is enlarged so much that it is stretched like men and can enter into intercourse.
Therefore, you must grab the superfluity of the hymen with your hand or with a needle and insert it.
And do not pierce in the incision, especially in the part of the vein, so that no blood flow ensues.
And then treat that with the treatment of ulcers until it is healed.
But born flesh is flesh that grows in the womb of the mother to fill it, and very often it grows out from the foreskin according to the appearance of a snake (and because of this some call this “tail-like hermaphrodite”); therefore we must insert it like an hymen and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter 72:
On the treatment of syphilis.
Syphilis is when the clitoris of a woman is not perforated, or it is a small wound. And it can be natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to a wound that has preceded it, and that is caused by tightly bound flesh or a thin bandage or membrane.
And it is caused either in the womb or the bones of it, or in the supine part of it, or in the lower part of it, and strongly prohibits copulation and pregnancy, and very often the menstruation.
And the diagnosis of it is made by the guarding of the midwife, if the oppression is evident, then you must cover it with bandages; but if it is not evident, then you should draw it with your fingers or with a thread.
But if the oppression is due to a thin bandage and is prominent between the two lips, then you must cut and rupture it.
And so that it rests on both lips, and then rest your fingers from both sides and press them inwards.
And let the woman be on her back with her legs extended, and then extend both lips with force so that the thin bandage is broken and the oppression opened.
And then take wool and dip it in oil and place it over the wound, and anoint it with ointment every day until the wound is healed.
But if the bandage is thick and tough, then you must insert it with liniment of lat or myrrh resin.
But if the oppression is due to bound flesh, then suspend that with a thread and insert it.
Let them be the medicines that cause bleeding to stop, like aconite, and dragon’s blood, and alder, bound with egg white.
And then administer a wide lead cane for so that the wound is not healed loosely.
And hold it for several days and give it cool water of lye.
And then let it be healed by the other treatment of consolidation until it is healed.
And sometimes accidents happen in the great conception of other meats, and then they are conceived according to this manner. But if it is by the ulcer of the bone, then do not do any opposition to the ulcer of the bone in any way.
Chapter 73.
Of the cure of hemorrhoids, and of tail and red buttock which happen in the vagina of women.
Hemorrhoids are an obstruction of the orifices of many veins from which much blood flows continuously, and when hemorrhoids become old and are formed.
And I have already said in the division of them the species and signs of them, and thus say those who receive a cure and those that do not receive a cure.
I say therefore hemorrhoids and theyls when they are in the depth of the vagina and do not appear to the senses, then in these there shall be no cure made by iron.
But those which are in the opening of the vagina upon which one can see with senses, these are those which are cured.
And cause the woman to be in a hot bath and then extend it with tweezers or with rough cloth, and insert those with roots.
And then powder over them one of the insulating powders without biting, thus with aconite and similar to these.
Then put in a pouch their feet for an hour and then place that in cold water.
And if the flow of blood continues then do that in a decoction of cummin and of onion peels and of pomegranate peels and of similar things.
And take wheat flour and cook it with honey and sour wine and make a poultice with that over the back of it.
And if the blood has dried out then it is good; and if not then attach with two leeches and at the breasts no scarification.
And take wool and immerse that in juice of coriander or in juice of marigold or in juice of wild garlic with red wine and make that adhere to the place until it is healed. And cure the place with ointments until it is healed.
And cure it until it is healed.
Chapter 74.
Of piercing of a wound in the vagina.
Many species of ulcers happen in the vagina, thus with bone ulcer and ulcerous ulcer and suppuration and wormy and ragged and others ulcers. And I have already said these diseases and the species of them and their signs and their cures in the division.
And cause I to say in this treatise of bone ulcer which comes in the vagina when it is of the ulcers that are congealed and if you want to know how to do its cauterization with iron.
Then consider if the pain of the ulcer in its coming is acute with concussion and phlegm and fever, and cause that to be swollen and if you see on it the senses then do not cut it with perforation and cure that with what helps on the maturation until the acuteness of the accidents cease.
And then cause you to make the woman lie on one side with her two sides; and recline on her back and join her feet to the part lower than the belly, and let her thighs be extended, and pause her arms under her elbows and let each hold according to what is convenient.
And the midwife follows the right side and administers the instrument by which is opened the opening of the vagina, the form of which will come in those causes that will be appropriate.
And when you want to administer that instrument then cause you to make the depth of the vagina of the woman and what is entered in the vagina of the instrument not more than the depth of the vagina and lead the patient. But if the instrument is larger than the depth of the vagina then cause you to pause powders on the texture of the depth of the vagina so that it be prohibited the entering of every instrument in the depth of the vagina.
And cause you to pause the wire which bends in the instrument from the side above and that it be administered by the person who holds the instrument and revolves the wire until the opening of the vagina is open.
And when the exit is seen and it is touched by the hand and it is cold and moist then cause you to dry that with broad linen.
And when the pus is evacuated then cause you to pause in the wound a poultice immersed in rose oil or oil with some astringent, and place the poultice in the section on the depth of the vagina.
And pause wool around the vagina and above the pubic hair clean wool immersed in water in which are boiled mallows.
And let it be cured after two days with ointment convenient to that until it is healed.
And some are washed the vagina and the wound with water in which is boiled aconite with water and then with water in which is boiled root of lily or of aromatic arnica and then return to the ointment.
And if the wound is bleeding in the vagina then cause you to be prohibited from the cure of it with iron but have a cure that we have said in the division.
Chapter 75.
To teach midwives in what manner the children will be medicated when they come according to non-natural figure.
A necessary cause is that the midwife knows in the beginning the figure of the child's coming according to its signs and it is that when you see the woman pressing on her parts below and wanting to smell the air, and when she is eased by what is above her and the part is made easy for her, and hastens the exit of the child, then know that this part is according to a natural figure, and the exit of it upon its head, and the second one with that or suspended from the navel.
Therefore when you see these signs then cause the belly to be pressed so that the embryo descends gently when he comes out upon his head, and let the second one come with that or suspended from the navel, and it is cleaned of those superfluities by a good cleaning.
But that which is another of this part is non-natural and not laudable when the child comes out upon his feet and his body before his head, and his mother's hand or on his foot.I. Or is come out the head of it and his mother's hand or to its belly and bent it is converted over his neck and similar to the figures of it non-laudable.
A necessary cause is that the midwife be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that she guard against error and deception.
And I show you the entire figure of those, and what craft is in them so that it be signified by that and is laid upon that.
When the child is come out upon his head by natural force and that is violent upon the woman and it is made for him a difficult part, then cause that to be done, or that women hold it, and evaporate the depth of it with fenugreek cooked and with oiled herbs.
And then the midwife put between her fingers a little broad sponge and split it with that the second one, or dry that with its nail until she comes upon what is in her of humidity. And press on the woman's abdomen where the fetus is descending.
But if it does not descend, then the woman should be anointed with an ointment of linseed and fennel seed mixed together.
Then command him, the one performing the anointing, to apply pressure and make the mother sneeze with the mixture; and hold her mouth and nose for an hour so that the fetus will come out quickly.
And if both hands of the fetus are not coming out at the beginning, then you should gently pull them out little by little. But if the fetus does not respond to the instrument, then place the woman on a board and lift her feet up, and gently rock the board back and forth on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall off the board due to the rocking.
And if the hands are not bent back and the fetus is not born, then insert your hand inside and break the fetus's head or grab its body with a cloth and pull it out little by little; for in this way, it will come out.
When the fetus is on their feet, then you should gently push those up and turn the fetus a little, and suck it in, and grab one of its feet and pull it gently.
But when it has come out between the thighs, then you command him to push it out, and make the mother sneeze with the mixture; for it will come out if God wills it.
And if it is not born with what we have described, then you gently return the fetus little by little to where it was, for it will come out more easily with its natural movement.
And if it is not possible with all that we have described, then take myrrh and dissolved gum, and pound them well in the mortar, and apply this to the woman's vagina, at the bottom of her abdomen. Then make her drink tepid water while she is achieving the vapor bath.
And when his feet are softened, then you give him the smoke of myrrh and place it under him. And when she has been in the smoke for an hour, then you make her lie down on a board and make her sneeze and open her mouth, and lift up the lower part of her abdomen with gentle pressure, for the fetus will come out at once.
Delivery of the fetus hanging down by one of its hands. You should gently pull the hand and suck in the fetus little by little; but if you cannot reduce it, then lift up the woman and make her walk.
And if she cannot walk, then make her lie down on the ground and rock her thighs with violent movement; and you should administer to her any remedies that are given by doctors made from mucilage.
And if the delivery has come, then make her lie down on a board and study the hand's reduction and suck in the fetus according to its natural shape, and make the woman sneeze and command him to push so that it will be born.
Delivery of the fetus on the neck with its hands and face spread out and the fetus' face towards the mother's back. Then the midwife should hold the fetus' hand and gently turn it little by little, and this will be easier.
And when it is turned and how it is sucked in, then you apply to its head what we have recommended of oil and mucilage.
Then command him to grab his mother' hand little by little, and when you have done this, then make her lie down on a board and command him to be bent over the right side, and command him to push; and make the woman sneeze with the mixture. Exit of the fetus prepared on its side.
When it comes out of the mother' body in this way, consider and then you insert your finger inside so that it is evacuated from moisture.
And if the fetus is suspended over its face and neck, then you insert your finger inside so that it is not retained and delayed.
Then you gently push the fetus to the sides so that it hangs down as you want, and command the woman to push several times; for it will come out with easy delivery if God wills it.
Exit of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes there are three or four; but this is strange and rare, and it does not live.
And count them; and if they are multiple, there is a second one, and they are separated by the umbilical cord, distinguish those inside the navel of each one of them; and sometimes they are born like this with easy delivery, and sometimes with delivery that is not possible as we have recommended.
And if they are difficult to deliver and come to what we have said about the non-natural shapes, then you cure them as we have recorded.
And if the midwife does what she does with ease and subtlety, and delays, and it is made according to all the forms as it is prepared for him by bringing health.
Remember that which is formed in the womb from embryos and abortions.
Some are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even ten; and I have verily seen a woman bear six, and another ten, all formed, which cause was made through measurement by the glorious wise ones.
And know that it is in the science of the midwife that which is strong for her to approach this little one like that, and therefore stop it from doing so.
Chapter .lxxvi.
On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you treat the dead fetus with what we have said in the division of medicine and it is not yet out, then you should consider if the woman is of sound health and not of any of the accidents by which she is feared to suffer harm.
Then you should have the woman bent over her chest and her head bent down, and her thighs elevated.
And the midwife should hold that in two parts or be tied in such a way that the body of the fetus does not extend because of the extraction of the fetus.
And then you moisten the mouth of the patient with moist oil and with mucilage of alder, fenugreek, and seeds of it.
And then the midwife anoints her hand with those oils and mucilage, and then inserts her hand smoothly into the vagina, and then seeks with her hand the place where the nails are in the foot.
And if it is convenient in that case: then you consider whether the foot is prepared so that it descends over his head, and then you place the nails in his heels, or on his neck, or in his mouth, or in his palate, or under his beard, or in the hollow of his chest, or under his armpits.
But if the descent is on his feet, then it is in the instep, or in the middle of his back.
And whoever has the nail holds it with his right hand, and places its curve in that place which is between the fingers of his left hand, and inserts his hand smoothly and puts the nail in one of those places we have mentioned, until he reaches the true cause.
And then place and fix in the aperture of him another nail, or a third if necessary, so that there is an equal attraction, and not extension according to his rectitude only.
But let the mouth be opened to its full extent, so that the extraction of it is facilitated as it is done in a tooth that is pulled out.
And whoever in him that is between them let the extension be softened; and if any part of him is retained, then let the midwife anoint one of her fingers with oil, and insert that skillfully and turn it about with what is retained.
So if the part of the foot is dislocated, then let the nails be interchanged into a place that is higher; and do this as long as all of the foot is dislocated.
But if the hand is dislocated in front of the other, and it is not possible to reduce that by compressing it, then let a bandage be wrapped around that; and then extract that as long as all of it is dislocated, and insert it into the joint of the hand or in the elbow.
And do this also to the other hand and the two feet.
But if the head of the foot is large, or there happens to it compression in its extraction, or there is some constriction on him, then let the midwife insert between the fingers a spatulate and pointed instrument and split the head and extract the fluid, or discover that with an instrument which is named 'alundat', the shape of which will come with the shapes of the other instruments in the chapter which is to come.
And likewise do if the foot is of a large head by nature: and then let him insert that with a ligature, or take it with an awl as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is dislocated and there is constriction due to the collarbone, then let it be split so that the moisture which is in the foot be discharged.
But if it is not complicated, nor obstinate in its dislocation, then you insert the head immediately as soon as possible to you.
And if the hernia of the abdomen is ulcerated or is dropping out, then let you pierce that so that the fluid that is in it runs out.
But if the foot is on his feet, then the attraction of it is greater and the direction of it to the mouth of the vagina is farther.
But if it is constricted due to the abdomen and the foot, then let you extract that with a bandage which you will have wrapped around your hand, and split the abdomen and the foot so that what is in them runs out.
But if the other members stand and turn the head, then the midwife inserts her left hand; but if the mouth of the vagina is open, then she inserts her hand in the anus of air, and seeks with that the head, and pulls it with her fingers into the mouth of the vagina, and then inserts into him a nail, or two nails, and pulls him with those.
And if the mouth of the vagina is constricted by an ulcer that comes to the u, then let it not be rubbed on him; but beforehand let the flow of moistening fatty causes be administered. And administer plasters; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
And if the foot is on his side, then if possible let it be turned; and let what we have said about the living foot be administered to him.
And if that is not possible, then let it be inserted into wooden stakes, and extracted.
And let there not remain any cause inside the secondina.
And when you have completed all your operation, then administer what we have said about the cure in ulcerated cauteries that come from the vagina.
And if there comes blood flow, then let it be stopped with astringent waters and administer the other cure.
And I have already seen a woman in whose abdomen was a dead fetus, and then over that other fire burning, and then the dead fire is the other fetus. There happened to him an ulcer in his groin; and it was swollen so that fire broke out, and he began to vomit blood.
And I was called to his cure, and medicated him for a long time, and the ulcer was not healed.
Then I applied to him some plasters of strong attraction, and extracted from him a bone, and then passed some days, and extracted another bone; and I was very marvelled, since there was not bone in the abdomen.
And then I thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Then I cut the ulcer, and extracted from him some bones, the woman having remained in the same disposition, and already lived for a long time, a little of the blood flowing.
And I did not think that anything was strange except that in it is science and aid to what the doctor artifices with his hand for cure administers.
Of the forms of the instruments which are necessary to extract the fetus.
Form of vertigine with which is open the vagina:
This is the form of straitness in which are engaged the lips, to that engagement are two virtues in two extremes of two parts. But this virtue let it be more subtle of compression, and let it be made of ebony or of wood of boxwood.
And let the thickness of each wood be as two fingers and the margin of either side is one finger, and the length of each is a palm and a half; and in the middle part of two woods are two joints of that woods which are already fitted, of which the length is the measure of a palm and a little more, and the thickness of each is as two fingers, or a little more.
And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the vagina so that it is open by them when you turn the two prescribed straitnesses.
Other form also similar to that more subtle and farther:
Let it be made of boxwood or of ebony according to the likeness of forceps. But in the end of it are two additions thus with handles, and the length of those additions is as a palm, and the thickness of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the womb, then you should let the woman lie on her back with her feet hanging down, and open what is between their thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument as you would with forceps according to the amount that you want from the opening of the womb while the midwife does what you ask.
The form of delivery which the ancients described is:
Form of delivery by force in which the fetus is forced out:
Form of extraction with a large head
And it is similar to forceps which have teeth at the end, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, and sometimes with teeth like a pair of jaws with which it is cut and crushed. Form of extraction of a few:
Form having one thorn:
Form of one thorn having two thorns:
Form of spatula having two ends, with which the head is cut off:
Form of two wide spatulas:
All those instruments are exercised, and when they are more numerous and prepared by the artisans, then they are easier for the artisan and better for men because of their quantity.
And whether you have any of those instruments or not, you should be prepared, because the need for them is inexcusable.
Of extraction of the placenta.
When the placenta is retained after childbirth, then you should command the woman to retain her breath, and then make her sneeze with cinnamon, and press your hand over her mouth and nose, and if she vomits it out, that's good.
And if not, then you take a bowl and pierce the lining with a knife, and place in it herbs that burn the mouth of the womb, such as hellebore and ruda and anise and camomile and scilla and arabic hellebore and cassia wood and sanderswood. All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the bowl, and place that over the fire.
And then place a straw in the woman's mouth, and hold that while the evaporation comes into the cavity of the womb.
And then make her sneeze as we have said, and the placenta will be forced out with speed.
But if this cure does not work and it has not come out, then command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or in mullein, and then insert that in the vagina and scratch with that the placenta, and when you have found the placenta, take hold of it and pull it out little by little according to rectitude so that the woman does not feel too much pain. Before this, make sure that it is moved to the right and left sides with ease.
And if the mouth of the womb is narrow, we have already recommended the cure with sneezing and medication in the bowl with herbs.
But if it is not forced out with all the causes that we have recommended, then be careful that you do not tire too much on her in iteration of abstraction, but instead what comes out of her mouth lies in the woman's lap, and then close up that with ointment and tetrafarmacon; because that will cause to rot that, then dissolved and forced out.
But when it is rotten, there comes from it a bad odor to the head and stomach, and then what the woman vomits out lies in her lap; and then let there be administered sub-fumigations and convenient things for that.
But some of the Ancients have already tested sub-fumigation of netherwort and of dry figs.
Form of instrument by which the woman is sub-fumigated because of retention of menstruation and of the placenta:
It is made of brass or copper.
And the thin end is placed in the vagina and the wide end over the fire, and the sub-fumigation is held over the coals of the fire.
And hold that while the sub-fumigation is consumed and iterate another.
Of cure of the anus of a child not pierced.
Move children who are born and whose anuses are not pierced, which cause pain and are swollen. Then let the midwife pierce that with her finger; and if not, pierce that with a pointed spatula, and be careful that it does not touch the clitoris.
And then place over that wool soaked in wine and oil, and cure that with ointment until it is healed.
But if you fear that it is swollen, then place in the slit a straw for several days, and hold it when the child wants to urinate.
And then it happens that the swelling of the anus comes from hardening of a boil or abscess; therefore let that hardening be lanced, and then cure that with what we have said about the cure and the poultice.
Of cure for fistulas that come from below.
The fistulas that come from below in the perineum are low and thick, which come out near the anus or in the space between the parts.
And it is a fistula or many.
And when that hardening becomes old and corrupt by the moist white or purulent discharge, and sometimes these fistulas penetrate some.
And those that penetrate are known by what comes out of them through the opening and by flatulence; and sometimes the woman vomits, and very often it comes out of them vermin.
And sometimes those fistulas penetrate into the bladder, and into the flesh of the vagina; and sometimes they penetrate into the junction of the hip and into the notch of the anus.
And that in which the fistula penetrates into the anus but does not penetrate is that you put your finger into the anus and insert a pointed probe of brass or iron into the fistula when it is tense.
But if in that it is tense, then insert into that a probe of lead or of horsehair until you feel the probe or the bristle in your finger.
And if you do not feel anything in it nor any sign of discharge or worm or flatulence, as we have said, then know that it is not penetrated, and then go to the cure.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the flesh of the vagina, then its sign is emission of urine from that and prohibition of that towards that which the place is medicated with ointment.
But if it penetrates into the hip joint or into the bone and causes pain in the circuit of the perineum; and its sign is that the probe goes through there if in it is not tense within the bone, and pain in the circuit of the perineum; and when there is no discharge from there, nor worm, nor flatulence, as we have said, then know that it is not healed with ointment.
And in all those fistulas there is not a complete cure, and the cure of those is work and labor of the physicians over it who are firmly set.
But in that which is not penetrating and not old, healing with iron is expected according to what I have told you, and that which I have already tried.
And let the patient lie on his back and raise his legs up against his chest, with his thighs bent towards his belly, and then insert a probe of lead or of copper into the wound if it is a tortuous fistula, and feel around to find the place where the probe enters.
And if the patient is suffering from a hernia in his neck, then you must push your index finger into his neck.
And if you feel the probe pushing itself in through the opening when you insert it with your finger, then you know for certain that this is a penetrable hernia; and so you should not operate on it, for there will be no cure, as we have said.
But some people say that this kind of hernia is curable in certain individuals who are thin.
And the treatment by which recovery is expected in such a case is that you apply a subtle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as mentioned before, and insert this cautery into the hernia around the neck; then repeat this twice or thrice until you know that all the flesh around the hernia, which resembles a feather reed, has been tightened.
And then treat it with poultices wrapped in cloth until all the flesh around the hernia has healed; and treat the hernia itself with medicines that generate and solidify flesh, and if it is cured, well and good; but if not, no other cure will help.
And if the probe goes in and does not go through your index finger, which is placed over the anus, and there is a space between the probe and the flesh or membrane, then cut off the fistula where it touches the surface of the skin; then dry up the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see that it dries up by means of the probe, and let the probe be in the hernia until its end is reached at the place where the probe goes through.
And then clean off the flesh around the hernia which resembles a feather reed, and none of these things should break open.
But if blood flows out between you and your operation as you press against those flesh, then the best milky pus-like substance is cauterized with fire or with a sharp medicine; for fire cautery achieves two good things: it dries up those moist flesh around it, and it cuts off the flow of blood.
And then treat the hernia with poultices wrapped in cloth or in cheesecloth until the swelling goes down; and then cure the wound with a ointment that generates hard flesh and solidifies it.
And this is how medicines which have astringent and drying properties work: when the swelling has been restored, then it is healed and you need not fear recurrence.
But if the hernia has permeated into the rectum and is elongated from there to the surface of the body, then insert your index finger into the anus and feel around with it.
And if you feel the probe and between you and it there is membrane or flesh, and it is close to being penetrable, then this hernia should not be operated on by a direct approach, but only according to the way of confidence and hope.
This can be done in three ways: either by cauterizing it as we have said; or by drying up the hernia so that you achieve its cavity and it is possible for you to insert instruments and perform the cure close to the hernia; or by not cutting into the membrane which contains the neck, but by having the patient lean forward from the waist so that the hernia slides down away from the neck without his will, and then cure the hernia as we have said since it is very easy to heal; or by elongating this membrane and cleaning out the pus which has dried up around the anus, using a probe or some other instrument with a sharp end, and then clean off the flesh around the hernia which has been cut through at the place where you can pierce it by pushing in; and then strive to make the whole wound heal by cutting, and if the orifice above is not solidified and the fistula remains open at the anus, then pus will flow out through the hernia. And sometimes the hernia is finished in this way: when you insert the probe into the hernia it is at the side of the anus around the surface of the body and at the edge of the anus, then take a probe with a perforated end, which is made like a needle for piercing ears in this shape:
and then insert it into the hernia until you achieve its cavity.
But if it is penetrable at the edge of the anus close to the inside, then you must pull out the probe from that wound just as you would insert your index finger into the anus; and pull out the end of the probe and squeeze both ends together, and hold it like that for a day or two, and when you have inserted the probe further into the flesh, squeeze it tightly so that those flesh between the two ends of the probe are pressed in.
And then cure the wound until it is solidified and healed.
But if the orifice of the hernia is not penetrable, then make it penetrable in whatever way you can prepare it, unless it is in the rectum, for you must not do anything which would pierce the membrane; and then cure it as we have said until it is healed.
The shape of the spatulum with thorns by which the hernia is split open: one end of it is very acute and the other blunt, so that you do not pierce what need not be pierced.
Of suturing up hemorrhoids from which blood flows when they are cut.
Hemorrhoids occur in two ways, for either they are between the anus like charcoal or they are like grass with fat on top. And some are small and large, and the blood flows from them at times; they are raised up and are around the anus and at its edges.
But those which are outside the anus are according to the months of little moisture; from them flows water with a little blood, and they are according to the colour of the body.
And the cure for those which are inside the neck is to command the patient to sit up and to press in so that the neck dries out and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you must pinch and suspend them with your nails or what you have those with your fingernail, and then cut off their roots.
But if the nails are not gripped in them due to their moisture and softness, then take those with a rough cloth or a cord or a strip of wool, and pull them out with your fingers, and then insert them and sprinkle some powdered caustic on them over the cut, so that they are as cauterized; or cauterize them as mentioned in the chapter on cauterizing. And then cure them with the other cure so that they heal.
And if the anus does not obey the exit, then castor the patient with castoreum in which there is a small bite, and let it be washed with that which is in the neck and let it obey the exit gently when the patient is squeezed.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is looseness, and you must take them with your fingernail or with a needle, and insert them, and then cure them as we have said so that they heal.
Here is the translation:
And do this to all of them, leaving one untouched so that the excess blood can flow out from it.
And then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or in cerate over the anus; and have the patient lie down and rest. And then leave that one untouched; and when it has healed, treat those with ointment or some other treatment until they are healed.
And when they are old and unresponsive to medicine, then you should pierce them with the point of a spatula or your fingernail so that they become moist and prevent their consolidation; and then treat those that have consolidated.
Then you should open them with a more violent incision than the first, so that some blood flows and they become raw; and then treat those until they are healed.
Know that syphilis, which is the key, is not apparent except for a dark red color on the body resembling the head of a nail, and it occurs throughout the body and mostly in the parts below the feet and the fingers, and because of this you should treat the pain.
And so when it has been pierced in the area around the nail, and held with forceps or tongs and pulled out from its root; then treat that.
And if you wish, cauterize the second one mentioned in its chapter.
Warts are small, rough, round, and fistulous protuberances on the surface of the body, and they often occur in children's hands.
And its treatment is that you stretch it out and pierce it, or tighten it with gut or string so that it falls off. And if you wish, cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine.
And however, a wart is a small, hard, or fistulous protuberance on the surface of the body, and it often occurs in the palm, and when rubbed, it feels like an ant bite; it is caused by an infestation of ants around the body.
And its treatment is to take a needle made of goose feather or peacock feather, which should be strong, and place it over the wart so that the needle contains the area around the wart; then rotate your hand with the needle so that you pierce what is around the wart, and place it in the palm of your hand, and eradicate the wart from its root.
And if you wish, do this with a needle made of ram's horn or iron according to this form:
Let the part above the needle be drawn out thinly, silently (so that it is not pierced), and wrapped so that when placed on the finger, it appears smooth and the rotation of that.
And if you wish, cauterize the wart as mentioned before in the chapter on cauterization.
The form of the instruments that are administered to give a cautery:
Sometimes cauteries are made of silver or brass or molten and hammered ram's horn; and sometimes they are made from small and large instruments according to those they are administered, for that which is administered in the treatment of small children should be small; and of those whose anuses are sore or painful, their cauteries should be small.
The form of a large and slender cautery:
The head of the needle, above which the pouch is tied, should be made wide according to this manner; and let there be a distinction where the pouch is tied as well as the times.
And the end of it below, which is inserted into the anus, should be silent  (so that it is not open), drawn out thinly; and on one side of it there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the width of the hole according to the thickness of the rays and more coarse one small.
And let the pouch in which are placed the medicines of animal bladder or sheepskin, and its root be one palm long.
And let it be pierced with many holes so that when it is rolled, the thickness of the finger is between the holes.
And then insert into those holes strong thread of hard gut which is made from ten guts, or wrap that around it; and fasten with that the pouch, and when the pouch is placed on it, tighten the head of the cautery between two distinctions with a strong constriction, and then cauterize with that each hole: However, the quality of cauterizing with that is that you fill the pouch with medicine, which should be warmed according to the amount of the patient's tolerance; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
And then the patient should lie on his back, and raise his legs up and place underneath him a board or a pillow; and then anoint the end of the cautery with oil or egg white or mucilage of fenugreek or similar; and then insert that into the anus easily, and then take the pouch and squeeze it with both hands strongly so that everything in the cautery is evacuated; and then withdraw the cautery and the patient raises his legs against the wall.
And if the medicine forces him to defecate, he should hold it as long as he can; and if he sleeps with that for a whole night, he is better off.
However, if you cauterize him in the illnesses of looseness of the belly and his defecation stops, then you should repeat the cautery until he is healed.
And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then let the cautery be very thin and sharp, of those cauteries with which children are cauterized.
Treatment of piles:
You have already said in the division of the treatment of piles what suited the free, and I have thus described their treatment with hand and medicine according to the complement.
Therefore say that piles are varied according to what they are made of and according to the location where they occur.
And the causes for which piles are caused are thus: a stone is lodged in the anus or the rectum is pierced by a spear or a staff, or it is struck with a lance, or with a stick, or with an arrow, or similar.
However, the piles that are in the body's locations are thus: a plague which falls on the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the buttocks, and similar to those of the limbs.
And I have recommended the treatment of some piles that stop that reasoning and rule over the others.
And I will begin the piles of the head simple, for the remembrance of the compounded ones will come to the beginning of the third chapter.
I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to a blow from a stone or something similar, and the skin has torn only slightly and there is a large wound and you fear that pus will form, then you must immediately open and flebotomy the cephalica vein, and do not delay this; and extract the blood according to the amount of its virtue if nothing else prohibits flebotomy, especially if the blood that flows from the wound is scarce.
And it should be a flebotomy on the opposite side of the wounded part; and the patient should be guarded against repletion, wine, and heavy foods.
But if some reason prohibits it, then let the food be diminished and do not bring him near meat or wine.
And place over the wound, if it happens that pus forms, a poultice soaked in rose oil or wine in which there is a styptic.
But if he is sure that pus will form, then place over the wound, if it is recent, his own blood and let the air not have changed that powder which I will shortly mention.
And if the air has already changed that, then place some ointment on it until it is healed.
But if the wound is large or it is due to a cut from a sword and similar weapons, and its lips are not joined by threads, then join them with stitches according to what I will mention about their stitches.
But if the wound is uncovered to the bone and there is no retention of it except for a small bandage, then insert into it and heal the wound with medicines and restore the flesh by applying in place of thread, and order the patient to abstain from foods whose nature is coarse: heads and formen roots and similar things to them, until it is composed.
And if you find in the thread putrefaction and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut away all of that rotten matter and throw it out, and heal it afterwards.
But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood can flow and it is not severed by medicines, then probe for the artery and if you find that it is not severed, then pierce it with a spike, or ligature it; and if necessity compels you to do so, cauterize it until the blood is severed.
And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is lightness; therefore you should dust over those this powder, for it will solidify before the air changes it.
And the manner of the powder is this: take olive oil a quarter part, dragon's blood two parts, and gum arabic three parts; let all be well pounded and sifted, and fill the wound with it, and apply it tightly so that it adheres to the wound and coagulates with the blood.
And then bind it tightly above with lint and let it be so while there is pus in the wound, for if you remove the medicine before it is healed, the wound will not be cured.
And sometimes it does this alone, when there are no dragon's blood or gum arabic at hand.
And this method of operation is also done on large wounds when it seems that it should be applied and the lips of the wound are joined together, and only on recent wounds whose blood has not been altered by the air.
And if the air has altered them, especially during the summer, then it is not necessary to apply this powder, but afterwards cure those with what we have mentioned, by applying over them some digestible ointments or pastes made from flour of barley with water and honey so that they form a poultice; and heal them with the other cure until they are healed.
But if there is a broken bone in the wound and it is small, then you should extract it with tweezers.
And I will tell of the cure for head fractures when they are punctured.
Of wounds in the neck.
But if the wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in its medicine, and it is similar to the medicine for a simple wound on the head.
But if the nerve of the neck is cut or an artery, then if it is a nerve, there should be no incision made in it but rather avoided by applying medicines to it that cause violent contraction, as with cinchona and zinc which are like vitriol and similar things because they hurt nerves and constrict that place. And do not put over the wound anything causing any heat, for the substance of nerves is heat and their continuation is through the brain, which is the source of all the members.
And if it is being cured by medicines that are cooling, as with water that has been sprinkled with rose oil or not, and thucium when it has been washed with tepid water and the other stones according to this manner, then apply moist ointments.
But if the wound is large, then administer stitches or tie together its lips, and heal it afterwards with lint until it is healed.
But if there is depth to the wound or there occurs in it pus with blood, then probe that place more deeply.
But if the artery is cut and blood flows from it, then stop or dry that place, or ligature it, or cauterize it if necessity compels you to do so.
But if the spondylous bones of the neck or all of them are cut and the veins of the neck are saved, then join together the lips of the wound with stitches above the spondylous bone of the neck and do not touch that place; before you return it to its natural shape and bind it with decent tightness and let it be bound for several days; and heal it with ointments in which there is contraction and excitement until it is healed.
But if the wound is on the bone and there is depression in it, then probe it and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract them all that you can; and let what you cannot extract be left inside so that the wound becomes suppurative, and let its discharge be separated and the swelling of it alleviated.
And if the wound is recent then dust over it the powder that I have mentioned to you. But if there is a fistula in the wound, then heal it with what its memory will come to you afterwards in the next chapter.
If it is a piercing of a spear or staff and its depth, then consider also if from the wound there is windiness when the patient breathes, then know that the wound is lethal.
And if there is no depth to it and the wound is recent with its blood, then apply over it in the first hour powder, and do not bind it so that the blood is not retained in its depth and returns to the heart and weakens the patient; but apply over it attractive ointment, and let it be loosed two times a day.
And if the ointment is not at hand, then probe the wound's orifice with a stick so that it sucks what there is of moisture; and let the patient sleep on the wound so that it runs what is retained in it.
But if three days or more have passed since the plague and the patient does not experience any spasms, tremors of a bad heart, or stricture of the throat, and you see other signs of good health in him, then you may know that he is saved from the plague; and then cure his wounds with cupping and with other remedies until he is healed.
But if the healing of him is excused and all time is open, then you may know that a fistula has already been made; therefore, cure it through its opening.
And if the plague is from an incision of a spear or knife, and it is simple in appearance on the surface of the foot or leg, then cure it with water that has been preceded by sewing up the wound, if it is large; or with powder, if it is small.
But if there has already been an impression on the bone and you see that it is incising into pieces, then you must twist the plague and cut to extract those pieces if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then let them remain inside so that the plague can be poured out; for their extraction is dangerous.
And as for other plagues affecting the other members, the cure is the same as what we have already said.
Of plagues of the belly:
The disorder that occurs in the belly is either great, or small, or middling.
And a small disruption is made difficult in another way, and one knows that the reduction of them is more difficult if you do not cut off their intrusion into their place at once, for it opens and becomes swollen, so that the insertion of it is made difficult.
And therefore the best disruption is middling, for in that the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is in the two species mentioned above.
And know that the sewing up of the belly is according to four ways; but two sewings are common and convenient in the sewings of the other plagues of the body.
And two other sewings are proper to the other plagues, but they are more proper in the sewing up of the belly.
I will now give you an account and explanation of each one.
Therefore I say that when the plague is small and has come from some cause of the intestine, and it is difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when there has come inflammation of the intestine because of the chilliness of the air.
And therefore when this is so, then you should warm it in such a way that you submerge a sponge or piece of damp cloth in water made tepid only with squinant, and cypress, and spic, and embrocations with that, and apply it to the intestine so that the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes this is done with wine in which there has been added camphor, and it is better than water alone for the resolution of inflammation.
And therefore when you see the inflammation resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which is added alder and mallow, for by that the insertion of it is eased by a little cause.
But if the insertion of it is excused after this cure, then split the disruption a little with an instrument by which are cut off hemorrhoids.
And the first cure is better when it is proper that there be no section and no occupation to dry up close to necessity and defecation.
Of the instrument, know its form:
One part of it is bent acute, and the other part not acute, and its extremity be subtle, and may not have the subtlety of a spatulum, but rather be obtuse a little.
And therefore when the plague is amplified and you see it outside the intestine, then know that its reduction should be according to the form of it natural, in its proper place, if possible on it, for that is better.
But when the disruption is ample and it is in the lower part of the belly, then you should make the patient lie on his back and place his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you place his head and feet higher than his middle parts.
And likewise if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then pay attention and your consideration always on that so that the part in which there is the plague be higher than the other.
And therefore you should administer this in great plagues and in middling plagues.
And in small plagues, pause what is prepared for you and let the minister be between your fingers, which holds the disruption all by his hand and tighten the lips of it, and let him discover to you that he knows the sewing up of it from any cause or another.
And this is the way of common sewing up: you take the needle or thread according to the amount of the amplitude of the plague; and let it be taken from the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger, and tighten the thread one turn, and then you do not put oil in the two extremities of the gut, with two extremities of the phalanx which is below the gut of the parts of fingers, inside that you make it to penetrate of that part; and you have already added two extremities of the gut and two extremities of the phalanx, and so you have made four turns.
And therefore tighten with oil double in the circuit of the needle, and sometimes of two parts together, and let it be added the two lips and the plague by decent agregation; and let not cease doing this if it is necessary with needles until you have filled all the contraction of the plague.
And let the needles be middling between thickness and subtlety, for subtle needles pierce the flesh more readily; and thick ones are of difficult insertion in the gut, and therefore let them be middling in thickness and subtlety.
And let the needle be fixed in two extremities of the gut nearby, so that the flesh is not pierced readily and the plague opens before its consolidation.
And do not be prolonged in sewing up so that the plague may not be prohibited from consolidation.
And let the extremities of the needles be inserted so that they do not cause pain to the patient as he wakes from his sleep; and you shall pause upon the sewing up powdered expanders of all parts, which hold the extremities of the needles; and let them be stopped when you know that the plague is consolidated.
And these species of sewing up with needles in this manner is more convenient in small plagues, for you have at the sewing up of them one needle or two or around those.
But the second sewing up is communal: and it is that you administer with sewing up the four extremities, of the gut and two extremities of the phalanx, in one go, with a needle in which is oil wrapped in thickness and subtlety.
And therefore when you have with the needle penetrated these four extremities, reduce the needle of that meted part from which you began, so that the oil withdrawn draws the pus from the more superficial part to the plague, so that the sewing up is according to sewing up of cloth by which the cloths are tightened.
And place between each suture the amount of the thickness of your little finger.
This is how surgeons sew up wounds.
And with this type of suture I sewed up a wound which had been inflicted on a man in his belly, and it was a wound two fingers wide, and the rupture was of the size of a palm, and it had come out of the intestines about two palms from the anus; and so then I reduced that after the intestines had been outside for twenty-four hours.
And the wound was healed within fifteen days or so, and he recovered and returned to his normal self.
And other doctors had judged that he would not recover; and by miracle it healed, because I did not cure it with ointment, but instead placed a piece of cloth twice a day on the wound and washed it often with honey-water until it healed.
But I will tell you about two types of proper sutures according to the account of the Word.
And it is so that you begin with the stitch of the thread, and you insert the needle from outside to inside at the beginning.
And then when the needle penetrates the thread and that end goes in according to rule and along the length of the entire body, leave the tip of the ciphac in which you have inserted the needle; and let the other tip of the needle penetrate from inside to outside at the other end of the wound.
And then when you have made that one penetrate, then make the other one penetrate again at the other end of that wound from inside to outside; and leave the tip of the ciphac which is on this side, and let the needle penetrate at the other end from inside to outside.
And let that one penetrate with the penetration by which you make it penetrate into the ciphac at the end of the wound that is on his inside so that everything penetrates.
Then begin from this side of the wound and sew that with the tip which is of the ciphac on the other side, and pull out the needle of the thread which has penetrated, and then return that into that thread and sew the tip of the ciphac which is on the other side with this end of the wound; and pull out that of the thread which is on his part.
And do this once and then again, and do this once more until you sew everything that is outside according to that example.
And the sum of this method of suturing is that you sew with the stitch of the thread by which you sew the skin, so that you sew the ciphac one time from the end of the thread, and then let it be on the other side so that the edge is completed.
But the second type of proper suturing which I describe is the way of Gualia, and this is from the same matter as him and recommended by him; it is that you sew that according to semilitut with which some doctors sew it, in such a way that they join every part to its equal part in him conveniently by nature; and apply one end of the wound to the other end of the wound, and this is done according to what you judge.
Put the needle into the end of the wound that is near you from outside, and make it penetrate to inside in this one, and leave two tips of the ciphac; and then turn the needle and let it penetrate from inside to outside in two tips of the ciphac.
And then turn those ones, and let them penetrate from inside to outside in two ends of the wound that are on the contrary side.
And this method of suturing is better than the common lighter suturing, and it is the suturing of which I spoke before.
This is the way of Gualia.
And some said that the suturing of the belly is rectified with two needles, so you insert into these one needle at a time, and begin from where you are supposed to, and let it penetrate into the other side according to the way those who sew the body with the mouth sew.
And know that when a rupture is in the middle part of the belly, then the suturing of it is more difficult than of other parts of the belly.
But the judging of medicine for a wound is judged according to other wounds.
The cause of this is because when you find the wound still fresh with its blood in front so that the air does not alter it, and reduce the intestine and sew that and dress it decently, then place on it a carnificative powder.
And if the air has already altered the wound, then place on it some ointments which are to you known so that they make a hard stone and draw the threads, and let the ciphac and wound be consolidated; and then cure that in this way as is the curing of other wounds until it is healed.
But if you do not have the medicines at hand, then place on it immediately, because as soon as pus begins to flow out, change that two times a day, and let the patient move two times a day, and take care of him until he is healed, for you will not need other medicine in many dispositions when the wounds are simple.
But if you fear that the wound will communicate to the main members, then take wool of lion in oil of good quality, or in rosated oil, and place that around the places which are between the angles and under the joints.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your intestines, which it should, then anoint that with black styptic wine, and especially so if the rot is caused by the intestine and there is a penetrating opening into its cavity.
And know that what is of the gross intestine is easier to heal than what is in the subtle intestines.
And it is of difficult healing because the intestine which is called “gegunu” does not receive healing from a wound that boxes in it from all sides; and this is due to the great multitude of veins that are in it and because of its size, and because of the subtlety of that one, and because of its proximity to nature of nerves.
But if what comes from the wound is the thread, and you obtain that fresh, then reduce it according to your rule by which you reduce the intestines in the same way.
But if it has come to that space and is already green or black, then let you strengthen that with thread over the place that is blackened in it, because of the flow of blood, for there are veins and arteries in the thread.
And then insert that which is other than that one, and let two ends of the thread hang from the end of the wound outside it, so that on you be eased the attraction of it by means of the seating of the thread and emission of the pus of the wound.
Remembering of the wounds when they happen in the intestine.
When disruption happens in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it may be restored in some people, therefore because I saw one who had been wounded in his belly by a lance wound, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and made a fistula, and he vomited and had ventosity.
Then I followed the curing of him until it was known that he was not confident in his healing, but continued to reduce that until it was healed and the place was consolidated.
And I have already seen the location consolidated, I guided over the patient that I received about him an incident of evil in his belly; and not receiving anything for this evil incident and remaining in their own dispositions eating and drinking, and also going into bath and being exercised in their words.
And I have already said some experienced people that when the wound is in the intestine, and it is small, then we must sew it according to this manner: and you should take pieces of skin from large animals; and then join together the two lips of the wound and place one of those pieces with an open mouth over both lips of the wound; therefore, when it takes hold of those and tightens its mouth, cut off its head, for it adheres and does not dissolve.
And then place another worm nearby the first one, and do not stop doing this with worms one after another according to the quantity of the whole wound.
And then return that one and sew up the wound; and those heads attached inside will remain until the intestine is healed; and nothing harmful should happen to the patient.
And it is possible that the intestine be tied with a thin thread made from an intestine of an animal attached to it, because it is thinner than a needle; and you should take the end of those intestinal threads and make it very thin, and then tie the end of it with its own thread, wrapped around, and pierce that thread through needles and sew it up with that thread, and return that one to its disruption.
And this manner of stitching with worms is not anything but according to the way of confidence and hope.
But if the wound is big and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, then there is nothing but thinning, and not complete healing for it.
Of treatment of hernia and fistula.
Know that any wound and pustule when it becomes old and ancient, and is made into an ulcer, and is not consolidated and oozes pus all the time and is not healed, then, in whichever part of the body it may be, universally, it is named fistula, and we call it hernia.
And fistula according to truth is hard, white knotting, without pain, and to which there is a hollow like the hollow of a bird's leg; and because of that it is named some knotted, that is, pain.
And in some people it is moist, which oozes pus; and the moisture is cut off in a few hours. And sometimes this moisture is increased, and is less, and is thick, and is thin.
I have already shown all those causes and their signs and the treatment for them with medicines in the division.
And so I will make you know the treatment of hernia which is made by way of operation with the hand.
And know that hernia happens in all the parts of the body; for there are hernias which happen to the large veins and arteries, or to the nerves, or to the brain, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to one of the ribs, or to one of the vertebrae of the back, or to any of the joints composed by composition like that of the hand and the foot; and those are near to the principal member and similar ones.
And therefore that one of these hernias which is according to this manner is of the evils of difficult healing, and does not receive cure, and occupation with it is labor and ignorance.
And if there is any hernia whose depth does not reach to those places I have said, and you expect and trust in the healing of it, and want to know about it, then take a probe of iron or steel, and if the hernia goes straight, and examine it with that.
But if the hernia is crooked, then investigate it with a probe of subtle lead, for lead with its lightness is separated and bent according to the crookedness.
And if the hernia has horrifying bumps, it is not possible for you to signify about it with a probe.
Therefore, cauterize the openings for their openings, for the moisture by which you cauterize it goes through the other openings and comes out of them.
And then examine closely, according to which way you can know if there is a bone or nerve, and know whether the hollow of the hernia is far or near, or it is a hernia whose openings are on top of each other and is due to the sum of your strength, with your examination, with which you examine the patient, and the invention of the pain happens according to your compression with the hand over the location, and similar to the signs and the causes of the apostema.
And when you have understood all those causes with true state, then go to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider if it is an apparent hernia near or in a salty location, far from a joint, or of a nerve, or of an artery, or of a vein, or of one of the locations which I have said to you and told.
Then dry up the hernia as I have said before about its formation, and know what is in that filtration and of corrupt meats, and what is born in the opening of the meat, or of blood and of similar things, and cure it until it is healed.
But if the hernia is of great depth and is straight, then know that you pierce it in the preon as much as is possible for you to do so, and then cleanse it of all its corrupt meats; and then administer hot waters wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert those within the hollow of the hernia, which you have understood with iron.
And do that some times within so that the sharp medicine corrodes all that which is left in the hollow of the hernia of the corruption.
And then restore it with unguents which produce healthy meat within so that it is healed.
But if it is not healed by that, then cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
But if the cause of hernia is bone and it is due to you having certified that, then examine it and dry it up according to what we have recommended, unless you forbid any cause of vein or nerve or of principal member as I have said.
But if the bone is revealed and there is in it any corruption and blackness, then cut out that so that all the corruption is stopped; and then cure that with what it grows within so that it is healed.
And if it is not healed and pus comes out as I have said, then know that you have not reached the complete eradication of the corruption; and then uncover it again and examine it closely and do the reason for it and the cleansing of it with your very strong medicine, and then restore it.
And thus if it is healthy, it is good; and if not, then you should know that the corruption is in the distant depth of the body, which has not been reached, and so to you it is not wise to do anything but to leave it as it is.
And if the rotten bone is small, or it is possible for you to pull it out, then you should pull it out with fine forceps which are suitable for this.
And if there are many bones, then you must carefully perform the extraction of all of them, and of none should you leave any trace with your strength.
But if any cause of the moisture makes you worried, and in their incision there is no fear or mistake, then dissect those membranes or meats if they are here, and free the bones.
But if you are not prepared to extract the bones at that time, then place over the wound what will fester the wound, and let it stay in there so that it is around those bones of meats and membranes, and guard the wound so that it does not heal, and the incision which you have made in your operation is constrained.
If you are worried, place over it a pad soaked in oil, or a pad soaked in Egyptian ointment, or one of the green ointments; for when those membranes fester and the bones are separated from them by the incision, then their attraction is removed.
But if it is a large bone such as the bone of the leg or thigh or similar to them, and what is rotten in it is only its fascia, then cut away that fascia only behind where that blackness and corruption is, and then close up the wound.
But if what is rotten in it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that up and to incise all around where the corruption has come in, and then to heal that up so that it is consolidated.
And I advise you to have a man lie on his side so that he places that on his hip as an example and helper for your operation.
A young man around thirty years of age had pain in his head, and the pain came from the parts within because the matter was brought to the head from within, and it is matter of an ulcer with a great ulcer, and there was not any external cause.
And so the time was prolonged with that because of the mistake of the doctors until the ulcer opened up, and many matters came out of it, and its cure was properly paused while the leg was fistulated, and there were many openings in it which all gave off putridity and the moisture of the body.
And so he was treated by many doctors for around two years, and there was not any wisdom in them but in the art, because I was called to him.
And I saw his leg and the matters that ran out of it from those openings for a long time; and indeed the body of that man was all emaciated and his color was yellow.
And so I inserted the probe into one of those openings and reached the bone.
And so I probed all the openings and found out that they came from all parts of the leg.
And so I cut and incisively entered into one of those openings where I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten, and it was already rotten and blackened; and a part of the leg was also rotten because it had penetrated into the membrane.
And so I removed what was discovered to me and prepared of the exposed bone.
And I saw that it was not in the bone but that corruption which I excised and removed, and I had already removed it.
And so I paused the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
And so I iterated and discovered again on the bone secondly on the first discovery, and found continued corruption in the bone.
And I removed what appeared to me from that corruption, and so I made the cure of it and restoration, and it was not restored.
And so I discovered on him another time and did not cease to incisively enter the bone little by little particularly and to probe the restoration of it, and it was not restored until I had incisively entered around a palm of it, and that extracted with its marrow, and so I restored that with medicines, and it is slightly consolidated and healthy.
And it is not necessary to iterate in the operation and incision on him except for the disposition of his pulse and for the scarcity of his tolerance and fear of death, because he had fainting in all hours from excess of evacuation.
And so he is healthy from whole healing, and nothing is in place of hard bone; and the disposition of him in his body is good and his strength has returned, and he is conversing in his dispositions and did not make for him any contradiction in walking nor harm in any cause.
But if the prominent bone is in place of the body and has been extracted, then you should do this afterward in this manner: and you should take membrane and strengthen that at the extremity of that prominent bone, and command someone to extend that while you hold it; and pause that membrane of woolen thread over the meat which is below the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you attract the meat to the parts below, and you uncover the meat over the spot which you want to close up so that the saw does not cut the meat.
And pause wood or table below the bone properly, because when you do that it is not prohibited that the saw not cut the rotten meat.
And you should do the sawing on the rotten spot little by little, because if it is in the concavity of the bone and corruption does not appear in its appearance to feeling, and force the sawging on it another time.
And if the bone is rotten and not prominent, before it is one party continued with the other, and the corruption is in the middle place or in a part of it, then you uncover the meat from all parts entirely; and so pause wood below, and then saw that from the first party where the corruption is so that the sawging is continued from the other party.
And the sawging should be according to the spot of the corruption a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, enter that rotten joint, and saw the bone where it is continued from the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there is no ratio in it except wit.
And if the corruption is in the breast of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however you should examine the corruption in whatever manner appears to you, and open that, and cut that according to any disposition which is possible for you, and with each wit be straightened to you when it does not make for you contradiction vein or nerve.
And know that the incisors and saws for cutting these bones are many according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness and thinness and greatness and smallness, and hardness and their rarity; so that you prepare for every kind of operation convenient instrument for that operation.
And know that that operation makes for you on the kind of instrument of which you are adept; when with you is great study and long and knowledge of the ways of this art, and witness of ways of illnesses, because then you have them by your tools what is convenient for them of the instruments for all illness.
Here is my translation of the first sentence, with no additional comments: Form of a saw:
Form of another saw:
Form of another large saw:
Form of a razor: Let the head of this razor be shaped like a star-shaped key, and its points be shaped like the points of a stelefegi.
And it is not convenient unless with this one are rubbed the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or a large mouth wide open.
Form of a smaller razor:
Form of a broad razor:
Form of another saw decently made: Let it be made with a higher arch and the sharpness of it from iron, and its member of wood decently made. Its form is:
Form of a razor in which there is a cavity:
Form of another subtle razor:
Form of another razor with a curved extremity:
Form of a small razor similar to a tent:
Form of another smaller chisel:
Form of another chisel; this one similar to a razor, and its extremity is like a saw, and it is used in various places on the bones:
Form of a razor which is convenient for cutting into those bones that are perforated:
And its extremity is triangular and acute.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly to all the causes that we have said about razors and chisels and saws.
Of cutting extremities and of serrating bones.
The extremities can be cut either by an intrinsic cause or an extrinsic one, or as you have medicated that corruption through the cure of those medicines and the cure does not confer, or you see the corruption go deep into the member which you have not perceived any cause, then know that you must cut that member to prevent the patient from dying or suffering a greater harm.
And the sign of him to whom it happens is that the member is made black as if it were burned by fire, or it becomes black close to where that decay has entered that member and it affects all the body; therefore cut with your chisel at that member.
And similarly, if the cause of corruption is a percussion of some poisonous causes like that of the sea scorpion or of the viper or of the rattlesnake or of their likes.
And if the corruption or percussion is at the extremity of the finger, then you cut the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it may enter the hand.
And similarly, if it has accessed the hand, then you cut that at the joint of the wrist, and do not give space to the corruption so that it may enter into the forearm.
And if instead the arm is affected, then cut the arm at the elbow in the joint.
And if the corruption goes further and turns around the elbow, then death follows for the patient; and in addition, another cause occurs in cure which is a quantity of virtue.
And similarly, do this to the foot when corruption affects its toe, then you cut that at one of its toes.
And if it affects the instep of the foot, then you cut all the foot. But if it has entered into the toe, then you cut the foot at the joint of the toe.
And if the corruption has already reached the toe, then there is nothing but dismissal, and let the patient die.
And the way of cutting the member or serrating it is that you tighten the ligament in the part lowest where you want to cut, and tighten another ligament above the location; and extend the minister one ligament to the parts lowest, and extend the other minister in its place; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments so as to be split wide open until all the flesh is exposed; and then it is cut or serrated.
And know that it is put on a linen of all parts so that it does not touch the affected location, and that it comes to the patient bandaged tightly and apposed with cauterized wound.
But if it happens bleeding when wounds are opened, then you cauterize the location tightly, or pause there some powders to constrict the bleeding; and then return to your medication until it is complete.
Then bind the bandaged member with a ligament in a suitable way, and cure that until it is healed.
And then he returns to you that he has fallen on a man on his foot, this accident which you have recomposed, which is when blackness has come to him in his foot by a scorching that was similar to the burning of fire.
And that corruption has first occurred in his toe and extends to all the foot.
And then that man prepared for himself remedies more than that medicine may go to the member with the strength of it that was struck by pain and scorching, and he cut that foot at the joint, and fire healed it.
Long time had occurred to him that corruptive condition in the toe of his hand indicated.
And then it came to me and so I perceived the excess of that suppuration with that which was applied on the hand of remedies, and then the cleansing of his body; and the suppuration is not reduced and began to go to another toe as it began in the hand.
And he called me to cut his hand, and I did not want to do that hoping about the reaction of that suppuration, and if he had to die because the virtue of life was above cauterization.
And after he left me, he returned to his land and came back to me that man prepared and cut all of his hand, and it healed.
And I have not added this narration unless it is an aide about that which strikes at the source of this disease, and that it is a sign by which it is understood and according to which it turns out.
Of cure of sores and quality of cauterization with medicines.
When apostemas occur in various members of the body and the space of the apostema is prolonged as it collects pus, then it is broken and perforated, and the pus is discharged from it, and the place is washed clean, and there is not inflammation on bone or on nerve or on ligament; it is called a sinus, and it is not named fistula.
But if the space is prolonged as corruption prevails in any member, then it is called a sinus and not a fistula.
And its cure is that you cut that codena completely as it is rolled, and more so when it is made with a saw, and compresses that do not adhere to the affected location by its corruption.
But if you hope that the codena adheres and that corruption does not succeed by other consequence, and in the codena has been a hollow, then cure it with a plaster.
And it is that you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the arm that you see gives off an offensive odor, then cauterize it with an Egyptian medicine which is of oil and wine agreed and received parts equally in a vessel, and are placed tightly over the fire so that the medicine is made hot and poured to specks of honey.
And then you take what is necessary from him and dissolve it with water and honey; and enema the rectum with it, and strengthen its orifice, and leave the medicine in him for the amount of two hours.
And then extract it with a syringe; and do this for as many days until the rectum is cleansed and the modesty restored.
And sometimes it is enema'd with water of ashes when you do not have this medicine at hand; and it is that you take the ashes of wood, and put water on top of it; and then stir it and enema with it until you are certain the rectum is cleaned out.
And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine nor water of ashes, then enema with water and honey mixed with ground cinammon, and also with wine and honey mixed, for the property of honey is to cleanse and wash, and the wine causes adhesion to the rectum, and especially when there is excess of dryness and stippling in the wine.
And when you do this several times and are convinced that the rectum is restored, then enema with something that makes the flesh grow in it.
And it is that you take the thin unguent and dissolve it with rose oil and stout wine; or you can enema with some other medicines and unguents which I have already written about in the treatise on unguents.
And if the orifice of the rectum is tight and does not receive the cannula of the enema, then you should widen it with a small iron gradually, and place cautery wrapped in unguent Egyptian or unguent Basilicon on it until it is widened.
And similarly if the orifice is wide, then you should sew up the lips of it and leave a quantity in which the enema can be inserted without addition.
And if the orifice of it through which the bowel runs is raised up to the parts above, then dry that in the pus base place that is in it so that the bowel runs down inside, for when the bowel is constricted in the rectum, flesh will be generated in it.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the rectum all around in the pus base place as you wish, then you should make an incision so that you prepare the member with preparation by which the bowel runs slightly more easily according to what you have experienced and that no cause of the bowel be retained in it.
But that which is over the orifice of the rectum, which restores in all hour by itself that which is stuck in it of the bowel. And so that you know if that which runs from it of the bowel is little or much, or is digested, or not digested:
And with this consider the place of that rectum, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if there is abscess in it.
And when your treatment is prolonged in such a manner, and you see the matter that is discharged over the orifice of the rectum already sticking, or becoming attached, then on the third day you can loosen it, and when you loosen the plaster, then change the linen and renew the unguent.
But if from the rectum a subtle humour flows for a long space, then do not despair of its adhesion, for its healing is proper, for some men in whom generation of flesh in their plasters is delayed and of those so in whom the contrary to it is done.
And if from the rectum for several days bowel of undigested food is discharged, then know that the rectum does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the rectum is delayed and the cause prolonged, then you temper in the dryness of the medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried thus with thin unguent when excess of addition of stiptic is in it.
And the best with which it is cured is that you take thin unguent and dissolve it in rose oil, and is on top of it old wine tempered in its substance, and then confect that with it, and use it.
And already do likewise in that action when there is no bowel, thin unguent, honey when it is cut in so that it is thickened, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe and mix all together and powder it over the honey which is over the fire, and then line that over linen and strengthen it over the rectum; and line that with the honey which you have cut in so that it is thickened and powdered over linen and strengthen it.
And sometimes they are administered with long aristology and slices of heavenly lily (and it is heavenly lily) and farina of erys and centaurea, and use those simples or mix them, powder all together and over the honey which you have recommended; and use it.
And if the rectum is prolonged and is not healed by this treatment, then know that corruption is in its depth, and already do incision on the bones or in the other hard members or bowels; then you cure it with tubular treatment, thus as above is said.
Of treatment of panaricus and nail scraped and digit addition and section:
Panaricus is an abscess which arises below the nail of the finger of the hand or of the foot, and it is very strong in the other fingers, and when it is prolonged and its cure is less valued, or it is an abscess of cauterisation, or it is corrupted, and causes bowel to flow that corrodes the roots of the nail, and very strongly corrupts all of it, and very strongly pervades its corruption to the bone within which it has a fetent odour, and its extremity is made dark, and its colour is made dark.
And therefore when you have that according to what we have said in the division and your cure does not come about, then see that you incise with iron all of the excess which is swollen from the nail and then cauterise the wound, for cautery benefits greatly in this.
But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail are closed and compact, and they begin to press and sting it, then see that you pause a subtle ray below the angle of the nail which presses the flesh, and drive that up and insert that flesh with facility, and pause over that which exudes from the flesh of the medicines scorching within so that all is restored.
But if the corruption has already pervaded the bone, then see that you incise the bone and extract it, for there is no time in which the bone corrupted is healed.
And if the decay and corruption go to the finger, then you insert that in one of the knots according to how it is premeditated, and then cure that so that it is healed.
But if there is a blow or scratch on the nail and as a result there is intense pain in that place, then you should start by bleeding the patient and dry the nail with a sharp spatula with a transverse cut above it, and be careful that the cut does not penetrate the flesh below the nail, for you will cause intense pain to the patient and will provoke the birth of superfluous flesh in that place; then heal that place with something that alleviates pain.
But since it is found in some people that there is very little flesh and very few bones, or very little nail.
And some are born in the root of a joint, or are born in some knuckles of the fingers. But that which is born in some knuckles of the finger is not painful, and that which is born in the joints is very painful.
And with those who are born fleshy, the cut is easy and you should insert it into its root with a wide spatula.
But that which is born in the root of a joint, its cure is difficult; and therefore beware of cutting it.
But with that which is born in the finger at the knuckles, you should start by inserting the flesh of it into the bone with a round incision and then bind it with one of those sutures appropriate for that purpose, and heal that until it is healed.
But the consolidation that happens to the fingers between their joints, either from the birth of the person, or from consolidation of a plague, or from a fire, or from something similar, then you should dry that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form.
And then place between them some bandages soaked in rose oil so that they are not consolidated quickly and separate those, or place between them a thin sheet of lead subtle enough so that it is consolidated according to the situation.
And similarly if consolidation happens in some fingers with the palm, then you should dry that consolidation according to how it is prepared and convenient for the figure of the member.
From an incision of a vein, they are varicose.
Varicose veins are varicose and are thick coiled veins full of melancholic superfluities that come in the parts of the body, and their greatest occurrence is in the legs, especially in the legs of travelers, laborers, and carriers.
Therefore, you should administer a purgation of the body with black bile several times with a strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
But their cure is according to two methods: the first is that it is incised and that black blood is drawn out; the other method is that the vein is elevated and all of it is extracted.
The cut is according to this method: soak the leg first with hot water so that the thick blood is dissolved, which is feculent in the leg, and then tighten the patient's leg from the highest part of the thigh towards the lowest part of the groin with a bandage, and then dry the vein at one, two, or three places with a wide cut, and then elevate the black blood with your hand from the lowest part of the leg upwards, inside and out, until the quantity that you want and can endure is expelled, and the strength of the patient permits.
And then bind that, and order him to abstain from foods that engender black bile.
And repeat the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full and this affects the patient.
But their elevation is according to this method: you race the leg of the patient if there are pains in it, and then put him in a bath and soak his leg with hot water so that he becomes red and the veins become swollen; or that he be exercised by strong exercise, if a bath is not available, so that the member becomes warmed.
And then dry the vein on the right side of the leg by cutting it in the long or behind part of it, or in the lowest part of it below the ankle.
And then open the vein with nails and gouge the vein from all parts where it appears to you, and its appearance should decline to blackness.
And therefore, when you see that white and chord-like substance, then you know that the vein is tied.
And then you put it below the thread so that it is elevated and let out of the vein, and suspend that with a lion-skin thong.
And then dry another cut, and then dry that cut through three fingers, and gouge the vein from above where it appears.
And then elevate that and insert it into the posterior cut below the ankle, and then extract it and elevate it until it is expelled by the second cut, and then extract it from the cut above that.
And do this until you extract it from the highest or uppermost cut of all the cuts, so that all is expelled; and then insert it.
And if it does not obey you in extracting and elevating, then insert a strong bent needle into it and ligature that and extract it, or insert your hand below the thread and turn your hand all around where it is inserted. And beware that it is not broken; for if it is broken, it is difficult for you to elevate that motion and it has come upon the patient through that harm.
And when all of it is expelled, then place over the site of the plague wool soaked in wine and rose oil and not-rose oil, and heal that until it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted having tortuosity, to which there is involution at its parts, and it is not according to rectitude as we have said, then you should gouge that in all of its tortuosity and its involution, and then suspend that with nails so that you elevate it all.
And beware that you do not cut the vein and plague it, for it will be difficult for you to elevate it; and use your prudence in that.
Form of the incision from which the vein is dried:
It is not cut in this way with nails nor is it of acute extremity so that it does not plague the vein; and it is of great flexibility, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein through its subtlety; it has in it superfluous thickness as we have said.
Of extraction of the leg vein:
This vein is generated in the legs in warm lands as in Al-Ateg in the warm land of Arabia and in the hot and dry lands of India, where there is little vegetation and few trees.
And it is very rarely generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And its generation is from putrefaction which comes below the vein as venom from serpents and worms and maggots and worms engendered between the vein and flesh.
And the sign of the occurrence of this vein is that there is violent inflammation in the leg and then the place becomes blistered; and then the vein begins to issue from the place of that blister which seems like the root of a plant.
And when his extremity appears, then you must wrap a piece of lead weighing half a drachma around it; and hang the lead from the arm by means of a thread, and let it rest on the chest.
And as many times as you see his eyes go outside because of something, wrap that up in lead and put it on over there. And if the swelling persists, then you insert a piece into him and wrap around the rest; but do not insert that part which was on the outside because it will be constricted and go inside the flesh and cause inflammation, pus and a bad ulcer at the site.
Because it should be treated gradually and extracted little by little, until it is pulled out completely from the rear of him so that no cause remains inside his body.
And from this vein, there are some people whose length is up to 20 or even 30 palm-widths; and I have seen one that was over 50 palms in length.
And if it is cut into during the time of its medication, then insert a needle into the opening and pierce it with a long needle throughout his body until everything that is in the material is evacuated, and cause putrefaction of the site for several days using medicines; and then cure that through the treatment of ulcers.
And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot, and comes to him many openings, and is extended from each opening.
And so cure that as we have said in the division and with what is above said.
About the generation of worms under the skin, and it is called bovine disease.
This disease is named in some lands bovine disease because many times it affects cows and it is a worm that is born between the skin and the flesh, and goes through the whole body pushing and going down, and it is revealed by its movement from member to member until it breaks the skin and comes out.
And its generation is through putrefaction of certain humors just like it happens with worms and snakes and earthworms and roundworms in the belly.
And it is feared for its malice because when it goes through the body and rises to the head, then it breaks out violently and goes in and destroys the brain, and that is why many times it happens.
And so when you want to cure that and extract it, then it is not done unless through his walking and appearing from him; and then when you see it above him and what is under him with strong constriction, then dry it out on him and extract that.
And if it is buried in the flesh and you cannot pull it out, then put fire on the site where it is hiding; and the main reason that is feared is corruption of him by which he corrupts the site just as we have said.
But if you see that it has reached the head close to the brain, then constrict on his forehead with a strong grip and dry him out there and extract that; and if the patient needs cleansing of his body with medicines that evacuate putrid bad humors and guard himself from foods that generate putrefaction.
About the disease of children.
This disease is named in our land a pain, and it is a pain that comes to some members, and then is transferred from member to member.
And you will see that according to what I tell you. I was called to a woman patient at a village, and I uncovered her arm and saw a small inflammation on the vein of the arm, and as pus came out for an hour, I saw that inflammation go like a worm pushing, but slowly, just as if it were a living silver when it goes from place to place.
And then it went into the pain of that site and settled in the muscles, and then I applied a plaster there for an hour.
And then it went throughout his body until it reached his other arm.
And I saw it move throughout his body just as I saw it, and was very surprised by its movement from member to member. And I had seen this before in my own eyes according to that manner; but I have seen many which cause pain being transferred from member to member. But I did not see that with the eyes just as in the woman.
And I did not think that it was because the woman was old, with thin skin and veins showing through, and in this she appeared to me that winding movement transferred from place to place.
And it is necessary that this does not appear according to this backward-cure in those who are delicate and with thin skin and veins showing through.
And when you want to cure that and the patient feels the pain, then do not put your hand on the opening as we have said above, but constrict it and pull it out slowly and dry it out there until that winding movement is stopped, and cauterize the site.
But if you do not see it with your own eyes, then cure that through expulsion of the body and by causing that winding movement to happen, and take out those by foul-smelling pills and pills of serapium and similar things.
About extraction of arrows.
Arrows are diversified according to their species, and according to the parts of the body where they hit, for the diversity of them is that some have great points, and small ones, and hooked ones, and blunt ones; and there are those that have three angles, and there are others that have tongues.
And the signs of the liver are when it hits that arrow and pierces the bone and is stuck in the cyphax which is above the brain, for then occurs violent soda, and scotomia, and vertigo, and heat in the eyes, and inflammation and heat of the tongue, and spasm and mixing of the mind and vomiting of bile, and a strong loss of speech and destruction of voice, and moisture comes out from the wound site like white pus, and you see him like bloodless.
And so if these signs appear to you, then abstain from the cure and extraction of the arrow if it is not out.
But the signs of the arrow when it hits the heart are that it is near the left mammary gland, and if it is stuck in a hard cause, and not a soft one; and then the movement of the arrow is like the movement of the pulse, and it draws out black blood from the wound site, and causes shivering of the limbs, and fainting, and syncope; and then you know that death is certain.
And the signs when it has wounded the lungs are effusion of bloody spume from the wound site, and the blood vessels that are near the throat are swollen, and the color of the patient turns pale, and he breathes heavily, and asks for air to breathe.
And if he pierces the arrow into the veil that is on his foot, and the pain is then near the little ribs, and the great vein is made with great pain and sighing, and all the parts of the muscles are not painful.
And if he pierces the arrow into the stomach, then very soon you will see from the plague some undigested food.
And if he pierces the arrow into the belly, and it is stuck in there, you will see some slit of the plague, or the fabric, or hernia which is torn, and there is no hope for the cure of him without extracting the arrow.
And if the arrow pierces into the bladder, and urine flows out of it, and some cause processes outside the parts, and there is great pain on the patient, then know that it is mortal.
But the other members like the face, neck, and throat, and shoulders, and the joints of the back, and the collar bone, and the hip, and their similar parts, are saved according to the greatest dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a venomous arrow.
And I will tell you what I have seen about the nature of these arrows so that you can understand it and use it for your cure.
The reason is that in a man who has been shot with an arrow in the tear duct of his eye, and I extracted it from the other side, after cutting through the bone of his nostril, he healed and did not lose the use of his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew who was shot in the bone of his nostril, below the eyelid, and the arrow was already concealed and he did not get it out except for a small end with which it adhered to his face, and it was a large arrow of the sharp arrows of the Turks, with a lion's claw at its tip, and there were no nostrils.
And the Jew healed, and his eye did not suffer any evil accident.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who was shot in the throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, and that one to which the bone was attached; and then I entered between two bones with it, and it was already submerged in his throat; and then I made it thin with that, and then extracted it, and the Christian healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who was shot in his belly, and I thought he would die from it; and then, since more than thirty days had passed and there was no change in him about his dispositions, I entered into the arrow and worked on it, and he healed, and no evil accident befell him.
And I saw a man in whom an arrow was shot into his back, and the plague solidified on him, and after fire had been applied to it for seven years, the arrow came out at the root of his hip.
And I saw a woman who was shot with an arrow in her belly, and the plague solidified inside her, and she did not change in her dispositions in any way, and the woman did not suffer harm in any of her natural functions.
And I saw another man to whom an arrow was shot into his face and the plague solidified, and the arrow broke, not causing him any pain, and similar things happened here.
And I extracted the arrow of the king's son who was shot in the middle of his nose and had already declined to the right a little, and the whole arrow was concealed.
And I was called for his cure when the arrow entered three days ago.
And then I found the plague of the arrow very tight; and then I inquired into it with a very thin needle, and he did not feel that; but he felt a sting below the right nostril, and then I perceived that this sting was from the tip of the arrow.
And I applied the place with ointment in which is verityative and digestive, believing to me that the location appears to me to be the location of the arrow, so that it dries on it.
And there happened no significant incident to the location that the arrow had reached that location; and I continued with the ointment on it for many days, and there happened no accident; and the plague consolidated in the meantime, and the throat of the extraction of him healed over a space of many days until one day he felt the arrow within his nose and made me aware of it.
And then I applied acute corrosive medicine to the plague for many days until fire opened it up, and with a probe, I probed that, and found the tip of the arrow sticking in the bone.
And then I continued the perception of the plague with that acute medicine until the tip of the arrow appeared to me visibly, and I passed through time with that for the space of four months.
And then when the plague was swollen, and it was possible for me to insert forceps into it and remove it, without resistance, I did not cease probing and working on that with various tools, until one day I began on that with tools of descentment, according to the form of those in the end of the chapter, and extracted that; and then restored that plague.
And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored that and the plague consolidated, and the throat healed with entire health, and there happened no evil in him.
And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some arrows so that you pause this rule and significance about what I have not said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of that are not comprehended by narration or understanding, nor does it comprehend those the book.
And the wise artisans compare a little about what is moving about what is absent; and find operation new and tool novel according to the descentment of the causes strange of the art when it happens.
And therefore I say that arrows are not wrenched from the parts in which they are stuck but according to two ways, either by attraction of the location in which they enter or by the contrary of the other part.
And that which is wrenched from the location from which it entered, or is arrow proceeding in a fleshy location, and is drawn out and wrenched.
And if it does not yield to pressure of the hour in which it entered, then know that you leave it for some days until the flesh around it dries out and is loosened from its entrance and exit.
And similarly if it is stuck in bones and does not yield to you, then let it go for some days and repeat that with attraction and motion on each day, and it is wrenched.
And if it does not yield to you after some days, then know that you bore into the circuit of the arrow in that bone of every part with a very thin borer until the location is enlarged, and then extract that.
But if the arrow is hidden in the body and hidden from the senses, then you should probe that area with a pointed instrument that is suitable for extraction.
And if you cannot reach it due to the tightness of the flesh and the length of the arrow, and there are no bones, nerves, or veins in the way, then you should cut into the flesh so that it is enlarged and it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if there are ears attached to it, then you should carefully loosen the flesh around the arrowhead, using all your skill; and cut around the arrowhead, if you cannot extract it through the opening in the flesh created by the fracture of the ears and by twisting them so that they loosen.
And when you are extracting the arrow from any location, you should use your hand with forceps in every way possible to make it loosen; and gently with great subtlety so that the arrow is not broken and it is easy for you to extract it.
And if you cannot remove it immediately, then you should leave it for a few days until the tissues around it have healed; and then try again when the time has passed. But if you are facing a flow of blood, then you should do what we have said about healing in its respective chapter.
And guard against damaging any veins or nerves, or the bowel; and use your skills in every possible way to extract the arrow, doing so with ease, calmness, slowness, and firmness as we have recommended.
And when you are contracting the arrow to pull it out, make sure the patient is in a position that will facilitate its removal according to its direction and angle, as that is more beneficial. But if that is not possible for you, then do what is possible for you based on your knowledge of the patient's anatomy.
But the arrows that are shot in the opposite direction of the other side, or those that have exited through the opposite side, or cause a bulge at the tip of the arrow from the deeper part of the wound, then you should press on it; and cut it according to how far the forceps can reach; and then pull it out, as it is easier to remove.
But if it is stuck in the bone, then you should twist the blade according to its angle so that the arrow cuts into the bone, and enlarge the wound, and then extract it.
Otherwise, leave it for a few days, and then try again when it has become loose.
And if the shaft of the arrow is in it, then you should push on it.
But if the shaft is broken and you want to administer pressure, then you should insert it into the arrow's groove so that it fits snugly into the concave part of the arrowhead and then push on it.
But if the arrowhead is concave, then you should push on it with a strong instrument inserted into it, as the arrow will be loosen by that action.
And if the arrow is stuck in the wound, then you should cut away all the flesh around it that is possible for you, and then heal it as best you can.
And if the arrow pierces the foot, or the belly, or the bladder, or the side, and is close enough for you to touch it with your finger, then you should cut away around it and guard against damaging any veins or nerves; and extract it, and then sew up the wound if necessary, and heal it.
The shape of the forceps used to pull out arrows:
They are shaped like the beak of an eagle, serrated so that they grip the arrow tightly and don't slip.
And they are made in various shapes: large and small, wide or narrow, depending on the size of the arrow, the depth of the wound, the width of the opening, and how tight it is.
shaped like a nail so that it can loosen the arrowhead inside the concave arrow and is pushed by it.
From the puncturing of veins.
The veins from which blood flows out when they are punctured are .xxx., which are in the head .xvi., There are two pulsating veins which appear near the ears, called alhasisain; two herbs that grow on the temples; and two veins in the tear ducts of the eyes, called aspicientz; and a vein prepared at the middle of the forehead, and a vein at the tip of the nose; and two veins at the neck; and two veins at the upper lip; and — these are called the algelic veins —; and two veins below the tongue. But the veins that are punctured in the arms are .v.; Because one of them is the cephalic vein, and it comes from the wild thyme; and the people call it “the vein of the head”, and it is superficial, and it is a small vein composed of a branch of the basilic vein and another branch of the cephalic vein; and the people call it “the vein of all the body”, and the basilic vein is the one that runs along the arm, and it is called “wrist vein”, and the common people call it “vein of the belly”; and the funis vein, which runs along the forearm, and it is the one through which the puncturing occurs, and it appears prominently; and the salvatella, which is the vein between the little finger and the little finger, and there are two branches.
And in the leg and thigh there are three veins; one of them is below the curve of the jaw of the jaw, and the other is the sciatic vein, which is below the curve of the domestic jaw; and there are other similar veins in the leg.
The healing of the veins near the ears is through old catharics, bloodletting, and ancient ulcers and sores on the head.
And the quality of bleeding them is according to what I instruct you: it is that you cut the patient's head, and wash his head in the occipital area where both veins are located with a wide bandage, applying good pressure; then tie the patient's neck with a cloth so that the two wounds near the ears appear on both sides of a depressed area of the head; and feel their pulses with your finger, and if you sense their pulses with your finger, here is the sign with your finger.
Then you take the cutting knife, and it is the one that is inserted, and then you insert it below the vein in the bone so that the puncturing comes to the bone. And then lift your hand up with the vein and the bone above, and pierce the vein with an inserted knife. And the length of the incision should be the amount of two fingers, give or take a little; and let the blood flow as much as you want.
And then apply a strong powder and leave it there until it is healed.
And now, at the beginning of the book, we shall describe their appearance and their cauterization.
But the two veins of the temples, from which bloodletting is performed, are ancient and rotten, and have constant suppuration and acute overflows to the ears.
And the way to let blood from these is according to what you see: constrict the patient's neck until the two veins become visible by a clear feeling and are demonstrated by your finger; and then you pierce them.
And then you lift the vein above the artery with your index finger, and insert the phlebotomy needle beneath it, and lift the vein upward; and you pierce it thus as you have done with the other two veins; and let blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
And then loosen the constriction on the patient' neck and place your finger over the vein for an hour; and place a bandage and strong powder over it, and leave it there until it is healed.
And the description of them, their appearance, their cauterization, and their attraction have now been described at the beginning of this book.
And therefore the phlebotomy of the vein on the forehead is similar to the phlebotomy of the cephalic artery for ancient diseases of the face and for suppuration and bad ulcers.
And the way to let blood from it is according to what you see; it is that the patient constricts his neck with a bandage until the vein becomes visible. Then take the instrument named "fossory", of which this is the form:
Place the prominent point at the top of the fossory onto the vein and pierce it with a needle or other sharp object in its hand, and let blood flow according to the quantity you wish. Then loosen the constriction on the patient's neck and strengthen that area until it is healed.
And sometimes it is opened by phlebotomy on the side, but not so that the phlebotomy has a sharp end as other phlebotomies do, rather it has a flat end, and it is phlebotomized according to its width, because the bone is near and would break through if it were too thin.
But the phlebotomy of the two veins that are in the lachrymal area for suppuration of the eye because of bad ulcers and diseases of the face.
And its quality is that the patient constricts his neck with a bandage and then you phlebotomize them while you are standing over his head.
And the phlebotomy is done according to its width and length a little with few phlebotomies, because there is no flesh in that place; and if the phlebotomy is thin, its end will easily be broken.
And then let blood flow as much as you need, and place a bandage over them, and strengthen that area for a day, and then loosen those.
But the phlebotomy of the vein on the nose is relevant to acute fever and violent suppuration, and diseases of the face and suppuration that occurs in the face, especially when it is ancient.
And the way to let blood from it is that the patient constricts his neck and then you take his nose with your left hand, and take the phlebotomy needle long and thin, and insert it in the middle part of the nose according to its straightness, because the vein does not become visible here, and because blood begins to flow immediately.
Take care that you finish your hand with the phlebotomy little by little and let blood flow according to your need; then bind it for a night, because it is restored quickly.
But the phlebotomy of the two veins that are on the arm is relevant to constriction of the elbow and to the beginning of leprosy, and many diseases, and bad ulcers as well as with herpes.
And its quality is that the patient constricts each one under his neck with a bandage; and the doctor stands over the patient's head, and the patient sits on a stool.
And then phlebotomize the vein along with a small, wide phlebotomy needle little by little. Then extract blood according to a moderate quantity or according to what you see is needed for that; and then do likewise with the other vein.
Then loosen the bandage and strengthen the two veins with a mild constriction so that the patient is not suffocated, and leave it on until the wound is healed.
And the phlebotomy of the veins in the armpit is relevant to small blisters and pustules on the mouth, and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and its surroundings.
And its quality is that you make the patient lean forward, and strengthen his neck with a bandage, and then open his lips and look at two veins of which one is on the right side of the lip and the other is on the left; and their demonstration is through their blackness, and more so because in the surroundings of those are small black veins. Then pierce each one with a piercing incision.
But if you are doubtful and do not know which is which, then listen to the incision of the larger one, and to the pus that is manifest in them.
And do likewise with the two veins that are on the lips above.
But of the two veins that are below the tongue its phlebotomy is relevant to the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for suppuration that occurs in the throat, for the disease of the uvula, and for diseases of the mouth.
And the way to phlebotomize them is that you follow the patient between your fingers in front of the sun, and lift his tongue, and look underneath it, of one side of which there is a vein and on the other side there is a vein, and the color of each is inclining towards blackness.
And then phlebotomize them; and be careful that you do not finish your hand in phlebotomizing them, because beneath them are arteries.
And your veins that are phlebotomized in the groin are those through which blood usually flows in all men, and their phlebotomy is done according to two manners, either with a needle of myrrh or olive oil at a declining thinness; or with a cautery blade, and it calls if there is no pain, and this is its form:
Take the needle in this way with its times, and it convenes to open the veins that are curved, full and apparently gross; and to those that contain thick blood.
And this phlebotomy is of lesser width and of very thin extremity, and it convenes to phlebotomy of veins that contain subtle blood.
But the phlebotomy of the basilic vein which is one of three veins; for extracting blood from diseases that are below the throat and neck, and what affects the feet and belly.
And it is appropriate for the phlebotomist, when performing that phlebotomy, to be very careful and cautious in it, because beneath it there is an artery, and if he err and puncture the phlebotomy needle into the artery, it will cut that artery and cause blood flow, so that whoever performs that phlebotomy with a phlebotomy needle, before doing so, should incise with a scalpel.
And if the basilic vein does not appear through a manifest appearance, then you should leave it and change to the other, or look for one of its branches; or phlebotomize at the end of the arm, for that is manifest; and incise it with a phlebotomy needle with alnessil as we have said.
But if you wish to perform the phlebotomy in the middle of the arm, then before the constriction of the arm, touch the area between the wrist and the elbow, and place a ligature over it; and raise the arm and incise the vein with a concave section using a phlebotomy needle as we have said; and be careful not to pierce the artery in any space of the location of the artery.
And when you see, as you tighten the ligature, swelling in the location that you have placed the ligature, then that swelling is an artery, and so avoid it.
And if you see the blood flow in the phlebotomy as yellow as infant's urine, and the blood is thin, then know that it is arterial blood; and so cover it and place your finger over it for a long time; and press your finger, and if the blood is stopped, even if it flows several times, then tighten the arm and leave it.
And take care of the patient from the moisture of it, and be very cautious with it and do not harm him for several days until he is healed.
But if the blood is not stopped, and you see that you must apply medicine to it, then you should incise the artery, if it appears to you; for the extremity of it is constricted, and the blood is stopped; or take a piece of cotton, and cover that, and take half of it and tighten that over the location of the vein with a bandage, descending with a ligature on another day.
And then if the blood is stopped, that is good; and if not, then heal that with what it was preceded from the location of the powders causing stopped blood flow.
And the stopping of the blood in some dispositions is difficult due to the small location of the wound and the possibility of constriction of the arm.
But from the dark vein, phlebotomy is beneficial when you extract blood from the upper part of the head and from the lower part of the body; because of this it is composed of a branch of the basilic and of a branch of the cephalic, as we have said.
And it is appropriate for the phlebotomist to be very cautious in the phlebotomy of that, because beneath it there is a nerve; and so if he err and puncture the phlebotomy needle into the nerve and injure the nerve, stupor will occur, and healing from it will be difficult, and some people will not heal at all. And this nerve sometimes appears to some men and is subtle and not obvious, then you should place the phlebotomy with which you phlebotomize with a section of alnessil, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein in length.
The benefit of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and benefits illnesses of the eyes.
And it is appropriate in this particularly that you should phlebotomize with a phlebotomy needle made of olive or of myrrh; for it is the safest of all veins, because beneath it there are no arteries nor nerves.
But however, in some people, it is only apostemat when it is not phlebotomized in the first percussion, but do not notice that apostema.
The first of these is that one should know that phlebotomy is not administered except in preservation of health and for hope of it, and that phlebotomy be done at the beginning of spring, over breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter, when there are signs of engorgement.
And phlebotomy be done and on the third day, or the first after that three hours have passed.
But phlebotomy which is administered, but when it provokes convenience and necessity for that, or at night or during the day, at any time and at any moment.
And a child should not be phlebotomized until he is fourteen years old, and a pregnant woman should not be phlebotomized except from the fourth month until the seventh, and the elderly should not be phlebotomized who have already passed sixty years.
And when someone wants to be phlebotomized for any reason, it is appropriate that he cleanse his intestines before phlebotomy with a lion's claw, if in them there are motes of retained fends, so that the veins do not cast off the superfluities in the phlebotomy of the intestines, which are purified, and that they do not harm the principal members.
And let not be phlebotomized the patients with recent fever and vomiting, or recovering from illness, nor due to drunkenness, nor because of the cause that dissolves virtue, whether in body or soul. And let phlebotomy be avoided during colic pain and after vomiting, and after abdominal discomfort, and during multiplication of urine and defecation, and from every cause that dissolves virtue.
And consider in the subtlety of humors before that if the blood is thick with foods and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible for it.
And enter into a bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or it is exercised by some exercise so that the blood is purified.
And do the phlebotomy of him in the feet in the middle of the day, so it is around the hour of terce, as we have said.
And be careful that the feet of him are guarded in that day from all evil accidents, as it is anguish, anger, fear, and from all bodily accidents, as it is labour and excessive pain and voiding and شبیه to them.
And in its use, let the causes be present in the use of which the blood is used for men with aromatization and odour and with balsams and شبیه to them according to the quantity of possibility.
And let the phlebotomist follow over a joint that is above that the joint which must be phlebotomized.
And then extend his arm, and rub that by the phlebotomist two or three times; and then tighten the ligature with a bandage and wrap that two times.
And let the constriction be moderate, because if the constriction is not equal or the constriction is with superfluity, then blood flow is prohibited; or it is with softening, and then blood flow of the body is prohibited.
And then the constriction, so that the person who is to be bled, rubs his hands together between them until the veins are swollen and become apparent to the sense.
And then the phlebотомist anoints his phlebotomy knife with a little of the proper old oil; and then he places his left hand's index finger over that vein, below the site from which he wishes to perform the phlebotomy, so that the vein escapes a little, and the pulse is slowed down because some veins are compressed like cords when they flee, and from those is extracted the ventosity, and when you place the phlebotomy knife upon it, it is contracted by the phlebotomy knife, and the phlebotomist is discovered; and the phlebotomy knife does not open the vein, and if it opens it, that vein is constricted.
And thus, so that the phlebotomist is stopped up and is solicited in all these causes.
And then you put down the phlebotomy knife, but if the vein is open in a bend, then it is good; and if not, you iterate that or another bend below that location a little, or on it with a festival, if the location is not pustular.
And if the location is pustular, or the patient becomes frightened, then you let it be for one or two days, and do not strain the limb, because soon it will throw off the pustule through cautery, nor enter into a bath.
And then iterate the phlebotomy if it is desired.
And if the wound is small and subtle blood seeps out, and you fear that not enough blood will come out the desired amount, then you iterate the phlebotomy in that cut according to rectitude and adjust in the wound a little, and do that with festival in front of what the location is pustular, because the location is pustular in most men due to small wounds.
But if you see that one already pustular, then do not iterate on it, because it does not excuse you for any cause; and put over that some part of the cut with oil, because it expels the body of blood. And it is better in this location than other oils.
And similarly administer cut of oil in every phlebotomy with which phlebotomists phlebotomize the veins according to the prohibition of body of blood, and they do that tyriaca alfadoc and sagzenea when it is put from one of those on the location, because the blood is subtilized and is revolved when it is thick.
And if in the location of the phlebotomy a great pustule is engendered, because many bends happen, and mainly to that which is not bled but that bend, or in the wound of the vein little, then you cut it, and put on the location sponge infused in water and salt, a little warmed, and constrict that for one hour, because it is dissolved.
And so that he does that appropriately the movement of blood from that vein with fulfillment of him or another vein.
And if it turns in the location for several days any blackness or greenness, do not note that; and if you want to, put over that some cause of aloe and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of juice of gentian or of camomile or similar to him.
And many times happen pustules and eminences due to phlebotomy of the basilic.
And then put your hand over that, and if you then press upon that with your hand strongly, then that eminence is wicked and bad; and then beware that you put on that any cause of what we have said, because soon blood will flow from the artery.
And make a poultice with what is astringent, so that the location is hardened, and then cure that with the other cure until it is healed.
And so that you extract blood from every man according to the quantity of his virtue and according to the color winning over the blood according to what appears.
Because if the blood is black, then you let it go until it becomes red; and similarly if you see it thick, then you let it go until it becomes subtilized; and similarly if it is acute, until the acuteness of it is lost.
And so for him who is full and strong and has need of extraction of blood in a bend, let the phlebotomy of the vein be amplified and the phlebotomy knife be wide.
And in him who is feeble, let the contrary of that be done, and so for him who extracts that in many bends, let the cut be narrow.
And what is best administered in phlebotomy of vein is that it is the transverse section, not puncture.
And this manner of phlebotomy is safe from flow of blood and incision of nerve, and it is more pleasantable and safer than phlebotomy according to width and length.
And to whom is accustomed to occur syncope due to phlebotomy, and so you cure that before the phlebotomy with a little of bread infused in wine of pomegranates or of simple oxymel warmed; and extract from him blood in three or four bends.
And if it is fainting of complexion, then take before the phlebotomy bread infused in myrrh syrup or in scented honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar, or in scented syrup and many odorous things.
And if it happens syncope due to phlebotomy, and it is caused of him issue of much blood, then so that he take in drinking water of meat and scented syrup mild; and use of aromaticity with aloeswood, and let his feet be unbound by that.
And use the other causes which we have said in the division in the chapter of syncope for evacuation.
And who wants to open his arm and dissolve his blood second bend, let that for whom the phlebotomy is for much evacuation, and whose virtue is feeble, evacuate the blood little by little according to the quantity of his virtue in continuous days.
But who wants to open his arm and let his blood second time, and whose body is strong, then do that after seven or nine hours of the first phlebotomy.
But who wants to throw the blood of his body contrary to the side to which he inclines, let that be opened on the second or third day.
But the body in which is much blood already warmed and acuteness happens and fever occurs, let that be extracted of him blood in one bend and let there be extracted of him great quantity and let the wound be amplified so that syncope occurs, then you will have preserved all conditions of phlebotomy; and let your hand rest over his pulse due to the body of blood, so that death does not occur in place of syncope, because many times it occurs that when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And not when you want to open the arm and evacuate blood second time, when the opening of the vein is closed and there is made difficult issue of blood, let that be pressed upon strongly by you and bent it be extended lengthily, because that is too ill.
Let that be stopped before it is phlebotomized second time; or remove that with the acuteness of the phlebotomy knife when blood coagulates in the opening of the vein; or put over that tyriaca alfarach, or sagzenea, and compress that with lengthier compression so that blood is expelled.
And if the vein is pustular, then let it be left alone and do not touch it until the pustule is settled.
And if you are prompted by necessity to let blood again, and there is no excuse, then you may bleed him in that spot or on the other arm into another vein.
And the vein called “the rope of the arm” is bled in place of the axillary or basilic vein when they are not found or are hidden, for it is composed of those.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient puts his hand in warm water so that the vein swells up and the vein appears clearly.
And then it should be tightly bound with a small ligature; and phlebotomy should be done according to the small transverse vein, not latitudinally or according to its length.
And the incision should be wide and your phlebotomy should be with which you bleed that on the joint of the hand a little.
And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you put the hand again in warm water and let the blood run in the water until you achieve your need.
But if you are in the summer days, then you are excused from putting the hand in warm water, and the month is put the body of blood in cold water in winter time.
And phlebotomy of this vein is safer than all other veins because from here there is no pulsating vein or nerve.
And phlebotomy of the wrist of the right hand is related to diseases of the liver.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that you bind the hand with a ligature or your hand, since you have put it in warm water so that the vein is swollen and is clearly demonstrated by looking at it; and phlebotomy the transverse vein; and if you pierce it from any side it will not harm.
And beware that you do not pierce your hand with the phlebotomy, because here are the nerves of the teeth which are bare of flesh.
And then put the hand again in warm water and let the blood run in that, for if you do not put it in warm water, the blood will coagulate in the opening of the vein, and it is prohibited to flow.
And when blood is extracted according to the quantity of necessity, then you put oil and salt on the vein so that it is not consolidated by clotting; and similarly you do in all wound.
But the benefit of phlebotomy of that of the left hand is related to diseases of the brain.
And do similarly in the phlebotomy of him as you have done in the other.
And the benefit of phlebotomy of the vein is to diseases that are below the body, as well as diseases of the mother, and retention of menses, and diseases of the lungs and ulcers of thighs and legs, and their like of the diseases.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient puts his foot in warm water and makes friction on it so that the veins appear clearly; and bind over the joint of the foot with a bandage; and the location of the vein is found between the toes, and from there it is branched into the fascia of the foot many small branches.
And therefore phlebotomy the widest branch or below the leg where it comes from the talus bone because it is better and safer.
And if you phlebotomize that in the fascia of the foot, then you must beware of nerves which are below that on the fascia of the foot, and place your phlebotomy with which you phlebotomize across, as if you wanted to pierce it.
And let the phlebotomies be gentle.
But if it is prohibited to raise the blood, then you put the foot of him in warm water and let the blood run in that so that it is evacuated.
And if the phlebotomist mistakes in the first time, then you repeat with phlebotomy on his few times, for the location is safer; and do not fear of evil, but beware of nerves as we have said.
And similarly do with the other foot equally.
And of the sciatic nerve, its location as we have said is below the talus bone from the wild heel.
And the benefit of phlebotomy of it is to hip pain when it is due to blood heat.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient bathes and ties a bandage tightly around his thigh from behind below the hip over the top of four fingers in one long band, for it appears only by this.
And therefore when it appears, then you phlebotomize that according to any angle that is possible to you and according to the transverse vein, and it is better; or pierce that by incision or secces that vein by section, for its location is safer.
And it is in most men hidden; and if you pierce that, and it does not appear at all, then phlebotomy some branch of it, and it is the one which appears on the back of the foot opposite the little finger and ring finger.
And beware of nerves, and let the blood run in the quantity that you want.
And then loosen the bandage and place it over the location of phlebotomy tightly, for loosely it is not healthy.
Of ventilation and the qualities of using those.
Ventozes are of horns, or of ram, or of glass.
And ventilation is done according to two ways: the one is by scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is ventilation without scarification.
And this ventilation which is without scarification is according to two ways, for it is with fire or without fire.
And the ventilations which are administered by scarification and extraction of blood are twelve locations of the body, of which one in which they pause ventilations is the alnocrati, and it is the back part of the head; and the middle location of them from two parts of the neck together; and ventilations of the chin below the mandible more below the mouth; and ventilations of two spatulas; and ventilations of alohoster, and it is on the edge of the throat; and ventilations of two focils, and they are of two arms; and ventilations of two cavilhas; and ventilations of two thighs.
And ventilation does not extract blood but from the small scattered veins in the flesh, and for that it does not have the virtue through them, as well as through phlebotomy; nor beware that ventilation is done with fire or without fire in any disease made by repletion so that the whole body is evacuated.
But if necessity prompts ventilation for disease or continence, administer that at the beginning of the month and in the end of it, and in the middle of it and whenever time is.
And therefore when you see any of these signs, and especially if they occur in the third or fourth week of the month, then we command that a purgative be administered after two or three hours have passed during the day.
And the purpose of purging from the neck is that when there is pressure in the head and this is accompanied by a swelling in the throat, then it is appropriate for there to be an evacuation of the whole body.
And this purging is in the place of phlebotomy on the cephalic vein.
And it is not advisable to use one who has a complexional tendency to phlegm, or in whom there is a cold, for this causes great harm.
And because of this, one should not use those who are old and whose heads have cold diseases.
But if someone is being treated with this method and they show signs of fainting, then one should command the person doing the purging to lift their hand slightly from the affected area in order to prevent the patient from losing consciousness.
But the purging of the neck vein is in place of phlebotomy on the external carotid artery and the basilic vein: and because of this it helps against asthma, and the constriction of the larynx and the division of the instrument of voice, and coughing, and regurgitation.
And it is advisable to keep the neck purging light, because if it is too strong, it causes weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And the purging of the temples helps against sudden pains in the head and against ophthalmia, and migraine, and pre-eye pain, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in place of phlebotomy on the basilic vein.
And one should command the purging practitioner to not press their hand after scarification so that they do not cut into an artery and cause a flow of blood.
And purging below the chin helps against ulcers in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; it stands in place of phlebotomy on the alar artery which is on both lips.
But the purging that is done on the two spatulas helps against headache, which is caused by regurgitation of heat.
And the purging of the two parts inside the corners of the eyes helps in the same way as phlebotomy on three veins: namely, the basilic, external carotid and cephalic; because that attracts blood from all those small veins which are in the skin, and those small veins between the larger veins through which the attraction comes to the three veins.
And command the purging practitioner not to go too deep in scarification, because the place is denuded of skin and under it there are nerves and arteries.
And it is a purging with which one purges the anus, and it helps against hemorrhoids in the rear end and ulcers that are lower down.
And one should command the purging practitioner to use a strong purging, and that it is of a ram's horn, because the place needs a strong cutting; and they should also cut it with scarification.
But the purging of the legs should be decreased if there is a visible decrease, because it draws blood from all the body, and it helps against old pains in the knees and hips, and in the mother, and in the bladder; and it provokes menstruation, and it helps with cough and phlegm; and it stands in place of phlebotomy on two saphenous veins, and on the saphenous vein, and on two small veins.
However, they weaken the whole body and cause fainting in many people.
And the benefit of purging on the saphenous vein is similar to the benefit of purging on both legs.
And the quality of the position of the purging is that one should pause the purging at the beginning and suck gently, and not prolong the position of the purging, but pause them briefly, and let the humors come to the place by equal attraction. And do not cease repeating this and continue until I see the place already red and swollen, and the blood appearing.
And then you can scarify and repeat the suction a little at a time, and then consider the disposition of the body.
Because if the person has soft skin on their buttocks, one should not scarify it again and again so that the place does not become ulcerated.
And command the purging practitioner to enlarge the scarification and take a little more, and to temper the suction with ease.
And if the blood is thick, then one should scarify two times, because in the first scarification the way of subtlety to the blood and its liquidity are opened. But in the second, one acquires the perspiration of the extraction of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very foul, then a third scarification should be done so that one achieves the last result.
And lastly, when we want to extract blood little by little or a little, it is enough for us to make one scarification.
And if we want to extract a lot of blood, then we should scarify with many scarifications; and if we know that the blood is thick, then we should scarify with profound scarification.
And the term of scarification in which the depth of the cut is merely superficial.
And if the one from whom the cut is deep, tough, and dark, and whose veins are narrow, then the places of the purging should be anointed gently, open widely; in summer time, use oil of aloes or oil of violets, or oil of bitter almonds, or oil of cedar wood; and if it is in winter time, use oil of nard, or oil of lily, or oil of camomile, or blood, and to those similar things.
And if the superficiality is thick and hot, then the oil should be of myrrh, or oil of balsamite, or oil of aloes, or oil of anise, and to those similar things.
But if the purging practitioner has ample experience of tender skin, then oil should be prohibited from them; and to those for whom the places of purging are near, the purging should be washed with water or hot water of solanum, or water of cedar wood, or water of borage, or similar things.
And if the blood is of great humidity, wash their purgings with sour wine, or water of myrtle and sumach, or similar things to those.
And if the superficialities are thick, wash their purgings with old wine, or water of mace which is myrrh, or of fennel, or of camomile, and to those similar things.
And one should keep the purging in a bath; let them have a bath, and let it be administered near the bath for an hour or two, and let him sleep after the purging.
What is necessary that he should be bled before purging.
And let them consider at the beginning: if the purging practitioner or he who is to bleed is choleric and his blood hot and inflammation, then one should take cold remedies, also with milky parsnip, and endive in sour wine, and lettuce, and celery, and dry sage, and to those similar things.
And give them food like this with puddings, and meat of young birds, and seasoned foods with vinegar, and to those similar things.
And for those whose complexion is hot and moist, let them drink aniseed syrup, or hempseed syrup, and sumac, and wine with a strong scent between old and new; and let him be recommended to drink little and eat little, and give him dishes of partridge and hempseed and pigeons and small birds.
And for those suffering from windiness or bleeding, let them drink more than they eat during the day.
And for those who are given to drinking at certain times of the day to some men tarragon or myrrh, or medicinal musk, so that it is musky, or alcelita before windiness or bleeding, or afterwards, in order that the principal members be comforted and that the blood be subtleized; and let no one take that wound.
But the windings that are made without scarification are windings that are paused over the liver, and over the melsa and podagra, and over the navel, in the places of the kidneys, and the pygidium of the broad, since these members do not undergo scarification upon themselves.
And it is not desired by them but attraction of blood from the member, just as they pause a ventosa over the breast in the malady of a flow of blood from the blood of the nose; and they use that so that a moist winding may be dissolved, invaded the member, just as they pause over the belly and navel; for that rarefies the member and cuts it and removes the pain since it resolves windiness.
And it is already paused over the armpits when they occur in their swelling or poultice, for by the strength of attraction, their swelling is very much reduced and the poultice eradicates the pain from its place.
And similarly it does when it is paused over the liver and the melsa due to windiness in those who are incarcerated.
And these windings are administered either with sucking or merely with fire; and sometimes they are administered with fire.
And sometimes they are administered full of tepid water in the maladies of the melsa.
And for this reason, the ventosa is filled and a pus-like substance is pushed out, either with water alone or water in which herbs appropriate to that are cut.
Form of ventosa administered with fire: let the width of the orifice be two digits, according to how we have formed it; and let the quantity of the fire be the size of a palm; and let it be in its side, in the place that is in its circuit, the size of it, the hole be small according to the quantity that enters into it an awl.
Let it be made of red copper or citrine, of thick edges, lion, handles and thorns so that it does not hurt the member due to its position over it.
And let there be at its middle a transverse groove of copper or iron, where the candle with fire is paused.
And let this ventosa be somewhat larger than that which we have recommended; and the small one less than that according to the maladies and the condition of him who uses it.
And the windings for children and emaciated people are different from those for young people and people with large bodies.
And the quality of pausing this ventosa with fire over the member is that it extends the wick with fire from decent wood in front of a few candles of wax, and pauses that over the middle of the transverse groove in the middle place of the ventosa, so that the fire be kindled around the part below so that the patient's body is not burned.
And then let it be paused over the patient's member, and the finger be over the hole that we have said, until when we hold the windings and do not feel the finger and the steam rises over that hole, then the ventosa will dissolve at once.
And blow the wick according to its manner, and repeat that if you feel the need for it.
But in the ventosa that is administered in the malady of pleurisy, with water, in which there is not a transverse groove or hole, and it is not administered except that it be filled with water, and is paused over the member merely.
And this is its form: And this ventosa, the larger it is, the better, so that it may receive a great quantity of water.
Chapter .xcvii.
Leeches are not administered in small members except in those in which it is not possible to place windings because of their smallness, just as with the toe and gum and their likes; or in a member stripped of flesh, just as with the finger and nose and their likes.
And the quality of using those leeches that if you have found in the doubled waters of boiling clean.
And then let them be placed in tepid water until they become swollen, and that no cause remains in their belly; and then let the body be evacuated at the beginning with bleeding and with windings; and then let the member of the patient be rubbed so that it becomes red; and then let them be paused over him.
And when they are filled and swollen,
and if it is possible to suck the place with a ventosa, it is better to do so in bleeding.
And if not, then wash the place with sharp wine and then with warm water; and let it be rubbed and pressed.
And if the flow of blood is prolonged due to the use of leeches and that drips, then you dip a cloth in tepid water and pause it over so that the dripping is absorbed.
And if the blood is profuse, then powder vinegar mixed with it, or gall nuts and their likes of the causes styptic, so that the blood is stopped; or let the pods of roasted peas be applied to it, and let them be paused over him until the peas adhere to the place, and let the blood stop.
And if it is necessary, let there be repetition of leeches, when it is possible to change them.
And if the leeches are prohibited from suspension, then let the place be rubbed with fresh blood or a needle be stuck in the places where blood flows; and then let them be paused over him, for those when I sense some blood at once.
And when you want them to stop, powder over them a little aloe mixed, or salt, or ash, and tie at once.
Thus begins the protection of the third part: the restoration. This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine; and it is restoration of fracture and of accidental dislocation in the bones.
Oh son, you will know from this chapter the foolish doctors and the vulgarians and those who do not guard the books of the Ancients nor read from them a letter.
And for this reason, the manner of those wise in our land is private; and I have not practiced it at any time, nor have I been obliged to do so; and I have not used what I learned, except through length of reading the books of the Ancients and study on the understanding of those, so that I extracted science from them.
And then add to experience and study in the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter everything that contains my science and about which my experience has passed; for I have shortened it in the end of shortening; and demonstrated it in the end of demonstration; and formed in it many forms of instruments that are administered in it, as it is done by addition of demonstration, just as I have done in two preceding chapters.
First chapter.
A summary of the nature of broken bones, from which a knowledge is necessary before we begin to discuss in detail the healing of various bones and parts. Now let us present at the beginning of this chapter, summaries of the subject that the reader must know and understand before we begin; and these chapters are for those artisans who have already achieved mastery and understanding of the truth about these matters, and also for you and others who will learn or perfect this noble art.
And so I say that when there is a fracture or dislocation or twisting or displacement, you should first apply leeches or other remedies to the affected area, or some other treatment, if no counterindications are present; also according to the strength of the patient, whether it be an adult or a child, and also taking into account any other conditions such as being in a state of weakness, or the age of the patient, or the season of violent heat, or violent rubbing.
And you should also be careful with food: eat fresh herbs and the flesh of birds and crabs; avoid fatty meats and rich foods that fill the veins with blood, unless you are sure there is no risk of pus forming in the affected limb.
And then return the patient to their normal routine, and correct any deviation from it that may have occurred.
And so when the broken bone begins to heal, then you should feed the patient nutritious foods that are rich and heavy, and contain a lot of moisture; such as dishes made from wheat cooked in water, rice, peas, beans, and the bellies of cows, and pigs, and fresh fish, and fatty wine and similar beverages, and with this regimen the fracture will heal sooner and better.
And you should know that the bones of old people and children are not able to knit together and heal properly because of their dry nature.
But nature adjusts and unifies the broken bone from all sides by a kind of bonding process, by which it becomes larger and stronger, until it reaches its final state of strength and firmness, just like fire at the beginning, unless some counterindication forbids this; and no cause can prevent this from happening.
And for this reason it is necessary to feed the patient foods that are heavy and rich in moisture and substance; as we have said.
And you should know that the kinds of fractures vary according to the different bones affected: a fracture of the bone in the leg is different from a fracture of the bone in the head, and a fracture of the bone in the foot is different from a fracture of the bone in the hand; and likewise all other bones are diverse among themselves.
And now we will discuss each kind of fracture separately, in its own chapter.
There are different kinds of fractures, depending on the cause. And the kinds of fractures that occur in bones are diverse according to their cause: some fractures are arched and others occur as stars; and some fractures depend on the length of the bone, such as fractures of the ulna and radius, and also there are fractures of the carpal bones, and also there are disruptions and fissures.
And each kind has its own special pain or discomfort during healing, according to the location of the fracture; and we will discuss these separately in their respective locations.
There are certain signs that indicate a bone fracture. And by these signs you can recognize a bone fracture: it is crooked and prominent; there is pain on pressure, and also when you press with your hand.
And therefore if there is no crookedness apparent in the bone, and the patient does not experience great pain when you press on it with your hand, then this is not a fracture.
There is a possibility that it is only a minor crack, and so you should not press on it with your hand, but rather apply medicines to the area; then wrap the area tightly with a bandage.
And you should know that when the bone is arched and not split in two or any other way that causes a break in the skin, then you may begin to treat it immediately with an cauterization of the wound; then wrap the area tightly with a bandage.
And if pus has accumulated in the wound, then let it drain for several days until the pus stops; and then treat it according to the nature of the wound and its pain.
And you should know that healing and hardening of the bone is a slower process than when it occurs in other bones.
And then strengthen it according to what we will discuss below.
But if the bone is split in two parts at the joint of the leg or hand, then it is necessary to extend that affected limb in two parts, with the help of the hand or foot, or with just one hand, or with a cord and the hand.
And hold the limb in its natural position, while you extend the two parts of the broken bone outward; then you will have to pull them back together as strongly as possible, and according to any method that can be used on these joints.
And be careful that your movements do not cause any pain or injury to the patient during this operation, and apply as much strength as you can, while holding one bone against the other in their normal position.
And you should apply as much force as possible with your hand while holding the bone, and if you find some other cause, then straighten it out and harden it according to the amount of strength that you have.
And avoid violent extension and compression, as this can cause pus to form in the wound due to their operation, or it can also cause contraction of the limb, as we have seen happen many times due to their operations.
And the degree of tightness of the bandage should be one that you can tolerate; for you should know that broken bones vary in their size and shape.
And for those that are small like the arm, hand and fingers, then a fine piece of linen is used to wrap them.
But those that are large like the thigh or leg, then a hard bandage is used to wrap them; for a tight bandage connects the large bone and strengthens it all around evenly, so that no swelling can enter.
And then you should begin by loosening the apparatus, stopping it from time to time in that place, over the fracture with three or four bandages according to the size of the bone; and strengthen your hand a little with the bandage.
And then bring him to the most superior part of the area of the fracture, and with great care so that you do not break your grip on the area of the fracture. Then lengthen and loosen the bandage around the area of the fracture a little, and ease the tightness little by little while you take hold of a large part of the area.
Then take another bandage and wind it around the other side of the fractured area, and then bring the bandages to the lowest part of the fracture; and your operation on the tightness of the bandage and its loosening should be according to what we have said about the first bandage above.
Then place between the bandages of wool or cloth with which the crookedness of the fracture is equalized if there is crookedness in it; and if not, then do not put anything at all in it.
Then place another bandage over it and tie those decently made layers together at once, if there is no inflammation or abscess in the area, and then place on it something that stops the abscess and reduces the inflammation; and leave it for several days, and then tighten the layers.
And the splints should be of the thickness of a straw or reed, and they should be cleverly formed; or they could be of wood or palm branches; and the length of each splint should be according to this form and figure:
However, the splint that is placed on the fracture should be thicker and longer than the other splints, and the length of the splint according to how long the limb is in size and shortness; and then tighten the splints with another bandage according to your first tightness; and then tie it above decently according to what we have said about tightness, and let your tightness be according to the location of the fracture more, and as much more as it is lengthened from the fracture, so much the lessness of the tightness.
And let the threads be moderate in thickness and thinness, and they should be of linen; and if the threads are thick, then as I have seen through the operation of some foolish people tying their threads with rope and it is a great error when the tightness is not equal.
And very thin threads are not convenient, because you will not achieve with them through tightness what you want, and let there be between each splint no less than a finger's width.
And if the patient is hurt by the ends of the splints when they are tightened in their places, then place below them wool or dyed wool so that it does not harm him.
Sometimes a fracture is with pus, and there is disruption in the tendon, and I have come to remember that one in the chapter according to its uniqueness.
And know that every broken member is not bound with splints on the first day; the cause of which is because the member, when it is large, let there not be placed on it splints except after several days or a week or more, according to your certainty about the occurrence of an abscess.
And this is the manner of the plasters with which the Ancients restored, and they were placed on fractures and dislocations and twistings.
Method of plaster as a remedy for fracture, convenient to many complexities and especially to women and children, because it is that with which heat nor friction comes: and take from the powder of milling, and it is the core of the flour that passes due to the movement of the mill on the walls of the mill.
And sift that as it is, unless you sieved it with white of egg, and use the composition of it not thick nor thin; and then use it.
Another manner of healing broken and dislocated bones: take of assafetida, laudanum, acacia, enula, and myrrh, the juice of wild mastic tree, all in equal parts, a drachma each; of myrrh and aloe, a drachma each; of honey, twenty drachmas; mix them all together and add enough alum wine to make an ointment, and spread it on the affected part. This preparation is of good composition, and restores quickly broken bones, and confers health to many men.
Another manner of an ointment that heals broken bones and dislocations: take mastic and white myrrh, a drachma each; myrrh and aloe, a drachma each; acacia, six drachmas; Armenian bole, twenty drachmas.
All are strained in a mortar with mortar, and sifted, and mixed with vinegar or white of egg, and let it be administered.
Method of plaster for joints and bones separated from their places, and to alleviate pain accidentally in those and to fissures and fractures: take a piece of flannel which is wet with warm wine and oil and let it be placed over the area.
Let this plaster not be efficacious for restoration, nor for abscess, but rather to expel pains properly.
Another method of plaster which restores a broken bone: take bark of fig tree and bark of wild poppy; crush both and make plaster from them.
Method of plaster abridged administered for the restoration of a fracture of bone and when you want resolution of the residue of an abscess: take ground of poplar, of camomile and flowers of violets, of flour of oats, of all an equal part .x.; and let all be strained and mixed with wine if the member is not scalded.
But if it is scalded, then let that be moistened with water of yarrow or with water and use it.
Another method of plaster stronger in resolution when that first one does not occur, when there is an abscess hard due to the restoration of the member: take ground of poplar and of seed of linseed and of balaustine, and marjoram, violets, camomile, of all an equal part; let all be strained and mixed with water of yarrow or with water, all according to the quality of the member and the rest of its color.
And let the hypocrass not be applied on its own but let it be placed over the broken member due to its restoration unless a poultice is made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and let it be moderate between thickness and thinness.
May the healing of the broken limb be accomplished by placing on it those remedies that cause moisture, heat and a quality like myrrh, incense and similar substances to those we have mentioned.
A way to make a plaster that will benefit a wound and pain: take honey, eggs, human hair or bird feathers, alder bark and salt, all ground together; strain them through a cloth and make a plaster from it.
But the amount of time that the binding should be left on depends on how well the healing is going and whether there is any pain or swelling or if the bone is broken or dislocated; if there is no pain or swelling and the bone is not dislocated, then you can leave it in place for a few days. And if there is severe pain or swelling or inflammation in the area, then you should either cut it off or take off the plaster.
And take a piece of linen and a sponge soaked in sea-lion oil, and dip that in lukewarm water and use it to wash the area until the swelling goes down and the pain is relieved; then let the limb rest for an hour; and apply lanolin mixed with sweet wine or rose oil, and leave it on overnight so that any pus from an abscess can come out and so that the swelling of the limb will go down and the pain will be relieved.
And then repeat this subtle binding and plaster, and don't tighten it too much with your first binding, but apply it sutilly so that the limb can heal.
And if the abscess and heat and pain and swelling and all the other signs have gone down completely, and you have removed the plaster and binding, then you should repeat the process as you did at the beginning.
And if none of those causes we have mentioned occur in the limb, then don't take it off but rather leave it on for three or four or five or seven days. And sometimes it is left on for twenty days according to how well the limb has healed and the fracture has joined together and the flesh has healed over it.
And then tighten the binding a little more than your first binding and adjust it according to how well the patient remembers it.
But if you see the fractured area becoming dry and thin, then know that it is prohibited for nourishment to reach it; therefore moisten it with lukewarm water every three days; loosen the binding a little, and through this operation the limb will receive nourishment and heal quickly.
But what the foolish restorers of a broken limb do is another way when it has not healed at the beginning according to how it should have, and it is healed crookedly according to their operation; therefore it is a great error according to their operation and a great fear, and if they had known this they would have made a much better cure.
And I have not seen any of them do that, for it is more reasonable that they not do so.
Chapter two: Of fractures when they occur in the head
The types of fractures are many, and their shapes are diverse, and their causes are distinct; for some fractures are caused by the impact of a heavy object, and the impact goes through the whole bone, breaking it as it goes, just like it does to a log, and for this reason that type of fracture is called a split fracture; or the heavy object hits only one part of the bone and breaks into the flesh but does not go through to the other side, and for this reason this type of fracture is called a simple fracture.
And the size of the fracture is either large or small, and it may be narrow or broad; and the cause of it is impact from a stone or fall on a rock, and their likenesses.
And this fracture may be penetrating so that it approaches the membrane that is below the bone; or it may be in the face of the bone, and the size of these two fractures may be large or small.
And another type of fracture is that which occurs in the bone, in the thinness of the hair, and for this reason it is called a hairline fracture.
And there is another fracture that occurs from falling or being hit by a stone and its likenesses, when a thin layer of the bone is forced into the openings within it, and this occurs in concave places just like it does to the fingers when they are hit and their tips are forced inward.
And most often this happens to the bones of bent bodies, like the skulls of infants.
And all these types of fractures are set in such a way that they are separated from each other. And you will remember all this in its place.
And you will know all these types of fractures by detection of them and by inquiry into their likenesses, and by examination of the rotten flesh that is above them.
And hairline fractures are known by their appearance when the flesh is pulled back from the bone and washed clean; for then the fracture appears black.
But in the treatment of fractures you should first consider the signs of the patient, and then if you see any signs that clearly show fear, like vomiting from cholera, or extension, or loss of understanding, or loss of voice, or fainting, or acute fever, or sweating and heat in those parts, and likenesses to them from the major dispositions, then he will not heal.
But if you do not see these signs, then you should begin his cure.
The cause of this is that if the fracture has occurred at the beginning in the winter days, then you should study the healing of the bone over the course of fourteen days according to its entire disposition.
And if it is in the summer days, then you should let the bone be bound for seven days, so that what is below the membrane can be corrupted by it, and so that the signs we have mentioned occur.
And if the fracture has already reached the membrane and covered the brain, and it is narrow and sharp, then you should wet the sharp edge according to what I have told you.
And you should wash the head of the patient who is fractured, and uncover it according to custom and in a way that is possible for you according to the shape of the fracture, and so that it is loose on the patient.
And if you see the detection of the bone, or bleeding or an abscess, then you should stop it with what occurs, and so that humors flow from the wound into a cloth soaked in wine and rose oil, and let the fracture rest so that the abscess is relieved, and then begin the girding of the bone and its healing.
And this should be done according to one of two ways of operation.
And the first way is that you insert the bone with a narrow instrument, and this is its shape: And then you administer another instrument, one slightly broader than the first; and this is its shape:
And the other way is that you insert the bone through penetration with a narrow instrument, and this is its shape; and then you administer the broader instrument.
And you should have several instruments of different widths, some of which are broader than others, and some are narrower, and some are acute in the end, and made of iron or steel.
And they have ease of use in percussion on the scalp to prevent concussion and lead him to that.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then you must pierce through its surface before administering the scalpels, which are called non-deep scalpels.
And they are not named like this except that they do not reach the bone of the skull to what is right next to it, so that the scalpel has a rounded tip or edge below the sharp tip of it, which prohibits being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take many of these scalpels, each one according to the thickness of each bone, so that they are present in all skulls of the brain, whose end is sharp, and the amount in length and brevity is according to the thickness of this skull.
And this is the form of three species of scalpels: The quality of piercing through the broken bone is that you place the scalpel on the bone and turn it with your fingers so that you know that the bone has been penetrated; then change the scalpel to another place, and pause where there is a quantity of thickness of the vein or around it.
And then incision with scalpels what is between each crack of the bone, and make that as subtle as you can on top of it at the end of elevation, thus as we have said, so that you radiate the bone, or by your hand, or by any other cause by some instruments which you will have prepared for this, such as tweezers and subtle forceps.
And be sure to keep the incision away from any cause of the brain.
And then when you have pierced the bone and separated it from the brain if it is continued with it, and you will have extracted that, scrape and gnaw that in its roughness with another instrument similar to an incision, but however, let it be more thin and more subtle than the other scalpels.
And if you pull out some of the small bones and threads, then take that with ease from what is due to you from the instruments; then cure the wound with lint and bandages which we have said.
And the other manner of operation is lighter, distant from fear, which Galien and Lauzeck praised for great praise; and this is their speech about it: it is necessary for you in the beginning to begin to uncover the part of the bone of the place where there is the most violent and most manifest fracture, so that when you have uncovered that part and placed below it the tip of this scalpel slow and gentle, of which this is the form:
And the lenticular part is round and does not insert into any cause, and the acute part is of it in two sides in length, as well as a wedge; let the lenticular part be applied to the brain with the sharp face of it inserted into the bone.
And then percute on the scalpel of one part with a small hammer so that you insert all the bone with ease as it is turned, and be sure of the membrane that it does not happen to him accidentally, and if the patient was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he was sleeping.
Then if he removes any cause attached to the bone of the membrane in some places of bones, cut that from it with the tip of the lenticular scalpel, and free that from it with ease, because it is freed from him without harm and fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the membrane, and what is cut off or remains of the bone is the face of it, and pulls in it roughness and subtle threads, then scrape that roughness and gnaw those threads with subtle razors by which you have prepared their number, of different quantities so that it is possible for you to administer them in every place most conveniently, and according to what place you are performing your operation on that broken bone.
And be sure to administer in your reason with which you scrape the bone at the beginning of the most side of those razors, and then use that most subtle one, and do not cease to do that according to continuity until you come to administer the most thin and the most subtle of all of them.
But in any other small capillary fractures and subtle fracture, be sure to cure it according to what you come to rectify it.
And it is a cause that is not hidden from all those who have studied in that art. And we have written about what we have shown in great fractures.
And if the membrane is extended when you radiate the bone, then take cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it over the hole of the wound; then take another cloth folded or doubled and soak it in wine and rose oil and place it over the first cloth and do that as gently as you can so that you do not weigh down the brain; then administer over that bandage with fat length, and do not tighten it except for the quantity that the wound has so much only.
And leave that with this cure for a day or two so that you are sure of cauterized pus; then loosen it and then administer medicines with which there is excessive dryness, such as linen rags and errhines of linseed, and powder of aniseeds and aristology, and of similar things to those.
And it is that you make of these medicines powder which is sprinkled over the wound, as they are dried; and universally, administer in that all medicine of property of which there is one that cleanses and does not bite.
And be careful according to your virtue that the wound in your cure is clean; and do not let there be any putrefaction or other in it; nor do you leave virulence to settle in it; because when it is applied over the membrane of the brain, it corrupts and rots it, and malevolent malice happens about the patient.
And it happens in the skull of the head, as when the bone is cleansed and most when the cure of it is diminished, and there is blackness on its surface; then consider therefore if it happens to the patient the accidents which we have said, know that it is mortal without doubt.
And if blackness does not happen except from the medicine which is placed over it, and it is because of that medicine that makes that blackness, then be sure to take some honey and parts of rose oil iii., and with those lines a cloth, and then place that over the skull; then cure it with the spices of cure which are convenient so that it is healed.
Chapter iii.
Of restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken except in two parts very much uppermost, or one of those some few times, because in it there are two bones, because the part below is cartilage, and is not broken, and it does not happen to it except tension and tortuosity and sinuosity.
But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then be sure to insert your little finger in your nose, and gnaw that fracture inside with your index finger, and with your middle finger push it outward, so that the nose returns according to its natural figure. And do this for you with ease, and be sure that it does not hit because of your operation on the pain of them.
And if the fracture is in the highest part of the nose, and the patient does not perceive it, then one must make a small incision at the end of the bone where there is some thickness.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should act accordingly.
And provide treatment for him on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then return to it or wait seven days after the formation of the blister.
Then insert a piece of linen thread into the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part; or put two splints in, if it is in two parts, and let there be as much thickness in the splint as will fill the crack in the nose.
And some of the ancient restorators say that the splints should be wrapped in wool, and changed every day, but this has not been seen by me; they say that the thread should be wrapped in alum-soaked linen, that the bone may be held firm, and the cartilage hardened.
And in some cases a feather quill is inserted into the nose instead of a splint; and this should be done when the fracture is very violent, and the patient not prohibited from breathing.
And this cause does not need you to act; and if you want to do it, then do it; and if you want to make splints, then make them.
And if another blister occurs, plaster the nose with cerate or cotton soaked in wine vinegar and rose oil, or with diaquilon.
But if a blister does not occur, then plaster that part with sesame flour and powdered onions cooked in alum vinegar; and place over it a piece of linen, and do not apply any other thing to the nose.
But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or crushed, then cut them, and extract them with instruments appropriate to those; and close up the cut, and cure it with something that encourages flesh-growth and bone consolidation, and plaster it with convenient plasters.
And if pus occurs within the nose, then cure that with splints and administer lead tubes to ensure complete healing.
Chapter 4.
Of the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
When the mandible is broken and the fracture does not have pus, then consider whether the fracture is only external, and not broken in two and curved inward at its parts; then its treatment is easier.
And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, then insert your left index finger into the mouth of the patient; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left mandible, then insert the said index finger of the right hand; and move with that the dislocation inward at its parts with facility by means of the other hand at the part of the bone outward; decently equaling those.
And if the fracture of the mandible is already separated into two, then administer extension of both parts according to rightness so that its position is possible.
And if disruption of teeth occurs from concussion, then strengthen those which you hope will break with silk thread or silver wire or cedar; and plaster the broken mandible with cerate, and place over it doubled linen, and over that decently made great steel plate, or a sole weight at the length of the mandible; and tie that above according to how you are prepared for its application, so that it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to use rest and quietness, and give him drink of sorbents of wine.
And if you judge that it has already been altered in some way, then you treat and loosen it on the third day; and correct what has been altered, and plaster it with alum vinegar, or with sesame flour, since you have removed its cerate, and place over it linen wool.
And after that, when the plaster is in place and adjusted over it, and the position of the bone is not altered, then leave it, so as not to loosen it until it is healed and the fracture strengthened; for many times this fracture is healed within three weeks.
And if another blister occurs, then administer what we have said several times in the treatment of it until it is healed, and let that blister be lanced.
And if the fracture has pus in it, then consider whether the bone is separated or shattered; then you act subtly that you remove those shatters with whatever is appropriate for their removal.
And if the opening of the pus is narrow, then you enlarge it with a flebotomy according to the quantity of your need.
And when you have removed those shatters, and if they do not ooze pus again, then close up the opening of the pus, if it is large; and if not, plaster over it one of the plasters appropriate for that, so that it encourages flesh-growth and is healed.
Chapter 5.
Of the restoration of the collarbone when it is dislocated.
Many times the clavicle in front of the breast is broken by the muscle; and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
For it is either broken, or separated, or separated in two parts other than those which do not occur shatters; and its treatment is easier; or occurs therein shatters, and it is difficult to treat; or the fracture has pus in it.
And its action in that, when the fracture is without pus, is that you have two agents, so that one holds the helper and follows the collarbone broken, and the other extends the collar to that part.
And then join the fracture with your fingers within it so that its form is made according to how it should be, and there is not a little prominence or concavity in it.
And if you need more extension, then let the patient hold under his chin a pillow or some wool, and the size of it according to the quantity of your need; and extend and raise the collarbone and stop the holding with your hand within that you join the fracture according to how it should be.
And if you cannot draw the end of the collarbone to its parts outward, so that it is approached to the breast, then let the patient recline on his neck, and place over the muscle of it a pillow on the left in size.
And the agent press the muscle of it to the parts below so that the bone of the collarbone is raised that which is in the breast above; and then you correct the fracture and join it with your fingers.
But if you feel shatters of the collarbone and they are oozing, then let loose over that and extract those shatters with facility.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you invent an incision of it with one of the saws which you have prepared for that, since you had paused below the collarbone the tool which serves the ciphac; and this instrument is of wood or iron, and its form is such:
And it is similar to a chisel of which its concavity is such; and its breadth according to what you have need for it, according to the size of the bone or the weakness of it.
But its length is according to what is possible for you in the operation; that it have two ends thus reversed, and one end be ample and the other narrow.
If the wound, which you have opened when you extracted the splinters from the bone, is wide and you are sure that there is no abscess, then you stitch together the two lips of the wound.
And if the wound is small, or you fear an abscess, then you fill the wound with lint and powder according to the size of the wound.
And if there is an abscess, then pour wine, honey, and rose oil onto it and place a poultice over the area.
Also, make sure that the stake is not pushing against the broken bone; and therefore, when you see the patient every day, if you notice that the ligament has loosened or the stake appears to be pushing out, then rectify it and tighten the binding.
Then place the pillow under his neck and another pillow underneath his head, on which he should sleep at night; in such a way that by this means, the shoulder on that side is raised, and therefore the fracture of the collarbone is also elevated above the level of the muscle; or his arm on that side is pulled up towards his neck.
Do not loosen the binding unless there is pus or an abscess within twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you see that his face is changing due to it; and tighten the binding, and restore him until he is restored and the fracture of the collarbone is coagulated.
And it is strengthened and encouraged according to the month in twenty-eight days; and sometimes in some people, it is done within less time than that.
Chapter 6:
On the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
The spatula is broken on its broad side and not on its edges.
And therefore when it is broken — and it is broken in its middle part — and it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture you prepare it and reduce it according to the natural figure in every way that is possible for you.
Then place onto the site powdered wheat flour and egg white, and lion's blood; then place a double-layered piece of linen; also place over that a wooden stake as thin as possible according to the width of the spatula or more.
But if under the stake is a hollow space in one of the places of the spatula, then fill that hollow with lion's blood and then raise the stake according to its equality.
Then tighten it above with long honey and decent constriction, and with the firmness of the stake so that it is not pushed out from its site.
And consider the binding every day; and whenever it becomes loose, make it tighter again and adjust the stake if it is pushed out from its site.
And keep the patient on his unaffected side.
And the spatula is restored in twenty days or in twenty-fifth.
And therefore when this number is completed, then you dissolve the binding; and know that it is of the bones from which the beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
And if it progresses from the bone's site and you place a weight under it, then you split it, and remove it, and proceed according to what we have said in the fracture of the collarbone regarding an abscess.
Chapter 7:
On the restoration of a leg fracture.
The leg sometimes is broken in its middle part and this is usually the case; but its ends are often not joined and comminuted.
And regarding its accidents when the middle is broken it inclines to the inner parts and there occurs great pain in it, and difficulty in walking, and coughing, and strong vomiting and bleeding; and a cavity is declared in the broken bone and it does not remain hidden from feeling.
And its restoration is that the patient should be laid on his back, and place a cushion between their shoulders; and press against their muscles, and adjust their ribs with the hands of two people, and gently in the operation and in the adjustment according to every way that is possible and convenient for it, so that the figure of the bone returns according to how it should be.
Then place onto it plaster and lint, and over that a thin stake of ash or of lime, or similar, after you have wrapped that in linen; also gently bend that over the broken bone so that it is not pushed out; and go around it with binding according to its roundness on the back sometimes, and tighten that with decent constriction; and consider the binding every hour, and when it becomes loose, tighten it.
And if it causes detachment due to swelling or pain, or an abscess that occurs in the site, then you cut and loosen it, and remove the plaster and adjust what has occurred due to its way of curing; and then return the binding, if there is a change in his face; and tighten him so that he is healed.
Chapter 8:
On the restoration of ribs when they are cracked.
Know that the fracture of ribs does not occur except in large sites that go along the back; and from their ends in front, it does not occur to them unless they are cartilaginous. And its knowledge is not hidden from feeling due to the inquiry with fingers.
And its restoration is that it should be joined with fingers according to the possible way so that it is swallowed according to how it should be; and then plaster and tighten the broken bone with a stake if it requires it.
And if the fracture of the ribs inclines to the inner parts, then there occurs to the patient violent pain and piercing, also with piercing that occurs where it has pleaded, and because of this there is difficulty in walking, and coughing, and vomiting blood; and this is of difficult curing.
And the Aンティクス have been applied to it with very heated instruments.
And from them there is issued: that one should stop foods for the patient that cause inflammation and fullness, so that the belly is flattened and extended, and the fracture is driven to the outer parts.
But we abstain from this so that it is not the cause of gout, if it has not occurred; and if it has occurred, then let us help it.
And they will order some of them that it should be stopped over the wound and that it sucks with strength; and it is like reasoning, but it is feared that the wind draws away the superfluities to the site due to weakness.
And they said among themselves: whoever is in charge of the patient, let him be covered with wool that has been soaked in hot oil, and let there be powder placed between his ribs where it can be filled, so that the binding is as round as a ball; and let the patient be treated with poultices of food and medicine.
And if there is a violent constriction that the patient cannot endure, and the bones puncture the veil with their teeth, they fear for the patient; therefore, whoever incises over the affected area, exposes the broken rib, and places upon it an instrument that retains the phlegm, the memory of which precedes, and incises the bone with ease to extract it.
And then, sew up the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a stitch, and treat it with poultices until it is healed.
And if there is an abscess inside, then cut and pour powder in warm oil over the area; and let the patient be treated with something that treats the abscess inside.
And let him sleep on his back until he is healed.
Chapter 9:
On the restoration of a fracture of the spine and of the neck.
Sometimes there is a fracture in the bones of the neck, and they rub against each other with pain, and similarly in the vertebrae of the back. And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider the following: If their bones are already soft and stupid and dead and cannot move or bend any more, and when you press them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and there is no pain, then know that they will not be healed, and in most cases it is lethal.
And if they are painful and there is a constriction when you press them or prick them, then know that the neck of the bone is saved and the patient will be healed with treatment.
And if you see something similar in the vertebrae of the neck and want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider his feet.
Now, if you see that they are already soft and there is something similar to what happened in the bones; and if when he lies on his back, he experiences windiness and involuntary defecation, and sometimes he lies on his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then know that it is lethal and you should not continue with his treatment.
But if none of these things happen, the prognosis is better and recovery is more likely.
And the treatment for him is to apply a poultice of hot oil to the abscess on the fractured vertebra with cauterized wool or with flowers of hound's tongue, and to apply it sometimes during the day as long as the abscess is suppurating.
And then apply one of the comforting and soothing poultices; and strengthen it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to take rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the side that causes him pain until he is healed.
And if there is a separation of the bones due to some cause, then cut and dry the cord, and let them put it on the bone; and then sew up the two lips of the wound with a stitch if it is large, and treat it with something that encourages the growth of new flesh until it is healed.
But if the end of the bone is broken and it is the end of the spine, then let him insert his left index finger into the anus, and hold together the broken bone with his right hand as much as possible due to the second condition; and then apply a poultice over it and splint it, if there are any signs of pain, and then bind it.
And if you feel that the bones are broken in him, then cut and dry over it, hold it, and treat the wound with what has been mentioned until it is healed.
Chapter 10:
On the restoration of a hernia.
The bones of the hips are often fractured, and when they are broken, their fracture is not only in their extremities but also in their length, and they decline towards each other; and there is pain and puncturing in the patient at that location, and the leg is stunned when it is fractured.
And its restoration is for you to extend your hand over it so that it lies over the fracture in the same way as its shape.
And if it is fractured at its end only, then hold it together according to what appears appropriate to you through an equal binding so that it is similar in shape to its natural form.
But if the fracture is in its length and it inclines towards the feet, then let the patient lie on his belly so that you can restore that fracture. And when you have bound it, apply a poultice over it, and then place over it a splint of wood or cord, and bind it tightly so that you do not fear the puncturing of the fracture or the removal of the splint.
And hold the cavity with something that fills it so that it takes on the binding according to its equality, and instruct the patient to sleep on his back or on his side.
But if there is an abscess, then stop its extension and its restoration until the abscess is suppurating, and apply over it what has been mentioned before; and then return to its restoration, and bind it in the same way as previously described.
And if they are broken or crushed, then treat them.
Chapter 11:
On the restoration of a fracture of the elbow.
The elbow is what is between the shoulder and the head.
And if it is fractured, then its restoration is in one of two ways, and the first is that you take wood of a medium thickness according to this form:
And let it be tied at its two ends with two threads, and then let it be suspended from the raised location.
And let the patient lean on one of his hands; and then let him bend his broken arm over the wood so that it reaches the tip of the wood at the location where the wood is attached to the curve of the wood.
And then suspend it with some heavy weight, or let the servant extend it towards its sides; and then let the doctor and his assistants press the fracture with their hands, so that the fracture returns as it was before.
And the other way is for the patient to lie on his neck and suspend the arm of the collarbone with a bandage; and then let two servants hold one of them holding what is over the fracture with their hands, and the other the patient's feet, and each of them extend it towards its side.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then bind over the fracture with a bandage and another one over that, and each of the two servants extend it towards its two sides.
And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then let half of the bandage be over the tip and the other under the fracture towards the shoulder.
And similarly, if it is close to the shoulder, then let the bandage be over that location and over the shoulder.
Hold it with ease and without pain, and then when it is bound according to its shape and there is no abscess, then bind it tightly if there is no abscess.
But if there is an abscess, then loosen it on the seventh day, and apply over it wool soaked in vinegar and warm oil so that the abscess is suppurating, and then bind it tightly.
And the manner of strengthening that is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then place a wrapping of new cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm onto that support, and place your open hand over his muscle.
And place the cloth and strengthen the support for the arm so that the arm is in place of the broken bone, unless prohibited by any cause of the broken bone.
And then use splints.
And it is that you place over the fracture that splint which is wider and stronger than the others; and place between each splint the width of your finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break with an addition of three fingers of all together.
And then strengthen over the splints with that binding which has been said at the beginning of this chapter.
And it is that your binding over the site of the fracture be more tight. And when the fracture is longer, let the binding be shorter.
And therefore if you see the placement of the splints and binding as we have said in the time when you restore the limb to its position, then do as follows:
And if you fear an ulcer, then you should leave off the binding and splints for seven days as we have said.
And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that no swelling or inflammation occur in the area; or it is prohibited that food come to the limb due to excess of binding; and therefore rectify all that according to what has been said.
But if you are certain that no such cause will occur, then do not loosen the binding but rather three days or more.
And let the patient's sleep be on his back, and let his hands be over his stomach.
And place over the support a poultice full of wool soaked in water, and consider throughout the night or day that the figure of the broken limb is not deflated nor dissolved, or that the binding be softened; therefore rectify all with your skill.
And give the patient food according to the order which we have mentioned before, so that the food be subtle in the beginning as it is commenced strengthening; and then cover that he grows fat.
For it is customary for the support and his bed to be tightened for 40 days; and then cover that they be loosened and a bath be administered and he be medicated with ointments which rectify that.
And if the fracture is white, then you should not loosen that binding and splints for 15 days or two months.
Chapter .12.
Of restoration of a fracture in the arm.
An arm is made up of two bones which are called two radii; one of which is small, and it is that which the thumb presses, and the other is large and is that which is pressed below by the small finger, in the part lower down.
And often only the larger radius is broken, or the smaller, and often they are both broken together.
And when the lesser radius is broken above, then its restoration is easier, and its healing is even easier.
And when it is broken below the fracture of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And worse than that is when both bones are broken together.
Therefore if the bone which is broken is the lesser radius above, then it is convenient for the doctor, in order to facilitate its restoration, that he apply a small extension with ease.
But if the larger radius is broken, then cover that he apply more violent extension.
And if both radii are broken together, then cover that you apply motion most strongly.
And cover that you place the hand's shape for its restoration and extension stretched out over a pillow, and let the wrist of the hand be higher than all other parts, and let the thumb be highest of all the fingers, and let the patient be lying on his back with his arm stretched out over one cushion.
And there should be a pillow under him in the height or bend of him, so that the patient does not labor.
And then one assistant lengthens the arm from below with his hand or with binding, and another assistant lengthens above similarly.
And then the doctor soaks the bone in order to reduce it according to the best figure he can.
And if in the making of the bone there are bumps, then pierce through all hardness in its place with your skill.
And if an appearance of separated bumps shows up which press the tendon and it is not in your hope for its restoration, then you should pierce through it and correct that according to the manner which we have said above.
But if the fracture is with swelling, then I have already made a particular chapter about that, and therefore take its cure.
And if an ulcer occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should line a cloth with cerate made from rose oil and white wax, and let it be in between being thin and soft, and strengthen the cloth over that with subtle binding so that the ulcer yields; and then remove the cerate and apply plaster prepared from powdered mulberry pulp, and then place splints; and let the splint which is placed over that fracture be wider and stronger.
And know that the number of the arm's splints you will see in the major dispositions, or let the fracture be in one radius or in both radii together.
And then strengthen your binding over the site of the fracture most strongly and most violently, and when you loosen the binding on top of the fracture or at the bottom parts of it, loosen the binding a little softer according to how it is preceded in the beginning of this chapter.
And the clothes which are wrapped over the fracture should be soft and moistened with oil, and not hard nor rough, and the thread with which it is strengthened should be between thin and thick, as we have recommended.
And consider the limb and the binding for a few days. And if any cause occurs which necessitates correction, as we have mentioned earlier when it occurred to the limb, then cover that you embrace the limb with warm water so that that yielding ceases.
And let the limb not be restrained while it rests, and then tighten the binding.
And if the binding is already softened and the bone is bathed and like those, then rectify all with your skill.
And consider also if food is prohibited from coming to the limb due to excess of binding, then cover that you soften it a little and let it be for a few days so that the food comes to it, and then strengthen it.
But if in the patient there occurs none of those causes which we have said, then do not cover that it be loosened for 20 days or thereabouts from those.
And then let the patient's hand be suspended by its virtue of active movement, and let him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 42 days, or most likely it is restored in 28 days, and all that is according to the disposition of the complications and the dispositions of skill.
Chapter .13.
Of restoration of fracture of the wrist of the hand and of the fingers.
Know that to the wrist of the hand and to the knuckles of the fingers there is sometimes fracture, and there does not occur to them except a little swelling.
When the hand becomes broken or dislocated, then you must have the patient lean forward and place his hand on a flat surface, and then apply pressure with your own hand.
Then the assistant extends the broken bones and the doctor applies a poultice to the affected area.
Then they apply a plaster and gauze if no abscess is formed; then they place a splint above according to the size of the affected area, which you have already wrapped in cloth.
But if the break is in the fingers near the palm, then they should make a splint out of cloth, and instruct the patient to keep that hand closed with the broken finger; then it should be bound tightly with long cloth.
The splint of wood should be bound with cloth, in such a way that the wood is applied to the palm; then bind it tightly according to how it fits.
But if the break is in the outer part of the hand, then they should place above a splint and another splint below at the base of the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; then apply the binding as the hand is rotated at the knuckle with the fingers bent.
And if a knuckle of the fingers becomes broken, then if it is on the thumb, it should be bound according to how it fits and then tightly bound with the palm; and if you wish, place above it a small straight splint so that the break is elevated and not bruised.
But if the break is on one of the other fingers, like the middle, index, ring, or little finger, then it should be bound and tied with that finger; or they are all tied according to their arrangement, which is better; or place a small splint above it as we have said for the thumb.
And in your restoration, consider the disposition of an abscess and its cause — through your own operation — according to what happens when any of those occur, as it is repeated in his account.
Chapter .xiv.
On the restoration of a broken thigh bone.
The thigh bone is often broken and it is felt in the leg according to how it turns towards the front and the upper part.
And its restoration is done by binding the ligament above the break and another ligament below it; then have the patient lie on his belly and on his face.
Then the assistant extends all the ligaments to their parts according to their quality when the break is in the middle part of the bone.
But if it is near the root of the thigh, then have the ligament near the armpit extend towards the part of the hip so that the extension goes upwards; and the other ligament below the break.
And similarly if the break is near the armpit, then have the ligament near the armpit and let the extension go towards the lower parts.
And the doctor should apply the bone with both hands to reduce it according to its natural appearance and let the bone be joined by a good conjunction; then they apply a poultice and binding if there is no abscess in the limb. But if an abscess occurs, then you must leave it for several days until the abscess has subsided; then return to your cure.
The binding of it is done thus: take a hard bandage and fold it two or three times over the break, and remove the superfluous length from it; then wrap the leg so that it comes to the ankle and the root of the thigh.
And insert long sticks between the thigh and the leg near the armpit towards the lower parts; let the ends of the sticks come from the uppermost part of both sides, then wind them over the leg and the thigh what exceeds from the bandage.
Then place splints on the thigh in the place of that break and place one of those splints on the shinbone.
Then fill the emptiness between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths so that the binding is coagulated.
Then start with strong binding over the place of the break with three or four layers; and as you lengthen with ligament of the place of the break, your binding should be lesser and looser and moister.
Then extend the ends of the sticks to the lower parts so that they come to the ankle of the foot; tighten both ends of the splints from the other side so that the ligament is not loosened from its place.
Then leave the binding over it as long as there is no corruption or abscess or inflammation and likewise to those; and if any of these occur, then treat them with removal of the binding and correct what has happened in each case, according to what we have said many times.
But if there is a wound on the bone, then you should heal it according to what is possible for you; and if not, leave it and cure with that of which the account has been preceded so that it is healed.
And sometimes this break of the thigh is bound with splints in addition to those we have said for the thigh and arm.
But in its restoration when it is bound in such a way, let there be no claudication for the patient; and if it is restored alone, let there be claudication of that from which it was previously affected.
And know that the thigh is bound for 40 days or a few months or a few years, and all of this is according to the variety of the complications and other dispositions.
Chapter .xv.
On the restoration of the break of the shoulder blade.
Know that the break of the shoulder blade hurts there, but it occurs in many places.
But if it occurs with break, then there is nothing more than crack or split in its parts; and over that all is felt.
And its restoration is done by having it bound in the parts that are broken with fingers so that they are gathered and joined according to what is possible through action, facility and fabrication.
Then place a poultice and place over it a round splint, if there are signs of that; then tighten above with binding according to what is convenient.
And consider all the dispositions which we have recounted for other breaks, likewise if there is abscess and likewise towards those in which there occurs any accident with that which to him is convenient so that it is healed.
Chapter .xvi.
On the restoration of the break of the leg.
Know that in the leg there are two bones of which one is thick and is named by name the leg; and the other is slender and is named fibula.
And it occurs in each of the species of break that there is occurrence to both bones of the arm; and for that its restoration is done thus with the restoration of the arm bound, and the operation of it is one.
And if both bones are broken at once, then the leg is turned to all parts.
And if the more slender bone is broken, then the leg is turned to the front parts.
And if the thicker bone is broken, turn it backwards, and those causes are that they are not bent.
And then administer extension and alignment and lengthening of the bones according to that treatment.
However, if the fracture of the leg is wide having many calluses, then the extension should be lesser and closer to each other, and push with your strength.
And if there is any cause for operation on the leg and you are making a cast of the bones and completing your entire operation, then you will take wooden pieces of pine which are placed below the causes that are placed on soles, and they are made into split pieces of palm leaves; attach those to which are small thicknesses, and it should not be of the sweaty ones, and its length should be according to the length of the leg, and from the inside going down.
Then wrap around each cloth in two wraps according to the length of it, and place one over the end of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, and they should be from the inside going down the lowest part of the foot.
And then tie the two bones in three places of the ends and in between the middle location, for with this tightness, the leg is prohibited from tilting to the right or left side, and stands in good position.
And then a wooden splint is administered according to the length of the leg, and it should be placed on it so that it conserves that movement.
And most importantly, you must do this in a fracture, and when it is a plague specifically.
And then consider the leg in each day and study it with that previous study, and you should guard it from swelling or inflammation or other similar causes; and when any of those causes happens, then apply to it what is needed for it to heal.
Chapter .xvii.
Of the fracture of the talus and the bones of the foot and the toes.
The talus does not experience fracture entirely; but to the bones of the foot there are some fractures; and to the toes of the foot there are few fractures, and they do not occur except for pressure in the months of disposition.
And if there is a fracture to the bones of the foot and they see those bones elevated against each other, then the patient should put their foot on the ground prepared like this:
Then place one foot over those elevated bones, and then press and pull those back into their locations.
And then apply plaster and stop it on top of that, and place below the belly of the foot a small table to which are two flat pieces placed.
And then strengthen that with the foot with descending extension, because you have wrapped it with cloths and other causes from which it needs strengthening.
And when three or four days have passed for it, then you loosen the binding, because you will find the bones to be aligned, either broken or displaced, and the operation in those is like this:
But if some toes are broken, then restore those, and align them like this as you saw and instructed in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. And then place to the broken toe a splint according to the length of the toe, and let it be lower than it by a bit; and below the foot this table which you have been instructed in, and strengthen that with descending extension.
But if what is broken of the bones is two or three or more, then you place to each toe a splint of its quantity wrapped in lion cloth, and strengthen the table below the bottom of the foot, and it stands on one of the ends of the table out from the belly of the foot so that it has good retention.
And it is convenient for you not to forget that you do not consider all the causes that have been said to you in the other fractures of the accidents that we have said, and apply to any accident what is needed.
Chapter .xviii.
Of the fracture of the bone of the female thigh and the bone of the penis shaft and the wand of man.
When the bone of the female thigh is broken, then make that to be bent in a sitting position, and then tilt it towards the end on one side a little bit, and it should be held backwards.
And then the midwife fills the hollow of the thigh, and it is made in the bone of that like this with hope; and then the woman is bent, and lifts the end of that a little bit by bit, for all that is forgotten inside that as it faces the end of the bone like this with hope and the broken bone returns.
And then place powder on the end of that, and when it wants to urinate, move the thigh with ease and then urinates, and reduces and returns that according to the way in which you measured it at the beginning, and then return to its first powder.
And do this for seven days or around them, because it is restored.
And if you want, take a bladder of goat and strengthen on the break of that a cannula of straw; and insert the entire bladder in the bone of that, and then blow in the cannula with strength so that the bladder is inflated inside the bone, because the fracture returns.
And then it is filled with thigh and stays for some days according to what we have instructed, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the penis shaft of man or woman is broken, then administer in its restoration and piercing of it what we have instructed in the bone of the hip.
And what is straight is not hidden in these nearby fractures and that hardly anyone knows it, most especially to him who has some study and understanding of this my free word; because that fracture indicates to you in the major dispositions directly in its restoration and in the strengthening of it, and therefore understand well.
But in the wand of man when it is broken, take garlic of oak, and put the wand in that; and then apply plaster on it, and let it be wrapped, and then let it be loosened after three days or around them, and it is healed.
Chapter .xix.
Of the restoration of the bones when they are with plague.
It is convenient for him to whom there occurs fracture with plague, and especially if the bone is large like this as it is the bone of the head or of the helper, or similar to that, that you treat it and fleubotomies it just as the conditions of fleubotomia testify about it.
And if the plague and flu flow out, then you should strengthen that to hold it in like this as you pulverize it with powdered zegi trissat, unless another cause is not present.
And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not prolong it, if an abscess does not occur.
But if an abscess occurs, then you should lift the restoration of it on the sixth day, while it has settled the abscess, and do not approach it in the third day or the fourth of all, because you will make accidents occur.
But if the broken bone is prominent over the uncovered tendon, then strengthen that for you to reduce it and align that with your hands with ease and with little extension.
But if extension is not prepared for you and the alignment of it with your hands, then you should reduce that with your hands using this instrument; and it is an instrument which is made of iron, the length of which is seven digits or eight, and its width according to the amount of plague, and it is necessary for the doctor who takes from those three or four according to the amount needed in the cure in all species of fracture.
Let him be laid down flat on his back, and let there be no awkwardness in his posture so that he is not bent over during the operation.
Let him be laid down flat on his back, and let there be no awkwardness in his posture so that he is not bent over during the operation.
This is how it should be done:
And in Greek it is named "labre volentz atelarem", and that means a small knife for cutting.
So that the lower end of the bone should be elevated above the upper end of the prominent bone.
And it should be pressed into a groove until the bone is returned to its position and bound with some tourniquet.
And then press the ends of the broken bone together between your fingers, and if the broken end is thin, and doesn't fit well into the instrument, then you should insert the end of that bone so that the instrument can hold it in place.
But if you are unable to reduce the bone using the methods we have described, then cut it with one of the saws that suits your purpose; or saw it in some way that is convenient for you.
Then smooth away anything rough on the bone and any small protrusions.
And when the bone is reduced, if you find that it causes great pain to the patient when he moves it, then understand that the bone has not been returned to its natural position; and therefore do something that gives great relief to the patient.
When you have finished your treatment of the bone, then immerse it in black-staining wine, and especially if it is summer; and do not place cerots or any other cause of oil on it, so that swelling and corruption do not occur in it.
And then give a poultice at the end of your treatment of the bone, and leave the wound uncovered so that you can apply the traction with forceps and the use of bandages according to the amount of the wound.
And be very careful not to stretch the wound with the fracture, for there have been many cases where foolish doctors have caused death or a bad disease to their patients by doing this. And if your tightness is looser, softer and different from the tightness of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or bad, and you fear that some harm might come to him from the accidents we have mentioned, and he feels pain in the area, then do not apply poultices to it, but make a bandage of hard cloths in place of the poultices and bind it tightly with those.
And when the wound has begun to heal for about a day or two and pus is being generated inside it, then remove from above the poultice the cloth which you have placed on it, and then apply hot poultices according to the custom of our medicine, also tetrafarmacon and similar things.
And it is appropriate for you to loosen the ligature and examine the wound every day morning and evening until it is consolidated and closed; and let the limb be prepared in such a way that the swelling runs from it into its parts with ease.
If after several days the wound is not consolidated or the pus has not been expelled from it, then understand that here are small obstructions; and therefore probe the wound with a tent. And of those obstructions which are separated and removed, those from which the member is not separated and cause pain, probe to insert them according to what you can do.
And if pus occurs in the wound or it turns black or some other kind of corruption and putrefaction happens, then do whatever is appropriate to it according to what is written about its cure in its chapter.
And from this, let your speech be brief and do not make it long: when a large bone is broken, let the member project above the limb just like the bone of the thigh and the helper, and those which are similar to those of the great limbs; and do not presume atraction of it, nor its extraction for many times it has caused death; let it remain until it becomes dry, for certainly after 20 or 30 days. And then heal the wound if you see it, and if not, leave it.
Chapter .XX.
On the cure of nodules that happen in the path of a fracture.
Many times this nodule happens in the path of healing a fracture, and usually it is near the joints, and it strongly prohibits the limb from its natural action.
Therefore consider if the nodule is recent and apply to it medicines which have tightened like aloes, and onions, and mallow, and thistle, and similar things; in such a way that you take some or all of them, and mix them with wine-based medicines, or with white vinegar, or with sour wine, and place that on the nodule with a sponge, and bind it tightly.
And let the ligature not be loosened for many days; and then loosen it and repeat another, in such a way that the nodule is rubbed; or bind tightly over that a sheet of lead descentment, for lead has the property of rubbing everything which is swollen in the limbs.
But if the nodule is already turned to stone and it is tight and it causes necessity to cut that with a saw, then cut it at the part which is most prominent from it, and insert the superfluous and prominent, or remove it with some saws in such a way that it is rubbed; and heal that until it is healed.
Chapter .XXI.
On the restoration of a fracture when it is restored and then what happens to the limb which is sottile and frail not according to its nature.
When a bone fracture is restored, and then the limb becomes sottile and frail, this happens for many causes: of which one is abundance of solution of the ligature and of its binding not according to what is appropriate; or by superfluity of stricture of the ligaments in such a way that the nourishment is prohibited from running to the limb; or by abundance of superfluous swelling; or by superfluous movement not at the right time; or by deficiency of blood in the body of the patient and of his weakness.
And the cure for this is to give food to the patient and make his heart tender in such a way that blood is multiplied in him; and apply poultices; and place leeches and let them remain on it.
And then place a bandage on the limb, in such a way that the bandage draws nourishment to it; or continue to rub it with warm water in such a way that the nourishment flows and returns to its natural figure.
Chapter .XXII.
On the cure of bones which are broken and then restored crookedly, and prohibited from their action by what is appropriate.
When it happens to the limb already restored that its healing of crookedness and prominence of the broken bone and nodule, and is thus weakened in form, but however the limb is not prohibited from its natural action, then do not accept the word of him who examines that limb as if it were newly broken.
But already there are many foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is most reproachable, presenting the sign of which is mortal.
If the limping and nodding are recent, then they should be treated with a compress of warm water in which soft herbs are steeped, such as leaves of alder and its roots, and sweet-smelling plants similar to these; or he should be given an ointment made from a softening ointment base, such as one made from liquid paraffin; or a poultice of alder root gum should be applied, either with cotton wool or with olive oil, and then bandaged with that; or fat figs should be cut into pieces and bound with pigeon feathers, and similar remedies to those mentioned for strengthening the joints.
And sometimes it is dissolved by frequent gentle friction with moist hands, and the limb should be moved in all directions at all times.
But if the twisting has gone too far and become strong and turned to stone, and requires treatment with iron, then the pus should be drawn out from above and the continuity of the bone should be dissolved, and that which is superfluous of the nodule of that joint should be cut away with thin instruments, and ease should be administered to it through solicitude and study.
Chapter 23.
Of speech in dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of one of the joints of its place, by which it is prohibited from moving, and the shape of the limb is distorted, and it brings great pains and serious injuries to the patient.
Therefore, when dislocation occurs, it should be reduced immediately, for if it is delayed, the joint will become inflamed and very strong, and the reduction of the dislocation will then be difficult.
And for that reason, he should not be beaten nor stretched in the hour of inflammation, for many times it causes spasms and pains to the patient.
But when it happens, you should apply the flaubotomy to the patient, and let him rest so that the inflammation may subside; then the limb should be rubbed with warm water and oil, and reduced with ease.
And every limb should be treated according to what its memory will bring it back to its place.
And I have arranged the chapters on dislocation according to what precedes in fractures, from the uppermost part of the body down to the lowest.
Chapter 24.
Of the cure for dislocation of the lower jaw.
The two jaws are dislocated if not chewed; and the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either they are beaten out of their joints by a little movement, and become soft a little; or they are completely dislocated and filled, so that they are softened at the joint where saliva runs from the patient's mouth, and he cannot hold it closed nor close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in his speech.
But when the dislocation of him is slight, then in the most dispositions it returns by itself for no cause.
But if the dislocation is entire and filled, then the reduction of it should be administered gently, and not be delayed at all.
And the minister should hold the patient's head, and the doctor should put his finger of one hand into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the patient' s mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or he should put both fingers in together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers of his hands be outside holding his cheeks; and he commands the patient to stop his jaws and open them in every direction; and the doctor should hold the jaw and push it back into its place.
And if the reduction of him is difficult, and especially if both jaws are both dislocated, then administer evaporation with warm water and oil, so that the reduction of both be made gently and not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
And therefore when they are returned and closed, and the mouth of the patient is not softened, then apply powders of cloth with cerate, and let it be made of wax and oil rozat; and then tie it with ease by means of mild ligatures.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and his head be standing between two pillows, so that he may not beat it to the right nor to the left; and do not force him to chew for any cause; having his food be lean lion meat, so that when the pains are beating and the jaws are numbed, then let him beat what he will.
And that should be administered with ease, and do not labor over the opening of the mouth after eating and drinking and yawning, so that the jaw may be numbed and healed.
And if the reduction of both jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at any hour and not returned to their places, then many times it happens that fevers and constant sweating accde, and very strong colic is provoked in the belly of the patient, and very strong vomiting of pure colic.
And when you see this, then know that it is dangerous; and many times that person dies to whom it happens in six days.
Chapter 25.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the collar bone and the extremity of the muscle.
The collar bone is not dislocated within by its continuity with the chest; and sometimes it is dislocated at the outer end, and that is declared by feeling.
And its restoration is that the patient yawns over his back and extends his arms. And then push the place with your palm with strong compression, for it will return.
And then apply ointment and powders and strengthen that.
But the extremity of that which severs the collar bone and is continued with it, is not dislocated on any day; therefore let it be reduced and closed as we have said and as it is prepared for you.
And then apply ointment, and powders, and compression, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until he is healed.
And by this medicine's cure, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter 26.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is that it is dislocated at the tip of the finger at the bottom part.
And the second is that it is dislocated at the top of the muscle, and that is done quickly; and it is not dislocated at the sides behind the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front by the nerves.
And mostly it is dislocated and drawn out at the bottom parts behind the finger, and mostly in those of which the flesh is few, it is dislocated quickly; but in those in which there is much flesh, it is drawn out with difficulty.
And very often it happens to some men by blow or fall, and the muscle of him is inflamed by inflammation, and it is struck by that which has already been dislocated.
Therefore let you probe that while you are above him, and then proceed in the cure of him.
And the dislocation of him is known when it is at the bottom parts behind the finger; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy muscle, for you press between those two with manifest difference; and you press in the head of the muscle concave and below the finger from the touch of the head of the muscle as a thumb, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to his shoulder, nor move it at all.
If the feet or ankles are dislocated, you will certainly feel it by touching, and it will not be hidden.
And from this dislocation there is an easy reduction when it is fresh and the patient is young.
And the reduction of it is that the minister lifts up the patient's hand to the parts above; and then he puts his fingers under the patient's armpit, and lifts up the joint with strength towards its place, and the minister lifts up the patient's hand, and extends it upwards; and then he lets it drop quickly below.
But if it does not return from that which we have said, and it has happened from the beginning that caused the dislocation, after several days, let the patient be bathed in warm water and given an ointment that softens and lines like so with comfrey, fenugreek, and mallows in water, and it is administered.
And then the patient is reclined on his back and a cushion is placed under his armpit expectant of wool that it be both elevated and pressed, and then the doctor places his thumb on the ball, and lifts up the head of the muscle with strength, and pulls the patient's hand so that it is not pulled to the parts below, and another minister holds the head of the patient so that it is not pulled to the parts below, for it will return to its place at once.
And if you want, reduce it in this way: and let there be present a man who is taller than the patient, and stand on that side, and insert his finger under the armpit of the patient and lift up the armpit to the parts above while the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the patient's hand from the parts below his belly. But if the patient is light, then let it be suspended by another cause, for the sake of gravity, for the dislocation will return at once.
And it is reduced in this way as well: and let there be placed on the ground a post long at its head whose top is rounded in shape, like mortar, neither thick nor thin, and then let the patient be placed under it; after which, let drape lionskin be placed over the top of the post, and let the patient stand according to the length of the post, and then let his hand be extended to the parts below on the other side; and let his body be extended from the other side with strength, for the joint will return to its place with speed.
And if it is difficult to reduce it by all the causes that we have said, then use this cure: and let you take a post whose length is two arms, and its width is four digits, and its thickness is removed in the hollow of the armpit according to this form:
And then on the rounded top are tied lionskin drapes so that the post does not press against the patient.
And then let the armpit of the patient be placed under it, and let his hand or arm be extended over the post to the parts below, and let the post be bound over the helper and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Then let the arm be placed over a step of a ladder according to its width, and let the hand be extended to the parts below, and the other body be suspended on the other side, for the joint will come at once.
And when the instrument of it is completed according to any manner that is possible for you, then let you place underneath the armpit a ball of wool of equal quantity; and then let ointment be applied prepared from miller's ash with honey over all the muscle, as if it were rolled over it, and then strengthen underneath the armpit with decent tightness; and let the bandage be rolled over the ointment, and the hand of the patient be tied to his neck, and he is released, and the hand of the patient must not be pulled for seven days.
And let the food of the patient be lessened a little while the member is being comforted, for it is more quickly healed.
And then let food be given more after seven or eight days and exercise a movement; and therefore if it is firm and not soft, then it has healed.
But if the joint is dislocated many times by moisture that befalls it or by another cause, then let cautery be administered to it with three cuts, according as it is said before in the chapter on cautery.
And if all this is done and then after seven days the bandage is loosened and the joint is not firm, and the ointment and tightness are removed from it several times, and it is not firm and cats cannot be raised to the parts above, then know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are cut or extended or soft, and know that the joint will never return to its place.
Of the dislocation which is made to the feet and the breast or behind, the reduction is made by pushing and extension with the hands, while it returns.
And let the other tightness be applied to it and cure it while it is being healed.
And if healing happens slowly in the member and there is delay in its movement, then let the patient bathe many times while that heaviness is removed and let it return to its first nature.
Chapter .XXVII.
Of cure of dislocation of the neck.
Know that the joint of the neck is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated to all parts, and most of all to the front part than behind, and its dislocation to you is not hidden, for when you adjust the neck dislocated in any way, it is declared to you manifestly, for the joint is hollowed out and cannot bend the arm, nor touch with it the muscle.
And let you know that if it comes to the patient with an abscess cautery, then its reduction is difficult, and especially when it comes to it with an abscess cautery, for it is not healed at all; and most of all when it comes to the back part, for worse than all other species of dislocation, and more pain, and many times they die from it.
And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand of the patient be extended with two hands, and the arm of the patient be expanded, and the hands of the doctor be on the neck and under it, and he push the joint with his thumbs of his hands inwards, or with the hollow of his palm, until it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is to the front part, then it returns in this way that he bends the hand with his own hand, while he pierces the neck with the hollow of his palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer violent extension and very hard.
And let two ministers extend the arm, and hold it tightly so that it is not pulled back from the extension.
And then let the arm be rolled all around, since it is wrapped in a long folded drape or bandage.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that it be helped by all causes which help in lubrication of the joint with ease; and then push the joint with violent pressure until it returns.
And then the reduction of it is that it be placed on the ointment in which it is stiffened and dried with honey, and let it be bound tightly with a bandage and the arm suspended by the neck, and let him be released for several days.
And then it is loosened; and if the joint is formed in its place, then you loosen the ligament of it and leave it there.
And if you see the joint not to be stronger, then repeat the plaster and the ligament, and leave it there for several days until it is strengthened; and then loosen it.
But if you see the patient become worse after the reduction of the joint, and the condition is in movement, then administer moistening baths and subtle friction, and compression, until it is relieved; or place a poultice on the joint, which is a mixture of grease; and then bind it, and leave it on overnight. And then remove the poultice, and place the patient in a bath; and when he is bathed, then rub the joint with tempered friction, and then repeat on that poultice, which is rosemary of oil, once, and the second time, and the third, corruption has already occurred in the brain through the instrument of bath water, so that it becomes thin.
And if you want, place on that wound of the cow's udder wet and roasted with butter and tightened over it; and do this several times, because that is wet and reduced to its condition.
Chapter .XXVIII.
Of the cure of dislocation of the elbow, which is the joint between the arm and the hand.
Elbow of the hand is sometimes displaced, and the reduction of its dislocation is easier, and in contrast to the other joints, however, there must be swiftness in its reduction in the hour when it is displaced, lest the joint become pustular or pus occurs in it.
And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the patient's elbow on a table and extend his hand, and the doctor places his hand or palm on the protuberance of the joint, and push it in until it returns to its place.
However, there must be consideration if the palm is already placed on the stomach of the hand, then the patient places his forearm on a table opposite to extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is prior to the forearm, then let the position of the hand of that be intrinically on the table, so that the doctor's hand lies on that protuberance of the joint.
And therefore if it returns immediately, it is good; and if not, then tighten that with plaster, yielding the pustule and leave it; and do not repeat this, because unless more than days pass over it.
However, the joint bends according to its tortuousness; and does not feel any cause in the patient, except that the hand is softened and cannot strengthen anything; then you know that the nerves are broken or cut, and therefore it does not have strength in it except when it is tightened with cautery near its joint and that is strongly applied.
Therefore when the elbow is returned, then place on it plaster which we have recommended, and let it be left and tightened for several days; and then loosen it and let it be left and the hand of him exercised.
But if the movement of it is hindered and there is any heaviness in him, then loosen that with warm water and friction several times, until it is relieved.
Chapter .XXIX.
Of the cure of dislocation of the fingers.
Sometimes the fingers are displaced entirely apart.
And when any of those fingers is displaced on the back of the palm or on its belly, then you press the finger and drive the dislocation of it with your thumbs, until it returns.
And then support the head of the finger, and suspend that over the part to which it is displaced, and leave it for two days.
And then suspend that and extend that until it is straightened into that place on that day.
And when the morning comes, loosen that according to that relation, and do not cease loosening that during the day and exercising it with movement, and loosen it at night; and do this for several days until it is tightened.
And do the same with that if it is displaced on the belly of the hand, and loosen that to that place and do with it your first operation, until it is healed.
And similarly do with that when it is displaced in other places.
Chapter .XXX.
Of the cure of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
When it happens to any of the vertebrae of the back or of the neck and several vertebrae remain out of place, then there is no cure in that, because death approaches the patient.
And the sign of this is that the excretion of the patient is outside his will, and he cannot retain it; and sometimes some of his members are softened or two of his legs or arms, or one of those; or one vertebra is displaced from its place, because sometimes it is displaced and sometimes the removal of those to four places.
Therefore that is already displaced to the back parts and is called hunchback.
However the cure of that is that you consider if the hunchback happens from childhood, because then there is no cure for that and there is no healing of that at all.
But in that which comes from accident or from stroke or similarly to those, the Ancients have spoken of ways of cure with prolixous words, of which the most returned with profit; but I and you have abbreviated that of which the little excused of its excess, by my proximity to intention my exposition, which I have expounded and formed from diverse instrument of that, by which I show that and spread out that.
And of those are not cured except that which happens in the back properly with that which I have mentioned.
And let the patient be extended on his face over a pail, and be extended below him instrument moist so that his feet are not bound.
And then a straight post is placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the pail around the head of him, and another post in the air holding his feet at the other end of the pail.
And the minister held the posts, and are not closed in a hole; and another minister holds the other according to that form.
And then wrap around the head of the patient and hold it with a lion-skin strap; and extend the end of the strap to the post which is over the head of him, and loosen that in him; and then tighten the other strap on the loins of him, his knees holding his feet, and then adjust all the straps and loosen those in the other post which holds his feet.
And then the minister extends the strap to the end of the post, and let the two posts not be displaced and the straps of their places in which they are placed, but however do not close them as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms on the vertebra with strength until it returns, or he lies on a table, and then let him adjust his feet on the table until it returns.
But if it does not return by that form, then take a table of which the breadth or length is in air for three arms, and hollow in the wall of which we have said it is close to the patient a place in which the end of the table. And then place the middle of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and stretch well until the spine is cramped and returns to its place.
And if you wish, open a turn which is wound around the hand; and it is that you place on the ground under the patient's head in the back of the knee two fists, the length of which is a arm, and under his head in the back of the heel also two fists; and let the length between each fist be a palm, and already in each fist there is made a pull in which the turn runs, and each is very firmly fixed to the ground so that it is not moved.
And there is placed a round post in which the turn is wound, and it is wound around the two holes of the two fists.
And in its end there is a hole in which the post is made, the length of which is a palm where it is wound; and in the other two posts is similar to that.
And then stretch the ligaments which you have tightened in the foot of the patient in the hole which is under his head, and the ligaments which you have tightened in his thighs in the turn which is under his feet.
And then place each turn and have a minister twist the turn with his hand, and the doctor bends the spine as we have said.
And then when the spine is returned and the place is smoothed, then apply a paste of dried white lead and linen; and then place over the paste a wooden board of which the breadth is three digits or around that, and its length is the quantity that it takes up the space of the hernia, and over the part of the spine.
And then let it be bound with a ligament as we have said, and use subtle food for the patient until he is healed.
And if any swelling remains in the place at the end of healing, then apply medicines that melt and smooth with administration of the table for a long time, which we have counted; and already is administered in that place a plate of lead.
And sometimes an imminence happens in the back of the spine bones, and it is cured by that dislocation; and it is that bone which already imminent for which it is not possible to be made protrusion to him with this medicine, because quickly he will cause death to you.
Chapter .xxxi.
Of cure of a dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle do not cause but dislocation only, and do not happen to those which happen to other joints of small removal and concavity.
And the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four ways, because it is dislocated at the parties inside, or at the parties outside, or at the parties in front, or at the parties behind.
And mostly it is dislocated at the parties inside, and seldom at the parties in front or at the parties behind.
And the sign of its dislocation at the parties inside is that when you bend the leg of the patient with the patient, it is longer and the thigh is more prominent than that of the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend his foot because of the language, and the location of the language is pustulated by pustule cauterized, so that the head of the hip joint has come here.
And the sign of that which happens to dislocation at the parties outside is that its accidents are contrary to these accidents.
And the sign of that which happens to dislocation at the parties in front is that they expand their leg according to its compliment, but indeed they cannot bend it without pain that is in the thigh; and if they insist on walking and not being able to walk over those on the front; and their urine is retained and their groin is pustulated, and due to their walking on their heel.
And the sign of that which happens to dislocation at the parties behind is that they do not expand the thigh, nor can they bend that in front that bends the groin, and their leg is shorter than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the hip joint is due to that place.
But reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and antique, which has already been ancient by having you administered reduction to it and remained according to its disposition, then there will not be complete cure in that; and therefore it is not possible for protrusion to happen to him.
But in that which the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocation, then you are led to that which you want to turn the joint and extend it to the parties inside and to the parties outside, and from there to the right and left, because quickly it returns and does not need other cure.
But if it does not return in this way, then you prepare a strong minister and extend his leg from the lowest party, or with his own hands, or with ligament which is bound over the leg on top of the thigh; and another minister extends his hand over that below the nipples of him; and then stretch with ligament lion over the root of the hip, and hold the other minister the extremity of the ligament.
And its extension is from the inside party to the groin at the party of the collar bone, or from the back party to the party of the breast.
And let the extension of all those in one go as the patient is elevated with his body from the ground and that he hangs bent.
And this species of extension is common to all four.
And therefore if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is well; and otherwise, it is necessary in every species that I will tell of their own cure.
In its own reduction, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is at the inside parties, let the patient be raised on his side; and then place the ligaments over the root of the hip in that place between the head of the hip joint and the party which is below the groin; and then extend the ligament from above the part of the groin to the highest party of the collar bone.
And then another strong minister takes his arms, and presses the thick part of the hip joint and extends to the outside parties by violent extension, because that returns to its place.
And this species is the quickest cure with which that member is reduced more than other species.
But if he is excused to you and does not obey the treatment with this species of cure in everything, then let his two feet be bound together with strong ligament, quickly, over both heels and over both thighs.
And let the length of each of its parts be the quantity of four digits, and let the hip joint be extended but that the other by a quantity of two digits.
And then let the patient be suspended over the head of the post, and that he is in the middle; and let its length from the ground be the quantity of two yards.
And then command a strong young man that lessens the head of the hip joint, and let him be suspended by another young man, and the other young man lessening the hip with strength pushes, because the joint returns to its place with speed.
But in its own reduction, when it is dislocated at the outside party, let him lie over the hole according as we have recommended while having hibernated; and let the ligament be tightened over the hip joint properly and over the feet of him.
And then two sticks are placed, one at the feet and the other at the head; and then sticks adjusted to the waist, with a damp cloth wrapped over the area, so that the patient is not harmed by the stick between their thighs, so that when the extension of the legs is drawn down, it is not pulled.
And then each assistant extends to their side, and the doctor has his hand ready to make the incision according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in front of the legs, then let the chest be slightly extended and it is according to this narrative on the waist; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand over the armpit of the patient, and tightly presses that with his other hand, and with that grip he extends the leg at the beginning of the groin.
And if the dislocation is in back of the legs, then it is not necessary for the patient to be extended at the front of the legs and raised from the ground; but let them be placed on a hard surface, just as the positioning when the arm is dislocated outward, as we have said regarding his lying down on two arms; and he should be on his side, and the joints extended, as we have said, with no difficulty.
And there should be a compression applied with a board over the location where there is pain in the joint.
And when the reduction is complete according to what you have seen — and if the sign of the reduction is hidden from you, and it is that you extend both legs for the patient, and when you see these signs and the patient stretches their leg and lengthens it without excuse, then you should know that the limb according to what has happened is returned — and then you adjust two thighs and apply ointment and tighten with a bandage so that the joint is not damaged in any of its parts; and the patient must remain at rest for three or four days.
And then loosen the ligament and the bandage, and compare one leg to the other.
Then, if you see these signs in reality, then know that the dislocation is already closed, and therefore let the patient go.
And if you see any cause of softening, then return and plaster that, and tighten that according to the first extension, and let it be for three days.
And then loosen that, and let that delay in walking over anyone for several days, until he is comforted.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder.
The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: it is dislocated outward, and inward, and downward but not forward; and backward.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you command the patient to lift their arm with their shoulder, and then you know that it is dislocated.
And the restoration of all its kinds is that you force the patient to straighten their arm, as much as possible; adhere two fingers to their face, and place their foot between your feet; and then have another assistant extend their leg while the shoulder returns to its place.
And the sign of its restoration is that their arm adheres to their shoulder without laboriousness.
And then plaster that and have the arm adhere to the shoulder, and then tie those together with a bandage for three or four days, and then loosen them.
And do not use the patient of walking for several days until it is healed and comforted.
But if its reduction to you is excused, then administer strong extension by the ligaments of which in the cure of the hip there is preceding narrative.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of the cure for the dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle is sometimes dislocated by slight displacement and sometimes it is dislocated according to full, and its dislocation is done either inward or outward.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you see the ankle swollen proceeding from the part to which it is dislocated.
But the cure for its displacement is slight reduction and is that it be extended with ease by hands and be covered while it returns.
But in its cure when it is dislocated according to full, you must force the patient straight, and have a strong and vigorous minister from behind his leg in the middle part of him.
And then you with your right hand hold the highest part of the foot, and with your left hand the lowest part of the foot in the location of the ankle.
And then draw the foot to you with your right hand, and then with your left twice, and then extend it with the left; and press the instep of the foot with the right because of the bandage of his labor.
And do that two times according to what we have counted.
And then press the instep of the foot to the ankle on the third occasion, and you are at the ankle.
Therefore if it returns in one or two according to this way, and if you see the foot swollen, it is good; but if not, then repeat the operation on it, because it will return.
But if you are prohibited from reducing it with what we have recommended, then let the patient lie on their back on the ground, and tighten a staff with a cloth in the ground, and that it lies between their thighs, and you have already wrapped a cloth around him so that he does not sweat.
And then the minister of it has his thighs, and another minister extends the foot by their hands or by the ligament that lies on the neck of the foot; and each minister extends against the extension of his fellow, and the staff is extended between the thighs of the patient, so that the body of him is not drawn to the front because of its extension.
And then the doctor holds the dislocation with their hands, and another minister has the healthy thigh at the front, because the dislocation returns with ease.
And therefore when the dislocation returns and you are told of its restoration, then apply plaster and tighten that with strong ligaments, and tie the foot to the ankle.
And you must fear or guard against the nerves which are behind on the ankle, so that the ligament on it is not violent and lead that strongly.
And then let him be for two or three days; and if the ligament is softened, tighten that.
And then loosen it on the third day or the fourth, and prohibit the patient from walking for 40 days. But if he is forced to walk before that space, there is no guarantee that the dislocation is not dissolved and ruined, and then it receives no cure.
And if pustules occur to him in that place, then you must minister to the swelling of it where our narrative precedes, in another location of cure and fomentation while it is swollen.
Chapter .xxxiiii.
A cure for dislocated toes of the feet.
First, let the one who is dislocated be anointed with a little oil; and what is not difficult, let it be lighter.
But if the dislocation is in any part of the toes of the foot, then let him have his foot cut off from under him on the ground or on a table, and let him stand like that.
Then you stand on your feet and put your foot over that which protrudes from the joints, and then press it with your foot with force so that it goes back in, and see if it has been anointed and there is no protuberance in the joint.
Then put under his foot a table that covers the whole foot, which has two ends, and then tighten him with decent and firm tension for three days; and then loosen him and let him rest from walking for several days, until he is healed and his return is assured.
Chapter 35.
Of the kinds of dislocation that are caused by a blow or by a fracture or by any other impingement.
When one of those causes occurs and you penetrate into the cure of that and into the restoration of him, many times death happens.
And because of that, you should not presume on the cure of him, but rather he who is wise in the art, with great compassion and pity, gently, not hastily or presumptuously, and who uses in the beginning of medicines which reduce swellings only so much, and let the patient be left to divine judgment, unless you hope for salvation from ruin, with alleviation of the illness, and in which there appears some hope. And then strive to reduce him immediately at the beginning of the cause, before he suffers an impingement.
And then if the member returns as we want, then administer treatment which reduces the swelling and heals the wound with that which is appropriate for him of the dry ointments.
And if the dislocation is with a fracture and it happens that the bones are separated, then you penetrate their joint, and do in that what we have said in the simple illnesses of those of which we have spoken earlier.
And guard and avoid according to your ability that instrument in the ways of fear according to what has preceded my preaching; for he who is best to you owes you your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and healthier to your true self those in your time. Thus end the words of Albucasim perfectly, of which God be blessed. Amen.
