O sons, if I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, through its completion in it, and through its expositions and declarations, from my point of view, you will complete that to you with this treatise, which is the part of the operation by hand, and that is surgery.
Because the operation by hand is neglected in our region and in our time it is deprived of all, while greatly risking the science of it, and its practices are obscured; and nothing remains of it except a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which they distorted and led to errors, and confused the senses of it, and elongated its force and art.
And it is clear to me that you will enliven that through the ordering of this treatise according to the second way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that it may come with the forms of the tools of cautery and of other instruments of the work as it should be for addition through declaration, and for preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
But the cause why no good artificer is approved by his hand in our time, is because the art of medicine is long, and that its agent must first be exercised in the science of anatomy which recognizes the parts of members and their forms, and their conjunction and separation; and have the knowledge of bones, nerves, and vessels, and the number of these, and their issue; and of the pulsating veins and of the quiet ones, and the places of their issuing.
And for that Hyporcas says that although his name is great, in practice it is small, and especially in the art of the hand.
But we have already said of that in the introduction to this book; because whoever is not learned in what we have said of anatomy, is not evacuated so as not to fall into error through which men will die, just as I have seen many of those, because some are formed in this science and they throw themselves away from it without knowledge or experience.
Because I saw a foolish and experienced doctor who made an incision on a goiter on the neck of a woman, and he cut some arteries in the neck so that much blood flowed and the woman died in his hands.
And I saw another doctor who took a stone from a man's gallbladder, and the stone was large, and he took it out with a piece of the bladder, and that man died on the third day.
And I called to him to stop that, and I saw that through the size of the stone and the disposition of the patient over him that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who received wages from a duke of our land for surgery, and he cured a black slave whose leg was fractured; and through the ignorance of the doctor, he removed the fracture over the wound with powders and splints with strong compression, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
And he bound it according to his desires, and he relined it, and he left it for several days, and he commanded that we should not loose the bandage; and so it was as the leg and the thigh became infected with an ulcer, and it came to ruin.
And I was called to him, and I prepared to loose the bandage, and I found rest and ease of his pains.
But nevertheless corruption was confirmed in the member, so that I could not restrain it, and the corruption did not cease to wander through the member until the patient died.
And I saw another doctor who perforated a cancerous ulcer, and it was open for some days, so that the evil of it increased through its lord.
The cause of which is that the rotten ulcer is pure of melancholic humour, then it does not reach him by iron or anything else, but that it be in a member that suffers so as to be hostile to it.
And for that, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation by hand be divided into two divisions: one is an operation associated with health, and the other is work through which there is peril in the major dispositions.
And I have already discussed that in every place of this book where there is an operation in which there is error and fear; so it is necessary for you to guard against that and leave it, so that the foolish do not stop speaking and disgracing you.
And thus take your arms with diligence and the protection of God; and your patients with facility and firmness.
And use the better way through the grace of God so that you may attain health and praiseworthy succession, and lay waste to terrible illnesses of difficult cure; and hold your arms from what makes you fearful, so that trepidation in your faith and name may not escape you: for it remains for your glory, and more beyond in the world and in heaven for your sanctities.
Galia already said in some of his proverbs: “Do not heal illnesses ill, so that evil doctors are not named.”
And I have divided this book according to three titles.
Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter ordered from the head to the feet, in the forms of instruments and tools of cauteries, and what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, of cautery and piercing, and of leeches, and of plasters, and of extraction of arrows and of similar things, all titled and ordered in the forms of instruments.
The third chapter, of restoration and of dislocation, and of cure of tortion and of similar things; a chapter ordered from the head to the feet, and of the forms of instruments.
I will tell you the quality of those cauteries and of their properties, and in what disposition cautery is prohibited.
Therefore I say that the word of the quality of cautery and the property of it is long and prolix, and subtle through science, and secret hid; and many wise men have spoken much of it, and they disagree on it, and for me enough is a little of their words, fearing prolixity.
And therefore I say that cautery confers upon every complete disposition universally the which is of matter or without matter, excepting two dispositions, which are caustic dispositions without matter.
In the caustic and dry disposition with matter disagreement; for some say that cautery is beneficial to it, and others the contrary of that, that cautery is not convenient in illness which is by quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and convening is that illness caustic and dry is cured by what is cauted and dry.
And he says the contrary of that, that by cautery there is benefit in every illness caustic and dry which one sees in the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of man and his humours to the disposition of fire, you find the body of man rubbed.
And I say by the word of that, that experiment it already to me several times have discovered.
But it is not appropriate to come upon this topic one who is inexperienced and un practiced in the chapter of cauteries through posterior exercise, and has not known the diversity of the complexions of men and the disposition of illnesses in their bodies, and their causes, and their accidents, and the span of time of those.
But in other complexions, do not fear; and especially in moist illnesses, for all doctors have agreed on those, and have not disagreed on the use of cauteries on them.
And know, sons, that the secret of cure by cautery with fire and its goodness, is because fire is simple, whose action does not reach except to the member which is cauterized, and does not affect another member with it except with little harm.
But the action of burning medicine reaches to those in members from which it is distant, and strongly brings the illness into the member with difficult cure, and strongly increases it.
But fire, by its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not do that except to cause superfluousness. And it is known to us through experience and through the length of service of study on the truth of causes; and because of this I am excused from the length of speech. And if it were not that I am not read in your presence in this pauserer, a secret hid by fire, and the quality of the operation of it in bodies and of its expulsion through which you expel illnesses, by philosophical speech demonstrated, which would be acute in your feet.
And know, sons, that they disagree on the time when it is convenient to do cautery and pause the best time of spring.
And I say that cautery is convenient in all times, so that the damage by the accidental time is submerged in the improvement of what is drawn by cautery, and especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong and fiery, which do not endure delay because it is feared of those who come to wickedness, which is greater than little harm coming by time.
And thus do not cut into your feet, or sons, that which is not considered except by the common people and foolish doctors; it is because to that illness which is healed by cautery there is not a reduction of all time, and they pause that consequence.
And the cause is not because they think it; for cautery is only in place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries up the moisture, which are caused so that pains come.
But cautery is superfluous over medicine by the will of its strength and power, and greatness of his lordship.
And it is possible that his illness returns at some time of the year, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of his illness, and its strength, and that which is prepared in his body from the accumulation of superfluities in him, and that which has come to him in his acquisition in foods and likenesses of those causes; but that the illness on which cautery was administered is subtle illness in a member of few superfluities and moisture, thus like cautery of a tooth for pain and likeness, it is possible that this pain does not return in him, but that is done in small ones.
And yet the vulgar speech is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a right speech, not so that they understand it in it, for they believe there is no cure which profits by medicine or other cause except cautery.
And the cause is in contrary to that; and the intention that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when we administer the methods of cure in certain illnesses, and those medicines do not confer it, and yet at the end of the cause a man is administered cautery, and profits from it. And then from here cut that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the intention which the vulgar and foolish doctors understand it.
And they said the ancients that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say it except for the equality of gold and sublimity of its substance.
And they said that the place of cautery does not do heat, when it is not absolutely true; for I have seen and proved that it does only in some bodies without the others, and cautery with that is good and better than with iron as they said; but when you do cautery with fire with gold, it is not declared to you, because it is heated according to the quantity that you will by the redness of the gold, and prepares to receive heat; and if you apply over it ignition, the gold melts into the fire, and drops some sheets so that the artificer cuts off by the occupation of that.
And therefore cautery is done with iron we must lightly and more closely to rectitude of operation.
And I have already ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and have ordered those of the head within the feet, so that they ask from him what he wants of it.
The first chapter:
This cautery confers with moisture and coldness about the superficial accident of which it is two causes, so is cause of soda and multitude of fluxes, called corissa, from the parts of the ears and the auricles and flowing, and multitude of sleep, and pain of teeth, and of goiter, and generally of all illnesses that come by coldness, thus with paralysis, apoplexy, and likeness in those illnesses.
The form of this cautery is that first of all you command the patient to be evacuated by laxative medicine of the head purging, for three or four days, according to the strength of the patient and his age and custom.
And then command him that he shaves his head with a razor, and then let him lie between your knees on a low bench, and let him rest his feet on you.
And then pause the edge of your palm close to the nose between the eyes. But yet, when the point of the middle part is reached, sign that place with a tent, and then heat the cautery olive of which this is the form.
And then pause it over the point marked by the tent, in such manner that the hand be stretched little by little, and you revolve him.
And then lift your hand lightly and look at the place, and if you see already some part of the head discovered, as well as any amount of bones, then lift your hand again, and if it does not return to you with that iron, with another one, if it is cooled off, between while be seen by you what I have said.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it on the place and let him lick that for three days.
And then pause over it cloth drenched in vinegar and let him lick that over while the scar of the fire is destroyed. And then cure the place with four-ingredient ointment, so that it is healed.
And they said that when the Roman plaster is open, as many meals give heat, for it is better and more healing.
And they said some of them that the jaw be cauterized within the bone, and it is held the cautery within while some part of the substance of the bone is burned.
And then let him lick that which is burnt in the bone, and then let it be cured.
Others say that when the cautery reaches the bone it produces a strong impression on it, and that this is the way to treat small ulcers. And they believe that the vapors of the head are expelled from that place.
And if a wound is left open for a long time, it should be treated until it is healed and consolidated.
But I have not seen these two species of cautery at all, except in some men according to the way of fear; and that which leaves, by my opinion, is better for health when it is; because the head is devitalized by solution of continuity in it also as we have testified in other members, and mainly when the head of the patient is of a phlegmatic nature.
And the species of the first cautery is more safe and better by my opinion; and with it we use and act for health.
Chapter second.
Of the cautery of the head.
When in all the head there happens chronic and long pain and this is prolonged in the patient, and he uses herbs and clysters and caput medusae and plasters and cataplasms and lances and poultices and hot stones and similar remedies, and mainly if he has already been cauterized with a cautery which we recount and does not benefit him any of those causes, then consider that if the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and it is phlegmatic and finds great heat, then cauterize with another cautery after that one a little. And then cauterize that above the horn of his head with a cautery until the membrane is split. The membrane being split and the quantity which we have recounted being discovered from the bone, cauterize that with a cautery in the posterior part of the head in the place which is called vas, — and it is that place in which the cupping-glass is applied. And hold your hand over that, and do not discover the bone, because the patient by that finds much greater pain than from the pain of all the other cauteries of the head.
And I say to apply this cautery in its place, because the cautery with which you cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput is a more subtle cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and it is applied as follows:
Chapter third.
Of cautery of not antique emigration.
When suddenly in the anterior part of the head there is a painful swelling, or the pain extends to the eye, evacuate the head with purging medicines, and administer the other cure, which I have described in the chapters on diseases; and if all does not benefit, cautery is applied to it in two ways: either cautery with an acute medicine burning, or with iron.
But cautery with a burning medicine is that you take an almond, and scorch it and rub the ends of it on both sides of the head. And then pierce the place of the pain in the temple with a pointed lance until it is made in it beneath the membrane, as far as it can be felt.
And then press on it with a bandage tightly bound, and leave that for the space of three hours; and then remove the bandage and treat the almond, and let the wound for two or three days, and then apply to it oil sprinkled with alum as far as the place makes blisters.
And then cure that with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you will, do this with some burning medicines which I have written in the two tractates of burning medicines.
But the cautery with iron is done according to this way: heat an iron cautery of which this is the form:
and it is called claus clavilis, because the head of it is like the form of a nail in which there is some curve, and in the middle part of it is a small prominence.
And then apply it to the place of the pain, and hold your hand — so that the cautery which is beneath is not touched — and move the iron little by little with speed.
And if the quantity of it that is burned by the thickness of the membrane as far as the size of it, and raise your hand so that the artery which is beneath is not touched, so that there does not come a flow of blood.
And then moisten a cloth in salt water and apply it to the place, and leave that for three days; and then apply a cloth moistened with wine, and cure with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you will, cauterize with the point of the scalpel according to the cautery, and beware of incision of artery in this not antique emigration properly.
Chapter fourth.
Of cautery of antique emigration.
When you cure emigration with what we have said of the cure preceding, and what we have said in the chapters on diseases, and the cure does not benefit, and you see in the disease that it does not suffice to it what we have said of the first cautery with medicine or of the cautery with fire, then when you ignite the cautery cutler until it is whitened, then indicate over the place of the pain with a line of length of which is the size of the digit, or as much as that; and laying your hand by one side, and piercing it into the artery and coming to the bone.
However it is necessary to you that you guard against the continuation of the jaw, which is injured because of mastication, and that the ligament not be burned and the nerve which hurts that, and that no spasm come upon it.
And if it is about the custody and care of flow of blood from the artery which is incised, because in the incision of it there is danger, and mainly to him who ignores what he does and is inexperienced and unskilful; and let the operation begin in that place.
And I will come with remembrance of the regimen of flow of blood from the artery according to his manner, in that free space.
And if you see of this disease that it does not suffice this cautery and see the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize that in the middle part of the head as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
And if you will administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter of incision of artery with cautery having two points, and this cautery is better and more suitable.
Chapter fifth.
Of cautery of pains of ears.
When in the ear there is pain from friction and it is cured with lactic causes and with the other cure which I have said in the chapter, and the pain is not relieved, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one which has the name puncta, of which this is the form:
And then puncture it with the point and carry it around the whole ear as it is turned, or in the circuit of whichever part if the pain is in whichever. Long it with the cautery of the edge of the ear few by few until you feel the place with touch.
And if the cautery of ten points in all the ear, and those around it, and then cure the places until they are healed.
Chapter sixth.
Of cautery of torture.
Torture which is cured and by cautery is not excepted from the remedies which come through phlegm, according to what we have said in the chapters on diseases.
Avoid cautery of the part that hurts due to dryness or due to a spasm in the nerve.
When you treat this kind of torture with potions and bloodletting and poultices, and your treatment does not help, then you should cauterize the patient with three cauteries: in the first place, you must cauterize the root of the auricle; in the second place, a small cautery below the temple; and in the third place, you must cauterize the junction of the two lips.
And apply your cautery on the side that hurts, because softening only comes to the part that appears to be healthy.
And the way to do cauterization is that you must cauterize the auricle on the right side of its upper extremity a little above the horn of the head, and another one in the temple, the length of which should be according to the length of the finger toenail; and you must apply your hand with the cautery until half of the thickness of the cord is burned.
And this is the form of cauterization, and it is a specific of the cutler, the shape of which is like a table knife. But indeed more subtle is that one a little bit so; and it is necessary to cut in him of superficial grossness a little bit.
And then treat the place with what is before prepared until it is healed.
Chapter .VII.
Of cautery of ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it with what we have said, and your medication does not help, and the patient has no fever, then you should cauterize him with four cauteries: over all the horns of his head; and with a cautery on the middle part of the head, as we have said before; and with a cautery in the neck. And the way to do cauterization is done according to what is above said.
And it is cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is more behind; and then it should be treated with what is prepared.
Chapter .VIII.
Of cautery of oblivion made by flame.
And you should give the patient at the beginning large potions and purgative pills.
And then scrape the whole head of the patient and apply on the neck of him plaster of cedar described in the treatise of plasters.
And apply that some times, for that is the way to do cauterization. And do that according to that medicine which I have said before.
And if he is healed by that well, and if not, then do to him three cauteries in the back part of his head, which descend from the uppermost part of the head to the lower part of the neck. And pause between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and then treat the cautery with what is prepared.
But if you see that he can tolerate it and the patient is that strong, then do to him cautery in the middle part; and if you see greater strength, then do cauterization on both horns.
Then treat that until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive oil according to the form before given.
Chapter .IX.
Of cauterization of hernia and of softening of the whole body.
And you should process cleansing of the head with potions and with what we have said; and then scrape the head of the patient, and then cauterize him with cautery in the middle part of the head, and with cautery on all the horns of the head, and with cautery on the back part of him, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the softening of the body of hernia and the patients tolerate it, and the illness is strong, then do to him four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and lastly with cautery until half of the thickness of the cord is burned, and lift up your hand. Then treat that until it is healed, and let this be olive oil cautery.
Chapter .X.
Of cauterization of epilepsy.
The epileptic is not cauterized except that epilepsy is due to phlegm.
And then cleanse the brain of him at the beginning with herbs and with the other treatment which we have said in the division when the patient is big and can tolerate the exception of medicines.
And if it is a child who does not endure medicines, then administer poultices and masticators the servant cleansings, before for several days, with the benefit of foods.
And then scrape the head of the patient, and then cauterize him with a cautery in the middle part of the head according to the previous way, and with another cautery on the back part of his head, and on each horn of his head you must cauterize. And if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then do to him cauteries which I have said, having paralysis and softening of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And let the cautery be olive oil according as it is before.
But if the patient is a child, then apply subtle cautery according to this way.
Chapter .XI.
Of cauterization of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humidities and phlegm, then do to him cauteries which we have said in having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is excess phlegm declining into melancholy, and the body of the patient is cold, then give to him to drink what cleanses the brain of him according as it has been said in the division.
And then scrape the head of the patient, and then make a decently made sponge of lye on the circle, and then apply it in the middle part of the head.
And the patient must be lying down, and he must hold his entire body.
And then apply linen; and it is also worthy of lamb's wool. And heat that over the fire with moderate warmth by measure, which the patient can endure when he is in him. And then apply it in the middle part of the head in the circle, and wash it when it is cool.
And do that to him once every week for one day, and let him have the other regimen of him well until it is healed; or if you want, cauterize him making small points according as he can endure them, except that you must hold your hand over a cautery in this way arranged: this is a specific cautery which softens the brain with equality.
And then place that cut part in a bath of warm water or in a bowl of rosewater.
Chapter XII.
Of cauterization with descending water.
When you have observed the beginning of water in the head through the signs which I mentioned in the division, then begin and give to the patient something to drink that cleanses his head, and guard him against all humidity.
And let him bathe in warm water for several days.
And then command him to wash his hair, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head; and also cauterize that with two cauteries over the temples if it is the beginning of water in both ears, or on one side if the water begins in one ear.
Cut with a cautery all the veins and arteries that are under the collarbone; and the cauteries should be in that length in the breadth of the temples.
And guard against bleeding when it is cauterized; and if you see any bleeding from him, stop it with some medicine which is possible for you.
And I will come with wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and with abstention from those and cauterization to prevent bleeding.
And sometimes it is cauterized in the nape under two bones with two cauteries recently produced.
Chapter XIII.
Of cauterization of old tears.
When tears from the ears are long-standing and persistent, and through the veins and arteries which are in the most obvious location on the head, it is verified that this is an excess of phlegmatic moisture, then cauterize that with a cautery which we have recounted in the chapter on the beginning of water coming into the ears, and with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with two cauteries on the nape under two temples, and with two cauteries on the nape under two bones. And if you see any discharge of matter, then cauterize that in every part of the ear canal at the end of the upper jaw with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
Of cauterization for fetor of the nose.
When you are treating someone with what we have said in the division and your treatment does not prove beneficial, then prepare and give the patient enemas for three nights; and then shave his head, and cauterize that with a cautery made of olive oil. And also cauterize that with a cautery of cloves with two cauteries over the two upper jaws under the hair, a little one.
And guard against the artery so that you do not ignite it.
And of the cautery of cloves this is the form.
Chapter XV.
Of cauterization for softening eyelids of the ears.
When the eyelid of the ear is softened by sickness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with one cautery with this cautery of the moon; and this is its form:
And if you wish, cauterize that over the two upper lids a little with two cauteries all around, and they should be elongated from the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of the eyelid.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but according to how much the upper part of the eyelid is swollen.
Chapter XVI.
Of cauterization for the eyelid of the ear when hairs have become ingrown and pierce the inside and poke the ear.
When the hairs of the ear become ingrown so that they pierce the inside and poke the ear, there are two ways to cauterize them, either with a cautery of iron or with a cautery of burning medicine.
If you cauterize it with fire, command the patient to wash his hair so that he does not hurt himself when he cuts off those hairs, until they are long and smooth; and if the ear is punctured by them, then strengthen his ears with a bandage so that he is not hurt as the hairs grow.
Thus when they grow and are smooth, then put the patient's head in the warm water, and then sign on the eyelid of the ears with a mark, a sign which is according to the figure of a dead leaf, and let the beginning of that sign be near the hairs.
And then put paste made with white vinegar or mullein on the ear.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
And then cauterize over the figure which you have marked, bit by bit, in small circles, until the surface of the collarbone is burnt up which is as it were with a myrrh leaf, all appearing properly.
And the sign of health of your work is that you see the eyelid of the ear already contracted and the hairs of it raised above the puncture of the ear.
And then lift your hand and let him go for three days, and then put on him paste made with oil until the scar is healed. And then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
But if they return for any reason and the eyelid is softened, then do again the cautery on that all around as you did at first.
But if the hairs are under the eyelid, then cauterize that until it is raised to its natural place and is smooth and the hairs do not poke the ear.
But the cautery with burning medicine is that you command the patient to wash the hairs until they are long and smooth, and then let the cautery be made of linen in the form of a myrrh leaf.
And then take some boiled lye and live coal mixed with it. And you shall take some boiled lye and live coal mixed with it. You shall take that mixture and add to it some live coal, and make that into a poultice so that it is not cold; and then spread that on the cloth which is made as the form of a myrrh leaf, and put that on one or both ears; and let the patient's head be in the warm water, and his hair in its natural position.
And hold the cloth over the medicine and press it gently so that the patient does not feel the biting of the medicine, for the biting is in him as with fire.
And when you perceive that the biting has ceased, then take away the medicine and wash the ear with water; and then consider if you see the eyelid raised as it is washed or as a result of being bound up with fire or with an incision, for then it will be well; and if it returns over that on which the medicine did not work its effect and does not darken until your operation is healed and the ear contracted.
And then put on it paste made with vinegar of wine or with another ointment until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you, after your operation that you watch with great diligence that no pus comes from the ear, and if the eyelid after several days is softened and some cause of the hairs poking in the ear, then repeat your medicine on that location of the eyelid which is softened, and particularly as you did at the beginning, and bandage him up until it is healed.
And this is the form of a myrrh leaf.
And know that the bodies of men are diversified according to size and smallness, and therefore according to this is made your contraction.
Nor is it hidden from those who follow this path that it is studied in this art.
Chapter .xvii.
Of cauterization of a fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
When you are treating a fistula and have not had success with what we have said in the divisions of diseases, then you must cauterize it as follows: order the patient to put his head on your lap, and have someone else hold the patient's head still between their knees so that he doesn't move or shake his head.
Then place a cotton wad soaked in vinegar or in a poultice of poppies over the tear duct.
And heat the cautery, of which this is the form:
which must be hollow, as it is shaped like a reed or a pen made of vulture feathers, from one end of which the cautery is made.
And if you wish, it may extend into the other end. And if you want, it can go out like a tent.
But that which is hollow is better for your work.
And press the fistula if it is open and draw out from it pus and dry it up. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the rottenness from it.
And apply the cautery, which should be well heated, to the eye at the start of the nose so that your hand does not tremble or the patient become disturbed, and then apply the cautery to the edges of the tear duct and corrupt it there.
And so if at the beginning of your cautery it pierces into the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice as necessary, and leave it there for three days, and apply a poultice of dry powder over it until it is healed.
But if eleven days have passed and it has not healed, then apply a corroding acute medicine so that the bone is uncovered and scrape it according to what is convenient in its chapter.
And there is another way to cauterize a fistula which some first said: enter the site of the fistula and open it and then place in that fissure a subtle bed of which its shape is as follows: melt an ounce of lead into it; and hold your hand steady with good control so that the patient does not move, and do not let the melted lead reach the eye of the patient; and place over the eye of the patient a cotton wad soaked in vinegar or water, for the lead will adhere to the site of the fistula and heal it by a wonderful cure.
And if the fistula is healed by what we have said about cautery and cure, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to apply a tracheotomy and reduce the fistula in the nose according to what comes into its proper place.
Chapter .xviii.
Of cautery of the split of the ear.
Many times fissures occur in the lips and mostly in children.
Therefore, when you treat those fissures with what we have said in the divisions and your cure is not effective, then heat a small cautery knife according to this shape that it fits into the fissure:
And its cavity should be according to the thinness of the blade.
Then apply it carefully into those fissures so that the cautery reaches the depth of the fissures.
And then heal that with ointment until it is healed.
Chapter .xix.
Of cautery of a fistula in the mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or on the roots of the teeth there is an abscess and it becomes swollen, and when it is burst, and when it is old, and is corroded, and a fistula is made, and you cure that and your cure is not effective, then know that you should heat cauteries according to the amount that is received in the fistula, and then apply the hot cautery into the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the iron reaches the depth of it, and do this once or twice; and heal that with what we have said about cure until it is healed.
And so if the pus is discharged and it is healed, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the site and scrape off the rottenness according to what comes into its chapter.
Chapter .xx.
Of cautery of teeth and of softening of ulcers.
When the ulcers are softened by moisture and the teeth are shaken, and you cure those with medicines and your cure is not effective, then have the patient hold his head in your lap, and heat the cautery of which its shape will come next, so that you apply the poultice over the tooth and insert into it the hot cautery quickly, and hold your hand steady so that the patient feels the heat of the fire on the root of the tooth from which it is coming.
And then lift up your hand and repeat the cautery several times according to what you wish.
And then the patient should gargle with salt water and keep it in his mouth for an hour, and then spit it out, for the shaken tooth is made firm, and the soft gum is made strong, and the rottenness is dried up.
Chapter .xxi.
Of cautery of toothache.
When toothache is from coldness, or in it is aching or green, or the cure does not work with medicine, then the cautery on it is according to two methods: either cautery with cow's dung, or cautery with fire.
Cautery with dung is that you take cow's dung and boil it in a pot made of iron, and then pick up a piece of cloth and wrap it around the end of the needle, and then dip that in the hot dung and apply it quickly to the aching tooth so that it becomes cold.
And then repeat that several times until the strength of the fire reaches the roots of the teeth.
And if you wish, dip wool or cloth in the dung above, and apply it to the tooth that hurts, and place over that hot iron so that the iron reaches the depth of the cavity of the tooth.
But the cautery with fire is that you take a needle of iron or of steel, and there is in it some thickness and the acuteness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
Then heat the cautery of which its shape will come, and apply it to the tooth and hold your hand so that the cautery is cold; and do that several times because the pain usually remains or in that day or in the other day.
And know that by force of that cautery that the patient fills his mouth with good breath and keeps it for an hour, then spit it out, and this is the form of the cautery.
And you cauterize by which you see the end according to what is possible to you.
And this is the form of the needle:
Chapter 22.
Of cautery of excrescences.
When excrescences are of phlegm and of cold humors and they do not yield to digestion with medicines and you see the digestion of those slightly, then heat a cautery whose shape is as follows: having two ends hollow so that smoke comes out from the cautery through one end, and apply it ignited over the excrescence once, and if you need, then repeat it, until it reaches the depth of the excresence.
And if the boil is small, then apply the cautery according to the size of the boil, and let it burn for three days, and place a poultice on it made from boiled oatmeal, until what the fire has burnt is healed.
Then treat this with ointment and bandages and linen until it is healed.
Chapter 23.
Of cauterization of any wound and of constriction of a vein.
When humidity comes upon the gullet of the lung, and especially when it is caused by coldness of complexion, then the patient should first be evacuated with laxative medicines, and then the root of the gullet cauterized in the affected place.
And take care that you do not reach with the cautery into the gullet, or burn his windpipe but only a little.
And cauterize this with another cautery behind the junction of the neck at his last vertebra. And the cautery for him should be a red-hot iron according to the previous manner.
Then treat this with what has been mentioned until it is healed.
Chapter 24.
Of cauterization of sickness of the lung and of cough.
When cough and sickness of the lung are caused by cold humidity, and the patient does not have fever or consumption and it is an old sickness, then cauterize this with two cauteries over the furcula in the affected places, lion-like and bull-like; and with another cautery in the middle place between the two nipples; and let the cautery be red-hot according to the previous manner.
And if you wish, let your cauterization be pricked with the cautery which is called a point, the form of which precedes in the puncturing of ear-aches.
And let the pricks be within these; and treat this with what has been mentioned until it is healed.
And if the cautery has three points, because cauterization can be done with this: with one incision you can do three cauteries according to this form:
Chapter 25.
Of cauterization of the tics, which is the head of the helper.
When the head of the helper is dislocated due to slippery humidity and does not return in its hour of returning because of this dislocation until it is returned to him, and especially if by a small movement it is displaced so that it should be, as we have testified, then first reduce the dislocation, and let the patient return to his back or on his side; and elevate the windpipe which is in the part within the tics to the parts above with the fingers of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated to the inner parts.
And take the cautery having two points; and this is its form:
And cauterize the windpipe so that it penetrates to the other side; and the figure of cauterization will then be in the form of a cross with four cauteries.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this account, and because there are eight cauteries.
And put parsley on the cautery, and let the patient be made to adhere to tranquillity, and let the member not be troubled for some time until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is to the upper parts and it has been done, then cauterize over the muscle with a red-hot cautery or with many pointed cauteries, for the joint is made firm, and the humidity is driven out and the patient is healed.
Chapter 26.
Of cauterization of the stomach.
When there comes in the stomach churning and many humidities enter so that these are extracted from his complexion and multiplied in him, and if you continue the manners of cure and do not confer with each other, then let the patient lie on his back, and extend his arms and legs, and cauterize this with three cauteries: with one cautery below the feet according to the quantity of a finger with a red-hot cautery, and with two cauteries below the ribs of the cautery so that the figure of cautery becomes triangular; and stretch between these which are not adjusted so that they will make heat.
And if the depth of the cautery is the quantity of two-thirds of the thickness of the windpipe.
And let the figure of the cautery be according to this form with addition, and if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle place of the stomach according to this form; and this is a cautery according to the form of a circle according to this form:
And let the stomach be punctured to that which of this cautery is frightened: and you feel on the stomach point according to the quantity that you wish with tent, and then cauterize this with cautery in the points; and treat this with what has been mentioned until it is healed.
Chapter 27.
Of cauterization of the fretted liver.
When there is liver pain because of coldness or because of humidity or because of grossness within so that from his normal complexion there has been produced by egression in excess, and it is cured the patient with what we have said and do not confer with each other, then let the patient lie on his back over his spine, and feel with tent three cauteries according to this form and this quantity pressed upon the liver below the hypochondria where man lies.
And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of a finger, and let the cautery be according to the length of the body straight.
And do not press it with the cautery hard.
And if the quantity of that which is burnt the quantity of the thickness of the windpipe, and let it not be pressed hard; and if the patient stands on his feet, then let him sit, for he has already extended his arms, and elevate his arms.
And it is for you to cauterize these cauteries with cautery cutlass, when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
And take care that you do not proceed too far in cauterization, and let the windpipe be burnt all through so that it reaches into the bowels, for the windpipe here is subtle; and know this.
Chapter 28.
Of piercing of an abscess of the liver with cautery.
When there is excision or abscess in the liver and you want to know whether this abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its tunic, then if it is in the flesh of the liver the patient will have heavy breathing and the pain will be sharpened.
And if it is in the tunic of the liver, with great pain and often the physicians have become tired of curing him.
Therefore let the patient be laid on his back; and feel the place of the abscess with tent; and take the cautery which is assembled like a rake, the form of which has preceded in the other page. And cauterize it with this cautery so that all the windpipe is burnt, so that it reaches into the diaphragm, so that phlegm emerges.
And treat this for the cure of other abscesses until it is healed.
And let whoever uses this form of cautery use only that which he has studied in the art of medicine, and through the marks of which many illnesses have become known to him; but let this be tried a few times over this operation, but nonetheless it is better.
Chapter 29.
Of cauterization of sores.
The ancients say cautery of the roots of aristology is applied to sores according to this manner: it is that you take from the roots of aristology a long root which is found, and it should be as thick as a finger.
And then you submerge it in oil and heat it up, and then cauterize with a cautery on the location which is between the continuation of the furcula to the neck; and use two small cauteries guided slightly downward from the part that is below the beard, and use two cauteries on what is declining between the fifth rib and the armpit, declining slightly to the rear parts; and use another cautery in the middle location of the foot; and use another over the stomach, and use three cauteries of the rear parts; and use a cautery in that location which is between the two shoulders, and use two cauteries on the sides of the feet, below the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
And let whoever grasps the cautery with his hand, not close it in the grip of the fist but rather in the open grip.
And some ancients say that some of the people who use cauteries of iron similar to a needle, ignite it and put it in that location which is between the ribs, until we reach with it to that apostema and there be discharged a healthy pus, as we have said regarding the apostema of the liver.
But in this piercing with a cautery there is no fear, for one dies suddenly when it occurs in the location of a fistula to which there is no remedy.
Chapter 30.
Of the cauterization of the melos.
When you cure the illness of the melos with what we have said regarding the cure in division and do not confer your cure, then cauterize it according to three methods, all of which are straight, one of which is that you make three or four lines according to the length of the melos according to the figure of the cauteries of the liver, the figure of which has preceded.
And let there be between each cautery the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery is the same as we have said regarding the cautery of the liver with equal parts.
And do not grasp the cautery with your hand, and let the patient be on his back.
And there is another manner of cauterizing, which is that you ignite the cautery having two layers, the cause of which we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the tendon which is in the end of the melos through which passes the jaw of the patient on the left.
And let your elevation with which you elevate the tendon be according to the length of the body, so that there are made cauteries according to the breadth of the body.
Then insert the two layers, ignite them, into that location through which you penetrate the tendon on the other side.
And then extract the cautery; and thus there are made four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three layers.
And then you cure the cautery when it has stayed for many days, for indeed the other causes precede in the cure.
Chapter 31.
Of cauterization of hydrops.
Cautery does not cut into hydrops but rather incises it properly.
When you cure hydrops with the manners of cure which we have said in division and do not confer your cure, then cauterize it with four cauteries around the ombelicus and a cautery over the stomach, and another cautery over the liver, and another cautery over the melos, and two cauteries between the shoulders of the back, and a cautery on the right side of the foot, and another cautery over the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportionate to the thickness of the tendon.
Then let the cautery remain open so that it may heal for a long time.
And do not discharge the patient from cure after cautery so that there may be added to him two intentions and he remain sick with him through the help of the cure.
The form of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be round according to what is above it, and that with which the back is cauterized should be oval according to what precedes it.
Chapter 32.
Of cauterization of feet and thighs.
When the feet are apostemized in hydrops and they are filled with yellow water, then cauterize the feet on the top of the foot in the space between the auricular and the annular, and elevate your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; then elevate your hand and do not return it at all, for the yellow water will flow out.
It is the cautery according to this form: then make two cauteries on both thighs, and in each thigh let there be made a cautery with the tip of the cautery blade. And let the cautery be according to the length of the thigh: one from below and the other above the middle part of the thigh, and on each thigh two cauteries.
And let the wound remain open during a long time for a cure so that any water may flow out from it.
Then cure them with those causes which we have said.
Chapter 33.
Of cauterization of body of belly.
When the body of the belly is for chafing and for moisture within which weakens the vertutes, which are in the stomach and in the intestines, and it is cured that with the manners of cure and does not confer, then the patient suffers cautery of the vertue exhiberant, then cauterize it with a large cautery over his stomach according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cautery of the circle and four cauteries around the ombelicus subtly, and with cautery clavih subtle; and cautery over the alcatenus above the os gran, or two cauteries.
And if you see the moisture exhuberant and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize it over the pentenilhu and over the intestines, and strongly apply two cauteries on the stomach near the inguons, for this is a perfect cure of the juice of which there are no errors.
Chapter 34.
Of cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
When there are in nature derier ancient hemorrhoids or of gross humors chafing or of moistures corrupted, and they are cured with what we have said in division and do not confer your cure, then cauterize them with three cauteries over the pus below the small spondyl of the back triangularly, and with cautery above the ombelicus through two ditz.
And if his stomach is chafed and his food is not digested, and his face is apostemated, then cauterize him over the stomach with a large cautery according to what precedes; and with a cautery over the liver, and another cautery over the melos of him with cautery clavih, and let the cautery remain open for some time, then cure it when it is healed.
Chapter 35.
About cauterization of ulcers, here is the treatment for them.
When you cut into an ulcer, then you should light the cautery that is similar to a ray. Then insert that burning cautery into the ulcer that has been cut open, and hold your hand over it until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood comes.
And do this once or twice; if there are more ulcers, then cauterize each of them according to what we have recounted, and then cure those wounds with ointment until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on someone, it is better to do so later in the day.
Chapter 36.
About cauterization of fistulas that are made by nature in the parts of the body.
When nature does not obey the work which we have recounted in its place, and the patient is distressed by this, then let him be healed by cautery.
Thus when someone sees a fistula in the nature of the body, and it is old, let him draw out the corruption from within and the corrupted moisture; and therefore what is most worthy to be done is to probe that with a thin needle, and then know the quantity of the depth of it by the previously mentioned probing.
Then light the cautery that is similar to a ray. And then insert that burning cautery into this fistula according to the quantity in which you inserted the probe.
And repeat the cautery on that until those corrupted bodies are burnt one or two or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
And beware of burning a nerve or vein; or if the fistula goes toward the cavity of the bladder or the cavity of the intestine, then beware of all those places; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think that it does not penetrate.
And then cure the place until it is healed.
And if the place is sealed and those matters have been cut out from it and remain thus for a long time, then know that it has been healed entirely.
And if those matters are not removed from it, then know that it penetrates or in its preon the body is corrupted, or it falls because of those causes from which will come a recollection in its place.
Chapter 37.
About cauterization of warts.
When in the warts there is pain from rubbing or from great windiness, and because of this the patient's body is worn down, then probe that with a needle on the warts with a cautery nail of which you will give the recollection.
And let them be cauterized very lightly by a small one under them, so that there will come three cauteries of linen, and then they will burn more later in the day.
Chapter 38.
About cauterization of the bladder.
When there is weakness and softening of the bladder due to rubbing and moisture such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize that in the part most below on the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic region begin, and cauterize with one cautery in the right part, and with another in the left part of it.
And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of the hairs; and cauterize that with cautery in the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries if it is necessary.
And let the cautery nail be according to how it has proceeded.
Chapter 39.
About cauterization of the membrane.
When there is rubbing and moisture in the membrane, and because of this there is prohibited impregnation, and the menstrua of it are corrupted, and there is delayed provocation of them, and occurs pain due to the holding back of them, then let that location be cauterized with three cauteries in the circuit of the navel, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder; and let there be cautery over the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery nail be.
Chapter 40.
About cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
When moist humors are spread in the part of the ankle, and there are made causes of the settling of its own place, and sign of it is that the thigh is prolonged over the other when compared between them. And the location of the dislocation is closed in where it bends.
Therefore let the patient be cauterized over the part of the ankle by the circle similar cautery, more than you will have probed with the needle in the circuit of the part as it is turned, and then that the part falls the middle location of the circle.
And let the cautery of which precedes be the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not at hand, then cauterize that with three cauteries with great olive-shaped cauteries.
And let the cautery be done according to the quantity of the spiciness of all the cord; and then cure that until it is healed.
Chapter 41.
About cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When there is pain in the part of the ankle and its cause is rubbing and moisture, and the patient is not cured by what we have said, and that is old, then let the patient be bled from gross humors by suppurating pills or artificial ones or similar; and then cauterize that.
And the manner of the cautery in that is according to two manners: or cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
Let them be according to two known manners, of which the one is that you cauterize that over the part of the ankle with three cauteries triangular according to this form; and make them good and deep. And let the space be between each cautery the quantity of the thickness of the finger, and if the olive-shaped or large cautery, then let it be.
Sometimes the cautery is over the middle location on the top of the ankle so that there are four cauteries.
And if you want, cauterize with the circle of which is preceded by the form in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, for that is a containing circle and burns the spiciness of all the cord.
And this is the manner of cautery in sciatica when the pain is adherent to the ankle and it is not extended within to the thigh.
But if it is extended within to the thigh, then cauterize that with two cauteries over the thigh on the location to which the patient feels the pain; and with one cautery over the ankle for four fingers a little beyond the hairy part.
And if the cautery is with a blade, then let the depth of the cautery be according to the quantity of the spiciness of the cord.
And if the patient feels that the pain is extended within to the location close to the toes, then cauterize that where he feels it with cautery by three points or four or more if there is need of that.
And if the patient feels pain going from below to the thigh, then cauterize that there with a cautery with a blade.
And beware in all cauterization that you do not burn with the cautery until it burns nerve or great artery, and that through it is upon the patient harm or counteraction.
I have seen one and another of those who cauterize on the ankle and finish in the cauterization, and the bed fire is inflated between which the tumor achieved the foot, and fire perforated and corrupted all the foot. Then the strong solution of vinegar, and here the death.
And if the pain is in two parts, cauterize each one according to this manner.
And they said the wise some in cauterization of that cautery, of which this is the manner: make a circle of iron of which the circumference is half a palm; and its hole according to the thickness of a finger nail or less.
And within that circle is one third; and the space between them is the quantity of a nail of the toe; and those circles are open on both sides; and the length of those nails is a nail or two nails, and do in those edges of iron decently dressed in the circles; and this is its shape:
Then it is ignited in the fire until it turns red and throws sparks, and then it is placed on the part of the ankle, the patient lying on his side. And so cauterize that with three round cauteries in a single sitting.
And then let that be for three days; plaster that with a bandage and leave the wound open for several days; and then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasis says: O sons, of this species of cautery we have used few for the terror of its custody, and because we have found few who guard it.
But of the good cauteries, let him who suffers them find them and bring that to the place of him.
But cautery with medicines burning is that you make two circles having perforated armor in which they lower the hammer of the door of iron; let the length of the parts in the nature of them be two nuts or nails those.
And if the space between them is the quantity of the thickness of the finger; and they are open below and above, and they are that contain themselves among themselves according to this form:
And then pause on the part of the ankle the patient lying on his side, and press your hand over the part of the ankle; and then take water tail and pour it between two circles, and its quality be to the fire little by little, and bear that for the quantity of an hour, and let the patient bear the biting and the pressure of him — for that I found biting so with fire — until the biting ceases.
And then lift your hand with the instrument and wipe off the water tail from all of the ankle with warm water.
And then let that be for three days and pause over that bandage until the darkness of the pressure remains blackened, and let that be for several days, and run from him pus; this is last in healing.
And then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
And if the pain is extended within the thigh or the leg, do to him statue in him that contains water according to how it is done in the ankle equally.
And this is the manner of water tail, and I have already written that in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Receive from an alkali and a non-extinguished ash of both a half part one, and grind them and pause in a new wave of which the bottom part is perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that goes into it.
And pause below the bottom of the other wave a wavy wave, and pour over that alkali and live ash of warm water the which covers those by a finger, and since you compress those with your hand for good compression, and let the wave that descends from him pour sharp water in the bottom part to the wavy wave.
And then adjust all that water, and pour it over another live ash and other renewed alkali, because that time-honored strong acrimony, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, for an operation makes fire.
And from some medicines there are some which are cauterized widely, as with theriac and honey of anise and ash with soap, in which they are mixed.
And Gualia recorded from a man of the ancients the operation and the cure by which it is healed pain of ankle and sciatic vein, and magnified much good to him, and said that he did not need another cure, and that he was healed by one way so with bath and ice he has known from that.
And let it be taken from a certain green herb, and if it is not found green, let it be taken dry; and let it be ground with a little of grain and be paused over the ankle where there is pain, or in the thigh, or in the leg, and be bound.
And let it be left for the quantity of three hours or for the amount that the patient bears biting of the pressure.
And then put that in a bath and then when his body is heated, insert him into the sun, because the pain ceases and he is healed.
And know that there is no fear that anyone uses cauterization with these medicines unless it is the evacuation of the body.
But Scorodius dried that when with goatskin the vein is stretched, let it be cauterized, draw him in oil, and be paused between the toes of the foot and between the toenails.
And then take dry goatskin and inflame it with fire until it is made charcoal; and then pause it over the wool and let it be left until it is cooled down. And then repeat that, and do not cease doing that until the biting of the pressure comes to the ankle and eases the pain.
And this manner of cauterization is called cauterization of cows.
Chapter .xlii.
Of cauterization of pain in two.
Some pains are in the back for many causes, as with inflammation or with piercing or with excessive evacuation, and for causes like those similar, with infusion of matter rubbed and moistened.
And cauterize not except in this single species which is made by infusion of matter rubbed.
Therefore know, then evacuation of the patient is with pills formed and like them, which are formed on the back in which there is pain three lines according to the breadth of him, because you have ten in each line cauteries or maybe, according to the quantity that sees of the tolerance of the patient and of his strength.
And let cauterization be made by point cautery.
And if you want, cauterize with three cauteries or with four to cautery nail medial according to this form:
Chapter .xliii.
Of cauterization in the beginning of gout.
Many times this maladie occurs to small children; and sign of the beginning of it in children is that they occur on them constriction in the armpit, in the elevation and the movement.
And they atrode in the last vertebra of the back and of the nails of him that already begins to rise over the other vertebrae.
And then when you see that and want to prohibit, let it be cauterized by cautery which is circle according to this form: that take the cautery over all part of the vertebra equally.
And if you wish, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery two or three times. Let the points be close to each other.
Then treat the wound within so that it heals with what we have said.
But be careful that cautery is not administered on any swelling caused by a nerve spasm.
Chapter 44.
Of cauterization for gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And thus when gout from cold is cured with a method of cure and the pains are not reduced, then apply cautery.
And you should cauterize that area around the joint on the foot with a hot cautery tool.
And let the cautery be olive oil, of which this is its form:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains spread within the joints or other joints, and it becomes swollen, then cauterize that on each swollen joint with three cauteries or four, all around, with this cautery of olive oil.
And if you need to use the pointed cautery tool, then cauterize it and do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery beforehand, but just stroke around the edge of the joint gently.
And if the pains spread within both joints, then administer the cautery we have described in its chapter.
And if the pains are only in the fingers and it is called sciatica, then puncture around the circles of the nails as they turn, puncture them in two lines.
And if the pains remain in the fingers, then puncture around the circles of the nails on each finger and on the palm of the hand.
And if the pains spread for several days in the joints or muscles, then cauterize each of them all around.
And do not discharge the patient from good treatment and the reception of medicines, for if good treatment is given and the inflammation is discharged with this cautery it will heal, God helping.
Chapter 45.
Of cauterization for breaks.
When a break occurs in the angles and tears the intestines before the skin of the abdomen, and it begins to happen, then you should order the patient to stop eating for his day and to use laxatives so that the tear falls from his belly.
Then follow the patient around with your hand on his head, and command him to keep his back straight so that the area between his shoulders is stretched or the intestines or hernia appear.
Then return it with your fingers and point at the break over the bone of the elbow with the tip of which is similar to the upper part of a circle on the upper parts of the body.
Then heat the cautery tool, of which this is its form:
until it becomes red and warm. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then hold the cautery tool over that and press with your hand with the cautery tool standing straight, and hold it there until you feel the bone of the elbow enter into the hollow of the forearm; and repeat with another application if you have not achieved it in the first application over the bone.
And observe wisely the movement of the intestine at the time of your cauterization, so that you do not burn the intestine so that over the patient it does not come to death or another great malice.
And know that when you with the cautery do not touch the bone, do not continue your operation.
And see to it that the cautery for children is subtle according to their size and age.
Then cure the area of the cautery for three days with wine until the scar of the fire is healed.
Then cure it with other ointments until it is healed.
And let the patient lie on his back for 40 days while the place is sealed and bandaged.
And see to it that you stop his nourishment according to the length of time of his cure which is loosening the skin of his belly and so that the intestine does not come out through the effort of healing.
And when he wants to be raised after 40 days, then administer to him a gentle lifting, and keep it for another 40 days.
And let him be idle from work and the filling of food and drink, and from violent movements, for when he uses this method of healing entirely it will heal.
And he will direct the cure of breaks in other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, and you want him not to be bent, then cauterize that break with a red hot cautery tool according to its size; and cure it with what we have said, and do not touch it.
And now some first ones say that the break should be cauterized with a triangular cautery tool according to this form, because it is pointed at the tip:
and it is placed a line that passes through the breadth at the top of the break, and another line above it; and holding your hand with an iron cautery tool, but the first cautery is gentler and better.
Chapter 46.
Of cauterization for torsion.
When a pain occurs in any member through compression or concussion and that pain persists for a long time and is not relieved by medicine, then see to it that you cauterize with a pointed cautery tool.
And let the cautery be of all members according to its magnitude and smallness, and nature and development of it, and location of torsion and pain of it.
So if it is healed by the first cautery, well; and if not, then repeat the cautery on it; for usually those pains are punctured in the member near which it is, so that you know them by the cautery on the patient when he is healed.
Chapter 47.
Of cauterization for leprosy.
Lepers some times with cautery for great benefit, and to clean the leprosy which is made by putrefaction of blood and of melancholy.
And so when you want to cauterize it, consider whether the leprosy is putrid and as that which has been healed with what we have said in the division and not decomposed, nor this, and pay attention to the patient that the corruption includes all of his body and all of its complecion, then cauterize it on the head with an iron cautery tool: one in the middle place of the head, and one below it, raise the forehead towards the ears; and both over two horns, and one behind, on the nape or neck.
And then your hand with the cautery tool a little while it presses in the bone a small impression, and from it are displaced the scabs so that the expiration of thick vapors is eased from him; and cauterize over the ulser according to what follows.
If leprosy has already spread over the patient's body and appears visibly, then you should cauterize it with the cauteries we mentioned earlier; and apply a cautery to the end of the nose, two cauteries on each elbow, two cauteries on the two spinal columns of the neck, six cauteries on the spinal columns of the back, one large cautery on the spinal column near the waist, one on the waist, two on the hips, one on each hip, two on the knees, one on each knee, two on the ankles, and two on the muscles; and cauterize all the joints of the hands and feet, as well as each heel, and the soles of the feet.
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are on the heel.
And sometimes a cautery is applied on the bone of the little finger, and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more you apply cauteries, the more beneficial and effective they are; and know that the patient feels no pain from the cautery, just as with the fingers, because his body is already numbed.
And you should make the cauteries large or small according to the size of the members and joints, as mentioned earlier in the tools section.
Then heal the wound with flour made from roasted bran mixed with honey and other healing remedies until it is healed.
Chapter 48:
On cautery for stupor:
When a member is paralyzed or asleep and is not healed by medicines, oils, and plasters, then you should cauterize that paralyzed member with cauteries according to the size of the member or its smallness.
And let your cautery pierce the thickness of the skin by a little bit. Then heal it with ointment until it is healed.
And sometimes there is cauterized a stupor that comes from the hands and feet, and spinal columns of the back, and you can see the movement of the nerves that move that member, and the stupor is removed.
Do not presume to do this unless you are skilled in anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves that move throughout the body.
Chapter 49:
On cautery for leukoderma:
When leukoderma is old and does not respond to any of the healing remedies, then you should cauterize it with a cautery lightly according to the thickness of the skin so that the white and color of it are changed, and its color is altered.
Then heal it with flour made from roasted bran and lentils, rose oil, and leaves of wild rosemary, and pigeon's blood or dove's blood; let each be a portion and all be mixed together; then have a cloth laid over the area so that it is healed.
Chapter 50:
On cautery for cancer:
When a cancer begins and you want it to stop growing, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circumference as it is turned over.
And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle of it; but I have not seen this, for I am afraid that it would ulcerate, and I have seen this happen some times.
And it is more proper that it be cauterized around its circumference with a circle as we have said, or with many cauteries.
Chapter 51:
On cautery for inflammation:
When an inflammation is delayed in ripening, and it is delayed because of the superfluity that produces it, or because of the state of the patient for whom it is, whether he is old and decrepit, of little blood, or because of the time, and you want to hasten its ripening; then cauterize around its circumference with many small puncturing cauteries; then let it be left so that it will hasten in ripening.
But if you want to pierce it with a cautery, then you should heat the cautery of which this is the shape of it: and place it in the middle of the inflammation so that it penetrates the skin.
And if the cautery is in that place that is more below, so that the arm's body is removed; then heal it until it is healed.
Chapter 52:
On cautery for corrosion:
Corrosion is a decaying that walks in the member, which corrodes it as fire eats dry wood.
Therefore, if you see this corrosion in a place that can suffer cautery by fire, then you should heat small nail-like cauteries, and large ones according to what is convenient in that place where the corrosion is.
Then cauterize it entirely so that you eradicate all of the corrosion and not leave any cause for it to return.
Then let him lie for three days, and place over the cauterized places a poultice moistened with mixed oil so that the scars are entirely eradicated and all of the corrosion.
Then heal it with flesh-generating ointments.
But if after three days the flesh does not grow and is not healed, then it is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery over it where it is rotted in the corrupted places.
And corrosion is treated some times with sharp medicine because that is the middle place of cautery. But cautery by fire is the most powerful healing.
And I have already said the healing of it with sharp medicine in division; therefore take that when you see its growth in effect.
Chapter 53:
On cautery for warts and other similar growths:
Many times warts grow under the feet of an old person who is called a claw, and it is a serious cause, deep-rooted, which pierces the foot; and cautery for these is according to two manners: cautery by fire, and cautery by hot water.
But cautery by fire is that you ignite the cautery needle-like and similar to a penny nail, which should be made of iron according to the quantity that contains the claw entirely, and it should have slender edges.
Then place that ignited one over the claw, and then turn your hand with the cautery around the circumference of the claw so that the cautery reaches the depth of the claw. Let him lie for three days until he begins to move his arm. Then poultice that with wild mallows bruised with salt, and place the poultice over that for one night, for that will eradicate it from its roots.
Then heal the wound with flesh-generating ointment until it is healed.
And if it does not become converted, and sometimes it accedes in the surface of the body, mostly in the hands and feet, then you should administer in those cauteries with hot water, and it is that you take a quail of lead or of iron or of a penny needle, and place that over the claw; and then let him get in the quail of hot water little by little, and hold your hand, and you turn that around with all your strength, and push the needle of the hot water into the depth of the claw, and wait for the patient for an hour, and then remove that, for the claw will have been eradicated from its roots.
And thus they come to those within whom they enter, one after the other throughout their body.
Then cure the sores that are caused by the roots of the claws, which are eradicated with ointments which the flesh engenders.
Chapter IV.
Of cautery for trembling.
When you have a tremor from friction on the nerve or from fever caused by friction, or from another similar cause, then you should cauterize that with four cauteries or with five cauteries, between each vertebra with one cautery; and do cauterization on his feet, and over his stomach, with an olive-oil cautery.
And the trembling of him will cease and the sickness from friction will be healed quickly.
Chapter L.
Of cautery for white spots on the body.
When white spots appear on the body, and pustules are split open, which are caused by thick corrupted matter; therefore at the beginning when they first appear, they should be cauterized over the head of the fistula with a subtle cautery made from myrtle wood, the end of which is heated; or with a long-stemmed erysipelas root cautery; or with a lenticular cautery.
And sometimes it is cauterized with alum at the beginning of its eruption according to this way; and they are not cracked, and the superfluity is broken up by doing this, and healed.
But it should be done with an evacuation through phlebotomy.
Chapter VI.
Of cautery for bleeding from a wound caused by cutting the artery.
Sometimes bleeding occurs from an artery which is cut beneath the plague, or beneath the incision of an ulcer or cautery on a limb, and it is difficult to stop that.
Therefore when this happens to someone, you should close it with your hand over the opening of the artery, and place your thumb over that place, and press it tightly with your fingers so that the flow of blood is stopped under your thumb, and it does not come out.
Then place on the fire the olive-oil cauteries, a few and large, several times, and blow over them so that they are set alight.
And then take one of those small or large according to the site and the plague in which the artery is broken, over that vein quickly so that you have stopped the flow of blood with your thumb, and do cautery on it until it is bound and restricted.
And if the blood flows from the opening of the artery when you release your thumb and loosen the cautery, then take another cautery which has been prepared in the fire, and do this repeatedly until the blood is restricted.
And be careful that you do not burn the nerve which is here, and that it does not come upon the patient any other harm.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to restrict the blood in those except by one of four ways: or by cautery as we have said, or by extraction if it is not extracted, for when it is extracted its extremities are burnt and the blood is restricted; or that it be bound with a ligature or with a bandage by strong constriction, or that medicines which have the virtue to restrict the blood be placed upon him and bound with a compress by decent constriction.
But he who administers decent restriction of him with a bandage and constriction with cloth or by position of causes burning and similar, does not confer but tar.
But if this happens to someone and the doctor is not present nor medicine, then open by placing your thumb over the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand at the great constriction of him until the blood is stopped from the principal part of the plague; and on the artery let there be no flow of blood; and from the artery sprinkle with water rubbed with something greatly rubbing until the blood is congealed and thickened; and unless cautery or medicine is necessary.
Of incision, and puncturing, and opening, and phlebotomy, and of plagues and their equivalents.
We have already said in the first chapter all sickness which is appropriate with cautery and with burning medicine, and their occasions and causes, and the instruments in which they are necessary and the forms of the cauteries; and we have ordered the chapters from the upper part of the head to the feet.
And now we will go through that medical way so that it may be lightened for the patient, then upon that which he has demanded.
And before we begin that, know that in this chapter it is for terror that which is in the first chapter of cautery.
And be careful that it is in him great caution, for in the operation which is in this chapter many times there is a certain evacuation which is with blood through which life is lost by aspersing the vein or incision on the ulcer or opening of an abscess or purification of a plague or extraction of arrow or incision of stone and their equivalents. And from all these accompany fear and trembling and in the mass of them death.
And I warn you that this does not fall upon you in which there is hesitation, for some times case happens to men by many ways of sickness. And of them some are sent away by their sickness and is the weakness because of it that signifies death; and for the length of his sickness and by the sickness itself, and it is fear which means death.
And of those is who gives to you his son or daughter, you expecting from him health, and his sickness is hurtful.
And therefore do not consent to anyone who comes to you in this way; and your caution be greater than naivety and your greediness; and do not presume any cause upon that unless proper certain science which verifies that for you, and to whom is possible laudable success.
And use in the cure of all your sicknesses from prediction and indication of him to whom health is converted; for in him there is help concerning acquisition of fame and memory, praise and glory.
O sons, God inspires you understanding and do not turn away from you direction and protection; for it is in his hand.
And I have ordered this chapter distinguishing by chapters according to what precedes in the chapter of cauteries, from the cure of the head to the feet, so that it may be lightened for you that which you demanded and of which you have need.
First Chapter.
Of the cure of water which is contained in the heads of children.
Know that this sickness sometimes happens to children because of pregnancy and when the nurse tightens the head of the infant she feels it.
And some times by hidden cause which is not known.
But I have not seen this sickness except in children; and to all those whom I have seen it happens death, and for this I have seen evident work in them.
And I have seen that one child whose head was of water, and his head was always magnified so that nurse could not lift him up by the size of his head; and but that humidity was increased within which fire caused death.
This moisture or is aggregated between the tendon and bone, or is aggregated below the bone on the head.
Because the operation in that if the moisture is between the tendon and the bone and the ulcer is small, then cover what you split in the middle of the head with a poultice in the width, and let the length of the poultice be six digits between which the moisture runs, and this is the form of the spatula:
And therefore if the moisture is more increased and the ulcer is larger, then there are here two slits according to this manner:
And if the moisture is below the bone, its sign is that you see the edges of the head opened wide and the water is squeezed out when you compress that with your hand to the openings inside, and it is not hidden from you. Cover what you split in the middle of the head with three slits according to this manner:
and then extract all the moisture; and then strengthen the slits with bandages and plasters; and then anoint it from above with wine and oil on the fifth day, and then loosen the bandage and heal the wound with ointments and dressings, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
And there is another manner of incision, which considers where the magnitude of the ulcer and the collection of water appear, for some appear more in the occipital region, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left; and therefore pay attention to the incision where the ulcer appears and the collection of water, and do it according to how you consider it most possible.
And observe that you do not cut the artery and cause a flow of blood and kill the patient through that flow of blood by the evacuation of moisture.
Chapter II.
When there is a catarrh or swelling in the ears or the feet, and it is ancient, and there is no response to the treatment of medicines, then the last treatment for this is the incision of those two arteries.
And therefore cover when you want to cut those which the patient's head passes through, and then wipe the place with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and then be bound around the neck of the patient with some cloth; and then consider where the pulse is; and the places of each over the places which are near the ears pressed down, and they are hidden except in some people.
And then mark on the artery with a tent, and then cut each one with the spatula of each part made with an incision penetrating into the bone, and let it be through the width of the head.
And if you want, insert the spatula below the artery and pierce that to the parts beneath, and those above are incident to the parts above.
And let the length of the incision be six digits apart, for when any vein is cut the blood flows out with a pulsating egress, and that salt jumps out frequently.
But if the artery does not appear to the pulse, then cover from the auricle the quantity of the space of three digits, and then mark with tent, and do it penetrating into the bone.
And that which comes out of the blood is quantity of wine ounce. and strongly he comes out of him more or less, and all that is according to the quantity which appears from the virtue of the patient and the collection of the artery from him.
And then consider the wound, and therefore if any cause of the head remains on the bone, then cut it so that no cauterized ulcer comes from it.
And then strengthen the wound with plasters and with bandages of linen cloth, and then heal that with ointments until it is healed.
Chapter III.
Of the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When to someone there happens migrain ancient or catarrhs caused, by humoral avarice and by quality in the lacerts of the temples, or ancient fever violent and similar to those, and is medicated with the manners of healing of medicine and that does not respond, then we have shown in these illnesses extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those also as we have shown.
And the manner of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient passes through the temples; and understand the artery which appears in the temple because it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is hidden except in few people by strength of wiping.
And if it is hidden from you, then be bound around the neck of the patient with some cloth; and then wipe the place with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with hot water until you appear to you the artery manifestly. And then you take the spatula of which this is the form: And then you scrape the tendon with that with ease until you come to the artery; and then cut in it and extract it into the parts above until you extract it from the tendon and discover it from the tunics which are below it, of all parts.
But if the artery is slender, then wrap that with the tip of the finger, and then cut one part according to the quantity by which they are lengthened and shortened, and there will not be a flow of blood, for if they are not cut the blood cannot flow out at all.
And then evacuate the blood of wine ounce. into three.
And if the artery is large, then cover that in two places with strong woolen felt or cords on length, and do not cut to it putrefaction before the consolidation of the wound and let there be a flow of blood.
And then cut the superfluity which is between two bandages; and do that in that hour or another hour.
And if you want, cauterize that with cautery into the bone with cautery knife within which they are cut the ends of it, and be in place of that meteyssa work.
And it is better work unless the patient has fever or is of heated complexions, for cautery is of those causes that help the ending humors, and therefore is better in youth.
And then cover the extraction of the arteries that appear to the place of ancient ulcer, and be laid upon it powders made decently, and then let it be healed with dry medicines making a poultice and with hot water until it is healed.
And if while you work another view happens to flow of blood from the artery, then you tie that blood, or with cautery, or scrape the place of ulcer, and strengthen your hand within until it is restricted the blood. And if any cause of those is not to you present, then pause your finger on the place within which the blood is coagulated, and moisten the place with hot water of violent frictions until the keenness rests, and be bound according to how it is covered.
And that which is pus earlier in the extraction of artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two points, because you have marked the two places with tent, and removed each other, burning fire, within which they come to the bone and cut the vein in two places so that it is elongated that which is between the ends of it, for they are not consolidated at all with this cautery.
And this is the shape of the cautery instrument:
The sharpness of both ends should be the same. However, if one end is slightly sharper than the other, it's better, for when both ends are close to each other and not pressing into the flesh with great force.
So, if there is any thickness in those areas, the heat of the fire should be held there and the flesh should be cut away gently.
And this is better than all other operations and less painful.
And the distance between the two ends should be equal to the thickness of a finger.
Chapter four:
On the treatment of acute and acidic wounds in the bowels.
When they are acidic wounds and the source is veins that are above the forehead, and there is no cause for the cure with medicine, and you see the patient's face becoming red and feeling crawling like ants in his forehead, and his bowels are weakened, moistened in such a way that their skin is known to be familiar with it, and the eyelids are burned by the acidity of the tears, the old ones apply a cure with a sponge.
And you command the patient to scratch the skin on his forehead, and then gently insert into his forehead three parallel incisions according to the length of his forehead. And if the length of the incision is two fingers: the first incision should be equally distant according to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little less than the movement of the tears that are in the tear gland, and the third from the other side.
And be careful of the incisions on both sides, and extend your hand from the continuation of both mandibles. If the space between each incision is equal to three fingers side by side.
And if you have a sponge apparatus or dry rags with which to stop the bleeding.
And then insert the spatula from both acute ends, of which this is the shape of the incision of it: that is from the start of the temples into the second incision. Excavate with it all the flesh that is between two incisions, using the skull as a guide which is above the bone, and then do the same with the middle incision into the second incision. And then press it with this spatula and insert into the first incision again, but this time with another instrument called a cutlass, sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
And press the sharp side of it against the flesh attached to the bone, and the other side against the bone, and insert it into the middle incision, and cut away with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the bowels.
But let the incision continue until it reaches the bone, and then do the same with the middle incision into the other incision.
And then when the blood flows in equal quantity, squeeze out the places of the clotted blood.
And then place in each incision a piece of old cotton wool, and place over them powders mixed with wine and oil and sour wine, so that no pus develops into an ulcer.
And on the third day loosen the bandages and administer copious fomentations of warm water or tea, and then cure it with basilicon ointment made with rose oil and others so that the wounds are healed.
Chapter five:
On the treatment of wounds by cauteries and bowels descending from the parts inside the head.
When to someone come cauteries and continuant, and you see the bowels of the patient weakened small, and then the guarding of them is debilitated, and the eyelids are ulcerated and their skin is blackened, and in the temple of the head there is acute pain and consequent tension, then understand from these accidents that the matters and cauteries do not come except from certain veins proceeding from inside.
And the best cure for these is this: command the patient to raise his forehead, and then insert into it an incision in the middle of the forehead, a little by the width (and begin with the incision of the left temple into the right temple; and let the incision be into the bone; and extend your hand from the tears of the temples which are hurt because of chewing), so that the bone is uncovered.
Dry up all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth, and then stuff between the two lips of the incision with old cotton wool or dry lint. And then press upon it powders mixed with wine and oil, so that no pus develops into an ulcer.
And when you remove it and see that the ulcer has diminished, then know that the friction of the bone caused it to come out, and then cure it with an astringent remedy which makes the flesh come out, as if you take flour from wheat two parts and gum four parts and mix them, and from this make a plaster and apply it to these wounds of the flesh.
Chapter six:
On the treatment of what bites in the ears.
The whole cause that bites in the ears is one of four species, for it is either mineral stone or similar to stone like iron and glass, or it is plant as if it were chervil or bean, or it is volatile cause as water and sour wine and their likes.
And then when stone bites in the ear or another cause like those causes that do not increase in the ear, and put the ear to the sun, and if you see the stone, then distill into it some cause of violets oil or sesame, and then administer its extract, and make him sneeze with medicine, and dry up his nose because of sneezing. And then put around the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to its sides, for many times it is torn by these causes.
And if it is not torn, then administer its extract with the instrument called extremely subtle curved forceps, of which this is the shape:
And if it is torn by gesti, let it be; and if not, then administer its extract with a very subtle sharp pair of forceps.
And then if it is not torn by that, make a tube of iron and insert the end of the tube into the hole of the ear and close the opening of the tube with wax and with softened oil so that nothing comes out except the tube. And then extract it with a strong pull, for often things are pulled along with it which we have encountered before.
But if it is not torn in this way, take holly ash or of venice alumbak, by which the ears are pressed a little quantity, and put that on the end of the ray, and then wrap around it a decent amount of bandage. And then insert that into the hole of the ear with ease, and then dry up the ear from moisture.
And then if it is not torn by all the causes which we have recounted, then you cut to such an extent that which comes out ulcer or spasm.
And the way to cut it is that you first draw the blood of the patient from the vein sephasic and extract the blood according to the manner of the nature of it, and then do it cescere between your hands and turn the ear to its sides, and open a little fissure in the root of the ear because of the grey matter in the place where it is premeditated by you. And let the incision be made in the shape of a moon so that it reaches the stone, and when the stone is found, obstruct it with instruments if possible; and then close the incision quickly at that time, and cure the wound until it is healed.
And if the cause of the pain in the ear is a growth that has grown and become inflated, then administer treatment and extract it; but if it does not obey you on its own, then take a thin spatula according to this form: and administer to it the incision of that growth which has fallen into the ear.
And do not do this when you think that it has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear, and put it in a few drops, and extract it from those with tweezers or with a subtle gesture, or with an incision as we have said, for the extraction of it is eased.
But with the water which has entered the ear, let the patient sneeze with the intention of causing it to come out at the beginning, and fill his ear with some old cotton, and spit upon that ear in which is the water, and if by this means it is expelled, well; and if not, take some thin stones and heat them according to the length of the finger, and warm those in the fire a little, and let the patient insert one of those into the hole of his ear and suck on it with another stone over the stone which is within the ear. Therefore, do not cease this until all the water is expelled.
Therefore, do not cease this until all the water is expelled. And when the water has been expelled in that way that you took from paper or from a cloth, take one end of it and insert it into the ear and extend the other end with fire until its middle is burned.
Then insert another cloth and do this as many times until all the water is expelled, and use that with a cannula as it has been said about the stone extractor.
But in the extraction of an insect that has entered the ear, if it is small, use the same as we have said about the stone; but if it is a large thing that causes the pain in the ear, then administer its extraction with tools and tweezers, and the cause of this is pus more than all other causes that enter the ear.
But in the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you are treating it with what we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillation and you do not find your treatment effective, then look at the ear towards the sun.
And so if you see any cause of the worm, then extract it with tools or with subtle tweezers; but if you do not see any cause, then take a cannula below which is narrow and above which is ample, and this is its form: And insert the slender end into the ear according to the amount which the patient can endure; and then suck it with a strong suction, and do this several times until all the worms are expelled.
But if it does not obey you on its own, then plug and close the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillation which the ancients have already tried in the treatment of worms, and find this in the treatise on distillation.
And let your effusion with which you pour the medical oils into the ear be with this instrument of which this is the form: And make it of silver or brass, below which is narrow and above which is flat.
And so it is with the embossing that it is in the cavity of the cannula from which what is necessary will be contained. And if you want, take the rod and wrap it in a cloth at its slender end, and then pour oil into the cavity of the instrument or suck juice from some herb, or anything that you want from these medicines into the cannula — and this is in the ear — and then insert the rod with a cloth above and squeeze it with your hand that compressed it until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the instrument and the patient feels the oil inside.
And what has been put in the ear shall already be warmed by fire a little. And beware that the cause which you distill in the ear is not too hot, for the medicines of the ear do not endure that.
Chapter 7
Of the treatment of the inflammation of ears.
Some children are born with hernias from the bellies of their mothers, and this happens in some men; inflammation in the middle of the ear is caused by a hernia or by some wound to that part, and sometimes it is in the openings of the holes.
And what happens in the middle, which does not include the pain, is in the most difficult dispositions to heal.
And in that in which you find the pain, look at the ear of the patient towards the sun. And so if you see swelling apparent, open it with a subtle spatula of which this is the form:
If its end in which the breadth is small, of which one part is acute and the other not, and let the spatula be of two sides smooth so that it does not hurt the ear.
And if the inflammation is from flesh grown in the ear or in the middle of it, then open it with subtle tweezers and cut that vigourously until all the flesh is expelled.
And if the inflammation is in the preon of the ear, then take a slender rod and warm it by fire a little, and then insert that into the middle of the ear.
And so if you have seen swelling with what the patient feels with ease because of the weight, relieve the pressure on it with ease; and beware that you do not hurt the nerves of the ear.
Then put on the ear a piece of linen according to the size of the opening which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the hardening of the swelling; or take some and moisten it with water and sprinkle that over it, having threshed and used it; and if you see the ear already puffed up, then pull off that linen and replace it with another which you wrap in cerote made from oil of roses, until the swelling is reduced; and then treat it until it is healed.
But if bleeding happens, then soak sponge or linen in warm water and place it over the ear, and use the other treatment which constricts the flow of blood, which is said in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter 8
Of the treatment of itchiness that comes to the eyelids.
Athezil which comes to the eyelids of eyes some time moist, sometimes dry.
Therefore take those with tweezers or with a spatula, and split them with the tip of your knife, and then place it over the spots having threshed it.
But if pain with flow of blood comes, then cauterize those with a small, subtle cautery.
And the best cauterization is when the splits and wounds return no more after some cause has been removed from their tips; and when they are cauterized by fire, those tips are burned and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Treatment for the swelling that comes to the eyelids of the eyes.
Sometimes there is a swelling in the eyelids of the eyes due to some cause that resembles a growth in strength and hardness, and because of this swelling it is called a growth.
And it is the accumulation of thick humidity in the eyelid, both above and below.
Therefore, the treatment for these is that one should consider whether the swelling comes from something external to the eyelid and is swollen throughout; and the cause of this is le پرخورة.
Therefore, open a slit in that place according to its width, and carefully scrape it throughout to allow the humor to escape; then suspend it with thread and tie it off.
And if the growth is large, then adjust it with a stitch; and treat that until it is healed.
And if it is small, you will not suffer harm from it because the oil of the eye restores and heals it.
And if the swelling is inclining towards the inner parts of the eyelid, then open the eyelid and suspend the growth with thread, another that you prepare for incision, and press it from all sides, and if the eyelid is extended by incision, then this does not matter in any cause.
And you can open with a slit of width and an incision throughout the eyelid, and the hot humor escaping through the nature of the eye; but if the tension is general in the eyelid so that the humor cannot escape through the nature of the eye except by incision, then make the incision, wash the eye with salted water, and treat the place until it is healed.
Chapter X.
Of the treatment of a circle in the eyelid above the eye.
A circle is a gray thing which is engendered in the tunics of the eyelid above, and mainly in infants, it harms those eyes and adds to their catarrh; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because of that which causes them to weep.
And because the hot humor cannot escape through the nature of the eye except by incision and if it causes general tension in the eyelid, open the eyelid with a slit of width and scrape it throughout to allow the hot humor to escape.
And there is another method of treatment for that in which the patient rests his head on you, and then he covers himself with a cloth and makes heat, and makes a circle according to the amount which contains arthernach throughout, and then he puts that on it and presses with his hands so that the catarrh is collected in the middle of the circle, and then open in the middle of that humid place with a spatula by making an incision through the width, and the incision should not be larger than the incision made in phlebótomy.
But in the previous case, split the cord all the way until you reach the catarrh, for in most cases, catarrh is reached through the incision according to the form of whitened gray matter.
Therefore, extract it with pieces of cloth which you have wrapped between your fingers to the outside parts and revolve it between the right and left hand until it is dispersed.
And beware that you do not insert in the incision so that with the spatula, you do not reach the eye and scrape it.
But if you do not see catarrh at the beginning of the incision, but you insert a little with ease so that it processes catarrh; and then extract it as we have said before, and then moisten the cloth in water and wine and place them on the place and bind those tightly.
And if someone has torn salt and places it in the cavity of the incision so that what remains of that humidity.
And then treat that until it is healed.
But if pus occurs in the place of the vein, then treat that with soft bandages until it is healed.
Chapter XI.
Of the treatment of a circle in the eyelid below the eye.
When in the eyelids of the eyes, the natural hairs are born under the skin and are old, then those cause illness to the eye and lead to conditions of illness such as constant tears and softening of the eyelids and the membrane beneath them, which is a cause of destruction of the eye called tactinir of the eye, and it is cured in four ways: either by cautery with fire; or with sharp medicine as previously said in the chapter on cautery; or tactinir is caused by incision and suturing; or by cannas as I will say.
And then you will place the head of the patient towards you; lift the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is lifted, that is good; and if not, insert a needle into that part where there is pus below the eyelid, and push the needle with the pus upwards towards the margin of the eyelid near where the hairs are born, and pull the pus to the top with the eyelid, and release it.
And then probe inside the eyelid below the hairs with a spatulate instrument into the tear duct where it joins the major lacrimal canal and enters the minor lacrimal canal; then extract the pus and place a small piece of cotton or cloth underneath the eyelid, and sign on the eyelid with a tent, forming a shape like a tail fin.
However, the shape should be according to the amount of swelling in the eyelid, because this varies among people; some require that a large quantity be cut out from the eyelid according to the amount by which it is softened.
And then probe with the spatulate instrument along the two lines you have marked, beginning at where the major lacrimal canal joins the minor lacrimal canal. And if your incision is close to the natural hairs according to the thickness of the membrane, it is good.
And then place the probe in one of the two corners of the pouch, and scrape away the entire lining, and with a thread or fine wool, stitch together the two lips, and clean the blood, and adhere what is superfluous of the membranes above the eyelids by applying some viscous substance, if you wish to do so, and if not, don't cure it.
And then let the stitching of the membranes be for three or four days, and then cure it.
And if you want, let the poultice be unsutured, and cure it with something that dries and constricts, because the eyelid is raised due to the sealing of the poultice and the addition of heat; but stitching is better. And so I have said about tactinir.
However, there should be diligence in performing it on the patient, and it is a good operation without fear.
There is another method for tactinir, which is to mark the shape of a tail fin on the eyelid, and then lift the eyelid with three hooks separated and gathered together according to this shape:
But if that is not possible, and the hooks are not available, then take a needle with thread and insert it at the center of the figure, and push the other end near the major lacrimal canal, and the other end near the minor lacrimal canal, and gather between your fingers the membranes with equality, and then with them, lift up your hand with equal elevation, lifting up all of the pouch which has been marked as we have recommended.
And then stitch together the two lips of the pouch and cure it until it is healed.
But if pus occurs due to your incision or probing, treat that pustule with ceronium and similar substances, and with ointment.
And sometimes it happens that the eyelids turn inwards, so then you should use what we have said about incision; but stitching in each case is more artificial.
Tactinir with cannas is according to this form: And it is that you convert the eyelid and split the figure inside according to what I have described; and then with skill, make two cannas or two thin rods whose length is according to the length of the eyelid and whose breadth is less than the breadth of the spatulate instrument. And you have already cut at the ends of some parts where you hold the threads.
Then gather each one with subtlety beneath what is superfluous of the eyelid of the eye, and tightly constrict the cannas in some parts with strong compression, and leave it for several days; because the pouch will die and become black and rot away, and when it falls, it will push itself out.
But if it is delayed, then break it with tongs, and cure the pouch until it is healed.
And so when it is solidified, the eyelid is lifted and the hairs do not prick.
And this is the form of two cannas which you will make according to this form: and have the quantity of length and breadth neither more nor less.
Chapter 12.
Of the elevation of hairs pricking in the eye with a needle when the hair is hard.
When there are non-natural hairs, hard and rough and pricking the eyes, then the operation on it is that you take a thin needle and place in it thread of fine silk, and then you gather its ends and twist them in a most subtle manner. And let the length of the hairs be the quantity of a palm.
And then you compose another thin thread under it in a short manner, and twist its ends if you wish to do so.
And then place the patient's head towards you, and let it be near the sunlight so that your work is seen clearly, because it is a subtle and delicate operation.
And then insert the needle at the root of the hair which needs skill, and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly while extracting that above the natural hair.
And then pull the hair out from under it and insert it into the eye, and let there be one or two or three hairs at most and not more.
And then pull your hand out with it so that the hair is extracted with the natural hair.
But if it is pulled out with the thread and the hair is not extracted, then pull out the thread from its parts under the hair which you have composed with that thread, so that when it is pulled out from above, the hair will be extracted with it.
And then examine it with the sight of the eye, because when you pull out the thread and the hair, and it does not stick to the membrane, the eye will be clear, and the clause will go away in two or three days, and the hair will adhere to its place and grow well on it.
And if the hair is longer, then you gather a long hair of the natural hairs, and elevate it with that, or let the one which you have gathered be elevated with it so that it is stretched out and you elevate it.
Chapter 13.
Of the cure of a hemorrhoid which appears in the eyelid above it.
When there is a hemorrhoid in the eye, and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted on one side or the other, from bad healing of membrane or from incisions or cauterization, and it is called leporina, and this inflammation or is natural or accidental, and it is caused by healing of membrane or from incisions or cauterization, or from similar things to their sick ones.
The manner of the operation on it is that you split that consolidation and separate its lips, and place in it a piece of linen thread, and gather those so that they are healed.
And it is necessary that you use a dressing for him from the causes which dry out; for if you do this, it will return in a worse condition than it was before.
Use in that which causes softening, such as fenugreek, and steep it in the water in which there are alder wood and seeds, or aquilon ointment, which should be liquefied with one of the oils, and soak the limb in it, and cure it with that.
And the secret to your treatment is that you should not pierce anything which has not consolidated according to its original form.
And this operation which we have described is merely a correction of the ehalixacratis which does not return the shape of the location according to how it was before.
Chapter .14.
Of the cure of ehacrats which is done on the eyelid:
This alxacrati which is done on the eyelid, which is aptly named vertadierament alxacrati; and it is of two types, either natural or accidental.
But if it is accidental, it is not due to the eyelid itself, but because there is some cold and moist humour in the eyelid which cannot drain in any other way than directly, and alxacrati is named for that which is directly vertadieramente. However, if it is accidental, it is caused by a wound or a tear or cautery or something similar.
And the method of operation for this is that you take a needle with a double thread, and pierce the flesh, and make the thread pass from the tear duct on the left into the one on the right, so that the thread passes through both ends of the flesh.
Then stretch out the flesh at its edges with the needle and sew it up with the needle, and insert the needle with a broad spatula. And so if it returns the shape of the eyelid as it should be, that is good; and if not, take a needle and place it in the split figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and close both slits on either side of the eyelid.
And the ends of the two slits are two angles of the incision, which you have made so that they meet; and an angle is made from them when they come together, and a figure is made from them.
And this figure is a Greek letter: the lambda.
And then cut the flesh to the amount that is the edge of it below it, so that it does not hinder the eyelid.
And then bring the separated parts together and sew them with a thread of wool; and then cure those with what we have said about the softening medicines and the poultices until it is healed.
And if alxacrati occurs due to a wound or a tear or cautery, then you should split with a flat fissure over the hairs of the eyelid as has been described. And then separate with the poultice between two lips as we have said.
In the sum of the speech on the cure of alxacrati when it is above or below, let there be an operation in it, according to how it is prepared for the form of alxacrati; and that is in the form of different dots.
And the wise artisans always prepare in whatever way is possible for them to return the figure to its natural form, or close to it, and that patient according to what suits them from the operation and the instruments in the greatest dispositions.
Chapter .15.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs to many people who have the eyelid glued more above the white of the eye, and is prohibited from the facility of movement and its natural actions, therefore you should insert the edge of a needle under the eyelid, and raise it up, or stretch it with unguent.
And then you insert the adhesion with a broad spatula, which does not have any sharpness to the incisions, having dulled a little so that the patient is not disturbed after the operation, and remove the spatula so that it does not hurt the eye with its sharpness.
And your incision should cut through that adhesion with ease so that the eyelid is returned to its natural form, and all the adhesion is healed.
And then you put into the eye salted water with which you wash it; or distill in it wine dissolved in water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a poultice of eggs, and apply over the eye wool soaked in white of egg; and on the third day use causes to consolidate it until it is healed.
Chapter .16.
Of incision of nail and prominence of flesh in the tear ducts.
Know that ungla is according to two ways; for it may be nervous, and be like a hard, thin cipha; or it may not be nervous, like white moisture congealed, which when the iron touches it, may be taken with unguent, and it is severed and the unguent is not put in it.
And both kinds do not heal except from the major tear duct as it gradually covers the sight and prohibits light and movement of the eye.
But the way to act in the incision of it is that the patient tilts his head down, and then open his eyes, and raise the eyelid with your hand, and then gather the nail with little doublings of unguent and stretch it upwards. And then take a needle and pierce with it the nail of a horse or ox or cow or similar animal, or of strong fiber, or double the end of the needle little by little and insert that into the edge of the nail, and pierce with the needle, and bind with wax the nail; and stretch it upwards, and loosen it on its edges, and cut with the fiber the side of the nail which covers the pupil. And so you follow that with the fiber into the depths of it.
And then you insert the remnants into the roots of the tear duct with a broad spatula or small forceps, and cut the flesh of the natural tear duct so that through incision of it there are not continuous flows of tears.
And sometimes the nail with its single unguent, as we have said, and then it is severed by a lion’s spatula of which this is the form of it:
And beware that with the spatula you do not touch the tunic cornea and that it comes in it a rupture; and that the pupil is perforated.
And then the incision is made in the eye with a little powdered salt or ash made of cinammon, and let it stay there until the next day; and then cure that with what comes into it until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle into it or put unguent in it, then many times this kind of nail is cured with medicines, and is healed thus with eye and covered in its division.
And if you want to cut it, then open the eye of the patient and take a broad lion’s spatula with sharp iron according to this form: with subtlety. And if it is hard and tight and the unguent does not come into it, then distill from your eye wine made of cinammon or with strong vinegar, and open the eye on the next day.
And then repeat the operation on that part where everything is from him, unless the opposite pustule is in the hole, because then you would cut that one open and treat the pustule at its beginning so that it heals.
And then repeat your operation on that part for as long as it takes to heal.
The tear duct, if you see it in the hole because of great harm, should be suspended with a thread; and cut that one part open, and do not finish the incision so that no tears flow out.
Then distill rose water into the tear duct and do this with myrrh until it is healed.
Chapter XVII
Of the incision of a hernia and of what is born from tight flesh in the hole.
Sometimes in the holes of some people, red flesh is born, and it is above-placed so that it covers the pupil, or it is close to or pressing on the eyelids, and it strongly presses the eyelids against the parts in front, and it is attached like a ball bearing.
The operation on him is that the patient places his head in your lap, and then you open those holes and gather up all that flesh with appropriate threads, and take it with a forceps or basket; and then cut the flesh at its beginning so that everything finishes with the scissors, and be careful of the hole that you do not harm it with your operation.
And your incision should be with that which you use to cut those things, or with a spatula which we have mentioned in the incision of the nail, or with small scissors with which the shape of it is gathered according to what is appropriate in this chapter.
So when your incision is complete and all that flesh is cut, then fill the hole with ground salt, or distill into it red powder and similar medicines, and place over the hole in front a bandage with egg white so that it is protected from pustules.
And if for any cause hernia is caused and there is pus, and you fear pustules, then cut open the hole and treat that pustule with what causes that pustule to yield, and then repeat your operation on it until it is healed, and similarly do on the tight flesh which occurs in this kind of hole.
But indeed you should guard against all treatment of the hole by natural or accidental way, doing it with iron, and not put your hand in any of these operations unless you see that that member is suffering that operation.
Chapter XVIII
Of the gathering of pus in the hole.
Pus are red veins which are hardened on the hole and forbid its treatment, and they open the hole over a period of days.
So it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the hole in which there is pus is strong and in it there is not another illness other than pus, then you gather that pus.
And it is that you command the patient to place his head in your lap, and then suspend those veins with a thread or two according to your discretion; and let that thread be of subtle double thickness according to this form:
or two threads graded into one body according to this form:
And then let those veins be tied with strong subtle threads, and press the blood now and then, until you see those veins being sucked back into the hole and being rolled up.
And be careful not to harm the hole with the end of the spatula; and if your operation is in the middle of the forehead, and let it be steady in your operation so that you do not cut except those veins.
And when you have finished, then distill into the hole head green wine or red so that with its keenness it corrodes what is sucked back from the pus.
But if it is not possible for you to gather all of that in one hour, then let him take something for the pain of it, and let him be for several days until the pain of him is calmed and he is protected from pustules.
And then repeat on him according to what was mentioned before so that he is healed.
And this is the form of the scissors:
Chapter XIX
Of the reduction of hernia in the nose.
When you cure hernia with cautery or with a sharp instrument when it is preceded by narration of it and is not healed, then do not put anything in it except that you cut on the pustule because of its maturity, and let you draw out all the humidity which is in it and the pus until the bone is uncovered.
So when the bone is uncovered and you see in it corruption or blackness, then scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:
And it is made of hard iron, and let the tip be rounded in this way so that it is made pointed by filing or with an awl (in this way as it is in the following figure).
And place that on the decayed part of the bone, and then roll it between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that the corruption is scraped.
And let that be done several times, and then restore the place with astringent and styptic causes.
So if the place is consolidated and good flesh has grown on it and the body has recovered from the sickness for more than 40 days, and it is not renewed or pustules arise in it or accidents happen to it, then you know that it is healed.
But if not, then do not put anything in it except to reduce the fracture to the form of the nose, and according to this way: let you uncover it according to bone with iron or with a sharp instrument, and when the bone is uncovered, then take gangrene according to this form:
Let its end be triangular with iron, and its base be pressed inwards towards the end so that it is extended outwards as it is shown there.
And then place that on the bone, and let it be near the tear duct; and lengthen your hand a little from the hole, and then roll your hand with the tribe so that it penetrates all the bone, and let him feel the patient for heat that comes out of his hand.
So then restore the place with astringent and styptic medicines as well as you have heated them.
So when the flesh and the place are hardened, then the matter which flowed to the parts in front returns to the nose, therefore that is pus over the patient.
Chapter XX
Of the reduction of a protruding hole.
When the hole protrudes with its totality and does not occur in the swelling nor decrease, then you should loosen the patient, and then let him hold his breath, and then press on the cervix with a scarification and suck strongly with good suction; and then place liniment which is made of alum and aloe and myrrh, and then cover the plaster on the hole with strong poultices.
And the way of the poultices is that you take sheets of linen cloth, and let each sheet be doubled into four folds; and make those sheets.
And then place those one over the other according to the quantity of which he has need of it. And then press on those with a firm bandage with strong tightness; and repeat the cups with suction after scarification; and let him keep the cups and examine the hole day and night.
But if meanwhile the ligament is softened, then let it be made tight.
And you should stop the bleeding near the wound during both day and night as we have said.
And if you see that the blood has already been reduced, that is good; but if not, then repeat the poultice with powders and the bandage and leeches until it is healed.
Chapter 21.
Of the beginning of the swelling in the tunica intima.
When there is a rupture in the tunica intima and it protrudes outside the eyelids like the tip of a pea, and it assumes a round shape due to this, and you want to operate on it, then the operation should be performed as follows: You should insert a needle at the base of the intima where the rupture is located, below in the upper part; then you should insert another needle with a double thread in the lacrimal gland, and allow that to penetrate while keeping the first needle in place according to its position. Then you should pierce the area of the double fold and lift it up using the needle, and tighten that thread.
Then pull out the needle and place over the wound wool infused with egg white, and allow it to fall due to the thread being attached to the intima.
And you should care for the wound in this way until the ulcer is healed.
And sometimes, a great swelling can form throughout the entire eyelid, and it should be punctured with a thin spatula that reaches the subcutaneous part of the wound, and the white moisture should run out, and the swelling should descend and go inside immediately.
And you should tighten it until it is healed.
Chapter 22.
Of the cure of hawks.
This disease that is called alconatis is nothing but an inflammation that is located in the eye, resembling water that is flowing down and not being absorbed.
The way to treat it is to make the patient sit upright and straight, then take his head in your hands from both sides, and move it so that you can see the inflammation flowing down to the lower parts, then dry it up and prevent it from descending, and damage the light, and the patient should see the cause just as he did before.
And if it does not flow down, you should know that it is water.
But if the inflammation is not prepared to flow down by what we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands, and take a thin spatula and place it on the skin covering the tiny space between the conjunctiva and the cornea in the limbus (in that area where the white of the eye joins the transparent part), so that the inflammation can be pushed out.
Once it is pushed out, then you should distill water into the eye that has honey mixed in it, or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
And you should cure it with the other causes until it is healed.
Chapter 23.
Of the cure for water flowing down from the eye.
We have already said about the types of water in the division and which one is suitable to be punctured with a needle according to the condition, then you should do that according to the health status.
Then you should make the patient sit between your hands on a chair and lift his head, then he should move his eye up and down, then it will be tightened.
Then you should place your left hand near the eyelid of his eye, if the eye with the water is on the left; or your right hand if it is the right eye.
Then you should take alum with your right hand if the eye is on the left; or with your left hand if it is on the right.
Then you should place the end of the alum near the limbus due to the thickness of the white in the tear film of the lower part of the lacrimal gland, and you should press alum with strength and rotate your hand around it.
Then penetrate into the tear film of the eye and you will feel that alum has already reached the root cause.
And you should measure the path of alum to the root, and the distance of the space that is from the pupil until the end of the blackness, and it is the limbus of the eye; because you will see the pupil with the vision of the eye due to the clarity of the tunica cornea.
Then you should place alum in the area where the water is, and you should pull it down once or twice, and therefore if the water flows down immediately, then you should see the patient over whom he will open his eyes immediately, and alum in his eye.
Then you should rest for a moment; therefore if the water has flowed down, then you should place alum again another time before alum is pushed in.
And therefore when it is dried up and does not flow down, then you should pull alum out with ease, and rotate your hand around it a little by little, and you should dissolve in the water a little of clear salt of gemma and wash the eye inside; then you should place outside the eye a cotton pad or stopa or wool infused in rosewater and egg white and tie it on with that.
But some of us and those who are from our time place on it a comb soaked in egg white.
And if it does not obey you with alum in the instrument of the eye due to its hardness — because it is the case of some men whose eyes are hard —, then you should take the spatula that is named "alberid" of which this is the form:
And therefore puncture it with that the conjunctiva, and do not finish your hand in the puncturing, and it is not unless you make a path for alum to reach its subtile place.
Then you should insert alum according as we have said.
And after you finish your work, the patient's sleeping accommodation should be prepared, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark room, and all movements should be prohibited.
And you should place over him something to cover his nature so that it is cooled down, and do not turn his head to the right or left at all.
And let the swelling be according to its disposition until the third day.
And you should loosen it in that dark room and show him the light, and let him see some causes, and you should return the swelling to its condition on the seventh day.
And do not do that in the hour of the cure or immediately then you should do the infusion. While you are doing this, you should keep it warm so that the water can flow more and stronger through guarding.
But if inflammation occurs, then you should loosen the eye before the seventh day, and rectify it with that which softens inflammation.
Then you should absolve the eye and place over it an oral poultice by which the eye is ruled from below for several days, existing in the dark room.
And you should let it dry little by little and converse about its causes.
And know that in alchatea the disciple of vision is not excused from seeing some views, and then you should see ardently about the operation.
And it has been received from some of those who are the Artach , and some say that fire is made in Ayrac magdaam punctured by which water is sucked out.
But indeed we have not seen it done in our land which was believed to have been done, nor has it been seen in any of the ancients' books; and it is possible that it is new.
And these are the forms of the species of magdaan so that it should be over those who ignore them:
And they should be made of iron or steel specifically, and the tips of them have this triangular subtlety, the acute tip like that is the shape.
Here begins the twenty-fourth chapter.
Of the cure of flesh stuck in the nose.
When in the nose are grown various flesh tumors of which there is some cause, which is similar to the scorpion sting or to a polyp stone; and this malady is called polypus because it represents that stone in appearance. And from it is cancerous flesh, scaly, of a dusky colour; and from it is that which is not dusky in colour but leonine flesh.
Therefore, when you are to treat one who has this flesh but not fraudulent or cancerous, let him fast between his fingers and be laid in the sun, and open up his nose and stick your thumb into that flesh. Then extract it to the edges outwardly, and then cut off what you have grasped of that flesh with a sharp, pointed instrument, until you know that all the flesh has been removed; for if anything is left in there from which removal is possible, then you should treat it with one of the subtle instruments with ease so that nothing is left. But if it is bleeding or has an acidic pustule, then you should stop that with what the patient holds; or if it is one of the malignant pustules, then you should cut and cauterize that until blood is let out and all the cavities are opened.
Then let it be treated in the nose near where the incision was made with wine or water or vinegar. But if the nose is open and from it flows moisture into the palate, then know that it has healed.
But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you should know that within it is flesh grown in the pustules over bones of the nose to which no removal has come about.
Therefore, then let the patient swallow bile from which there is some thickness, and suck in his mouth seeds of nuts, and place between each nut the quantity of a finger or less, and cause the patient to yawn and insert one end of the bile into the nose with the ray or another cause by which it is possible.
And after this has been done, let him blow his breath into it until it reaches the passages of the nose, and spit out onto his handkerchief, for troops of children do this action in schools, and it is a lighter cause for him who wishes to do so.
Then place the two ends of the bile, one end that comes out over the nose and the other that goes into the nose, and then administer cutting of flesh with the nuts that are in the bile, and do this until you know that the flesh has been cut by the nuts in the bile.
Then extract the bile and place in the nose, near where the blood is being let out, a sponge, and do this for three days or more until the gum has corroded all that which is left of the flesh.
And at the end of the treatment, let a lead tube be placed in the nose for several days until it is healed.
But if there are other remedies that dry out, use that one.
And this is the form of the instrument to the purging of the nose through which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
And make it from silver or iron, which is similar to a small open lamp, like a small cauldron, and the mead similarly.
And if you wish, make a closed tube like a cane, and the canal of the instrument to the purging of the nose be round, uncovered; to which is attached in its back, with which you grasp it, when you heat in it oil or water that you wish from the sucks and the causative remedies.
Here begins the twenty-fifth chapter.
Of warts on the ends of the nose.
Warts are often found on the ends of the nose, and it grows large and swells in several days unless proper care is taken of it.
And for this reason you should dig into the beginning of its appearance, and cut off all of that. Then place on top of it or cauterize or burn with a medicine that is burning in that location.
But if its growth is delayed so that it becomes large, then consider if it has become hard, of dusky colour and of little feeling, then do not touch it with iron which is an evil apoplexy; for many times when you cut into this apoplexy, it causes great harm to the one who has it.
And if the apoplexy is of leonine touch and not of dusky colour, and its incision is possible in all of that, then evacuate the patient and cut into it without fear, and treat the location with what flows out and constrict it until it is healed.
Here begins the twenty-sixth chapter.
Of sewing up of the nose and of the lips and of the ear when the continuity is dissolved by pus or similar.
Know that when dissolution of continuity happens in one of these cartilages, few give way to that operation except for some men.
Therefore, when because of some cause to these, you should consider if it is fresh pus with blood, then you should bring together the two lips of the pus with sewing, and then treat that until it is healed.
And if the lips of dissolution of continuity are already separated, and each one is healed, then you should cut off each part of the visible vein until blood flows out. Then bring together the two lips with sewing and strengthen those, and over that powder blood of dragon’s blood and pound it, and place over the powder a poultice of diaphoretic plaster, or of one of the other plasters that are consolidative, and let it lie for two days or three, and then remove it and change the plaster and let it lie until the veins are cut off, and then treat with ointment until it is healed.
But the manner of sewing is that you add the dissolution of continuity or with nails as we have recorded in sewing up of the belly, or add the dissolution of continuity with bile as we will tell later.
Here begins the twenty-seventh chapter.
Of extraction of those causes that come in both lips in the openings between teeth.
Many times in some men are found in the openings between teeth of their lips some hard pustules that resemble warts, and some are small and some are large.
Therefore you should open up the lips and split each one of those hard spots all around, and then fill up that space with sagion pounded until the blood is constricted, and then wash it with wine water and treat the location with what is constricted until it is healed.
Here begins the twenty-eighth chapter.
Of cutting of flesh joined to the gums.
Many times grow on the gum flesh that is joined which the ancients called albus, so then you should suspend it with wax or what you have that one with tongs and cut off that with your knife until its root, and let the pus flow out or the blood.
Then spread on the wound a mixture of powdered styptic or astringent herbs, or both.
And if the tissue comes back, cut it again and cauterize it; for then the cautery will not return.
Chapter 29.
Of toothache.
When in the surface of the teeth of the gums there are sharp, rough spots and holes, and between the gums there is corruption and the teeth become loose.
So you should open the patient's mouth and place his head in your lap, and hold his teeth so that they do not move, and examine the teeth where there are holes, and remove the cause of them; and this will cure the blackness and citrinity and other things which remain inside.
If this has happened in the beginning of the disease, then it is good; but if not, you must repeat the treatment on those for a second or third day until it reaches its conclusion as you desire.
Know that teeth have different needs of many remedies of diverse forms and figures according to how it is prepared for your operation. And the scaler with which teeth are scaled from their roots is different from the scaler with which they are scraped between them according to other forms; and you should prepare these forms of scrapers as soon as you see them:
Chapter 30.
Of tooth extraction.
You should cure the tooth of its pain with every artifice and delay in any extraction, for there is no cause to suspect that it will grow back when it has been extracted, for it is a sublime substance which causes suspicion in the extraction of it.
But if the patient is forced to have that tooth extracted, you must be certain which is the aching tooth, for often the pain deceives the patient and may be in a healthy tooth, and you extract that and the pain does not cease until the aching and sickly tooth has been extracted, for we have seen this through the operation of the barber.
So how you should be certain which is the aching tooth and if you know it well, then you must scarify the gum around the tooth with a spatula on which there is some virtue, so that it may be dissolved from the gum entirely, and then pull at it gently with your fingers or with subtle forceps little by little until you loosen it.
And then hold him strongly by the jaw with great persuasion or stupor until he cannot move, and place his head between your knees so that you may not harm him, and pull the tooth according to truth without breaking it nor giving the patient more pain.
And if it is not loose, then take one of those instruments and place it beneath the tooth from all sides with ease and pull at its removal so that it is done in the beginning.
But if the tooth is split or worn away, then you must fill that crack with a thread and squeeze it with the tip of your finger so that it does not get caught when you tighten it in your grip.
And you must open widely with scarification around the gum entirely and be careful of your strength so that you do not break it or tear it; then return to the patient for the second pain is greater than the first.
And beware of doing that which ignorant barbers do in their skill and audacity about extraction, without using what we have recommended; for they often bring great sickness on people, which are difficult to be tied up, and the roots of them drawn out entirely, or some of those, or that you extract it with some bone of the jaw so as we have often witnessed.
And then after its extraction, wash the mouth with wine and vinegar or wine and salt.
And if afterwards blood flows from it, as often, then take some alum and sprinkle it over the wound; and if that alum does not stop it, cauterize it.
The form of the forceps and subtile tongs with which it is gripped at the beginning should be of long length, short handle and thick, so that they do not bend when you must work with them.
And let them be of such gross handles so that when you tighten them, they do not bend; let their tips be short.
And let them be made of Indian iron formed from straight pieces; and at the tips of those should be teeth which one intrudes into the other and tighten with a strong grip; and sometimes the tips of those are in the form of a hawk's beak, so that it is hooked, and they are of strong constriction.
Chapter 31.
Of tooth extraction and the cutting out of bones from the jaws that are broken.
When you must extract a tooth which is broken, then you should put over the wound some cotton for one or two days until it softens; and then insert your fingers or forceps the tips of which are fashioned like a hawk' s beak or hooked, the form of the forceps:
The tips of them are made from inside as with a file or chisel.
And if it does not obey your command with these forceps or tongs, then you should cut away around the root and strip off all the flesh and insert the instrument called an awl, which is a little lever, the form of which is this:
And it should have a short thick tip, and not bent so that it does not get caught.
So if by that the root is loose, it is good; but if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are their forms: the form of the first instrument is triangular at its tip in which there is some thickness:
The form of the second instrument is that it be triangular and more slender at its tip.
And you are helped with this instrument having two ramps, the form of which is thus: And with other instruments used in grinding teeth; for youth is done with this instrument which is fashioned like the testicle of a ram, and this is its form:
Of the triangular tip bent or short, in which there is some thickness, and not bent so that it does not get caught.
And know that the instruments of teeth are most like other instruments.
But the wise and subtle artisans of this art find out for themselves according to what indicates the operation and various sicknesses; for there are sicknesses to which the ancients did not assign nor prepare a proper instrument, due to the forms of their diverse species.
But if the jaw or other bones are broken, or if it is swollen, then let it be bound up on its place with that which is convenient to it of the instruments and forceps we have spoken of in the extraction of the tooth roots; and help yourself with a bandage the form of which is this:
And let it be bound up little by little with something thick, and let it be bound or held at the mouth so that it may not escape or open until all of its bone is loose; then restore the wound with convenient medicines to that.
But if there is some inflammation in the bone, then scrape it of that inflammation and its blackness, and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter 32.
Of the treatment of teeth protruding over others.
When teeth protrude beyond their natural size, particularly in women and especially in the elderly, one must consider: if a tooth stands alone and is not attached to another tooth, and there is no way to apply pressure or a poultice to it, then extract that tooth; but if it is attached to another tooth, then one should cut into it with this instrument, which has a shape like the mouth of a pig and is made of Indian iron with an extremely sharp edge.
And your incision should be the size through which you will cut into it over several days, according to the hardness of the tooth, and so that none of the other teeth are affected.
And if a protruding tooth is exposed to air, then file it down with an Indian iron file of this shape:
And it should all be made of Indian iron with an edge that is evenly sharp; and it should have tiny points like the file with which needles are made, with which the tooth is filed a little at a time over several days, so that no other tooth is affected or damaged. Then smooth it out at the end and polish it with some razor blades.
And if a tooth that is bitten into and pressed down upon by the tongue, then one should smooth out that spot where it is bitten so that the sharpness of that portion is blunted and flattened, so that the tongue is not cut nor speech impaired.
Chapter 33.
Of the restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver.
When teeth suffer concussion and displacement from a blow or from falling down, and the patient cannot bear to chew on that side, and your treatment with astringent medicines has not worked, then so long as they are not loose there is skill in strengthening them with gold rather than silver; for silver turns green and soon wears away after a few days, but gold never changes color.
And the gold should be of such fineness and thickness according to how much can fit between the teeth; and the technique of the filling is that you take the gold and make twice as much as you need between two healthy teeth, and then let it grow with two curves of gold between two damaged teeth, or if only one or several are damaged, so that it reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. Then repeat the process at the beginning of the damaged portion that you started with, and strengthen your hand with ease and skill so that it is not damaged.
And your compression as you tighten the gold should not let go of the roots of the teeth so that it does not slip out.
Then cut off the excess gold with forceps or tweezers, and press it into each spot with your fingers, and shape and smooth it out between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth so that it does not cut the tongue. Then let it harden as tight as a Roman road.
But if it is loose or broken, strengthen it with another filling in the same way at all times.
And this is the form of teeth and the shape of the filling between two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, as they are bound together thus:
And when one or two teeth return to their sockets after falling out and are regrown as we have described, and become loose again:
And it is not easy except for skilled and wise artisans.
And sometimes a cow’s tooth is prepared for some reason, and it is made into the shape of a tooth, and placed in the place where the tooth fell out, and strengthened as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter 34.
Of the incision of the membrane that appears on the tongue, and prohibits speech.
This membrane which sometimes appears underneath the tongue, either naturally or accidentally due to an illness that has already healed.
And the operation on it is that you open the patient’s mouth, lower their jaw; and raise their tongue, and then cut into that nerve membrane according to how far it is relaxed from the incision.
But if there is any hardness or swelling in it, and this is caused by the healing of an illness, then you should put some oil on it and cut into it where you first cut into the membrane and where the swelling has dissolved.
And be careful that there is no fissure in the flesh of the tongue, and that you cut through the artery and cause bleeding.
Then wash the cut with vinegar or warm water, and then place the tongue back into its socket; for it is a membrane that the patient’s tongue is kept in on each night so that it does not heal over again.
But if bleeding occurs, then put powdered vitriol on it; but if the blood clots, then cauterize the spot with a red-hot cautery that is suitable for such a thing. Then heal it according to the other causes by which it was caused.
Chapter 35.
Of the extraction of a ranula from under the tongue.
Sometimes an ulcer appears underneath the tongue that is similar to a small nut, which prevents the tongue from performing its natural function; and it is enlarged as it fills the mouth.
And the operation on it is that you open the patient’s mouth, looking at the ulcer in front of their face; and you consider the ulcer:
And if you see it as black or dark colored, hard, to which the patient does not respond with feeling, then do not touch it because it is rotten.
And if it is white and soft, then put oil on it, and cut into it with fine spatulae; and if blood comes out in the hour of your operation, then press it gently with a sponge, as if it were vitriol, so that the bleeding stops.
Then return to your work until you have completed it, after which wash it with warm water and vinegar, and heal it according to what caused it so that it is healed.
Chapter 36.
Of the extraction of an ulcer from two ears, and of that which is found in the gullet, and of other ulcers.
When pus gathers in the gullet and becomes hard like a gland, the pus of which comes out and is called two ears, when you heal it with what we have said in the previous chapter and it is not healed, then consider whether the ulcer is hard, dark colored, without feeling, then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red colored and the vein is thick, then do not cauterize it with iron because of the flow of blood; before you let it heal itself, or else it will burst on its own.
And if it is white colored, raw, and the vein is fine, then that is what should be cut into.
And the operation on it is that you consider, before your operation, if the ulcer has rested completely after being cauterized or if it has diminished at all from any diminishment; and then let the patient look towards the sky, and his jaw should be lowered so that his chin is on his chest, and open his mouth with the help of a noble instrument, of which this is the shape:
And it should be made of silver or of steel, and it should be fine like a needle.
Therefore, when you press it with your finger and the pustule is shown to you, cut it with your knife, then grab it with tweezers and place it in the poultice, and pull it out to the outside as much as you can. Another thing is that you remove some cause from the tissues, and then cut it with an instrument of which this is the shape:
Another thing is that you remove some cause from the tissues, and then cut it with an instrument of which this is the shape: and is like a pair of forceps, except that its ends are curved so that the hole in each of them faces in the opposite direction, and they are very sharp; it should be made out of iron and plated with tin.
But if this instrument is not available to you, then cut it with a spatula whose shape is as follows: and it should be sharp on one side and blunt on the other side.
And after you have cut one wound, cut the other according to this method of cutting, and then wash the patient with water rubbed with salt.
But if blood flows from it, treat it with water in which the bark of a pomegranate or bay leaf has been boiled; and also use remedies that constrict the flow of blood, until it is healed.
And sometimes pus will appear in the armpit, and you should cut it according to what has already been said about cutting two wounds at the same time.
And I once treated a woman who had an abscess that had formed in her armpit; it was a dark color and didn't hurt much, and it had closed off her armpit; the woman could barely breathe, she had to be fed and given water to drink, and she would have died if this had gone on for one or two more days.
And the abscess was so large that it had pushed out for almost two months through two openings.
So I cut it open and placed one of their tweezers in it, and pulled out a great deal from her; then I cut it where I understood the other opening to be, and also closed off its mouth, pressed her tongue, and placed the tweezers inside the abscess.
And I cut out a large portion of it, and only a little blood flowed from it. Then the armpit of that woman was completely closed off, and she began drinking water right away and also eating food; so I did not stop cutting that abscess many times over a long period, and it kept forming in the same place as before.
Then I gauged and cauterized her armpit, then bound it with an additional bandage; and I walked around and did not know what God had done to her.
Chapter 37.
On cutting of a hovel when it is pustular.
When pus drains from the nose and it is pustular and long, then it is called a perpendicular; and if it is thick and round at its lower end, then it is called a bulla.
But if it is cured by what has already been said in the division and does not agree with your treatment, and it sometimes happens that pus is drawn out from it and it is thin; and if it is round at its end and blood-red or black in color and not painful to the patient, then beware of cutting it, for there is danger in cutting it.
And when you see it according to the way that I have said about its whiteness and length, then press the patient's tongue with an instrument whose shape you know; and then place one of the tweezers in the pustule, pull it down and cut it with either of the two instruments with which I instructed you to cut two wounds.
And beware of cutting it except where it is right on the natural line; for if you cut beyond that, you will harm its parts.
And when cutting, use what I recommended in the cutting of two wounds, and treat it so that it is healed.
But if the patient is frightened by cutting it, then use fire in cauterizing it without fear, and the way of cauterizing it is not except with sharp water; and it is that you place the head of the patient on your lap, press his tongue with the instrument I have said, and grab the water which I mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and apply the cause while alive, and pause neither thick nor thin, and fill the cavity of the instrument whose shape I have described.
Let the end of it be hollowed out in which the medicine is placed just like the cavity of a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine over the nostril; and let the patient lean on his side so that saliva or spittle from his mouth does not fall into the nostril due to the medicine, so that no cause falls onto his armpit.
And with your hand hold the medicine and squeeze it over the uvula through a space of about half an hour until you see that it is blackened and subdued by the medicine's biting.
And if you wish, take a cotton swab and wrap it around the end of the nostril, and dip the swab in the medicine and insert the nostril with the swab in a tube so that the swab adheres to the tube; and do this as many times until you achieve what you want from cauterizing the grape, and then let it be dried out and fall off after about three or four days.
And if you see that the medicine needs to be repeated, then repeat it; and after cauterizing, clean around the grape with a swab dipped in wine, and cleanse it inside with what is in the circuit of the nostril from the medicine, and wash it with water rubbed with salt, and treat it outside with ointment, and inside with remedies until it is healed.
And this kind of treatment is safer than cutting and longer-lasting in terms of fear.
Sometimes the ulcer is cured by what is thinner than cauterizing and cutting, for it is cured by sub-fuming in this way: take chalk, hyssop, orris root, ruda, Arabic scinched, camomile, and brew them together with the others according to their kind, and add all of these causes into a wave, and boil it; and let the wave be laded with decent wax, and let there be a tube in the middle of the wave on which is placed an instrument made of silver or iron.
And let its end be inserted into the mouth of the patient so that the vapor reaches the uvula over the nostril, until the uvula is greatly obscured.
And repeat this over it several times until it is dried out; and beware of doing this while the food for the apostema comes out, for it will be too tight in the apostema, and you should not do that unless the apostema is cauterized.
But if this instrument is not available to you, then take a reed and attach a hole of horn to its end so that the mouth of the patient is bent; for the horn's hole prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter 38.
On drawing out thorns and what adheres in the armpit, and of other causes.
Sometimes thorns or the spine of a fish or another cause adheres in the armpit.
Then, if you wish to extract what is apparent from those parts, upon which the eye falls, press the tongue with an instrument before the sun, so that it may be revealed to you what is in the throat.
And that which is hidden and occult in the gullet, let it be caused to vomit before food has been digested in the stomach; for very soon the cause attached to the throat will be forgotten by vomiting. Or let the patient eat a piece of turnip or lettuce, or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sea-sponge and moisten it with bile, and then swallow it down, for when it reaches the place where the pain is located, it will be forgotten. And if you take an eel and moisten it with bile and let it be within the mouth and then gently extracted; or take a leek and gently insert it and gently pull it out again.
But if they are not forgotten by these causes which we have mentioned, then use an instrument of lead in this shape:
And let it be thicker than a small one, and at its end have a cavity which you may introduce into his throat with ease.
And let him keep his head elevated, and guard against touching the bone of his throat, lest he cause pain to himself or to the doctor with his hand.
But it is better that the doctor himself inserts it because of his knowledge of the location of the attached cause and presses it downward and pulls his hand upward with the instrument, all according to the amount that is prepared within him until it is forgotten.
Chapter XXXIX.
Of pains that are made in the members of the body. Of bleeding attached to the throat.
When bloodletting is performed with what we have said in the division of the cure with medicines and not with cauteries, consider then in the throat of the patient toward the sun, since you have pressed his tongue with an instrument as we have recommended.
Therefore, if you wish to see the bloodletting, draw it out with a needle that is very small or with a fine and decently sharp one.
And if it is not possible for you to draw it out with that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the throat of the patient, and then pause in the concavity of the cannula a hot iron, and do this as many times (until the bloodletting has stopped and the pain leaves the throat) and abstain from water all day.
And then take a pitcher full of water and pour it over his mouth with that, and wash his throat with it; and do not swallow any of the water but spit it out into the pitcher again with your hand, for as soon as the bloodletting feels the water it will come out.
But if it is not forgotten by what we have recommended, then smoke the patient with camphor or asafetida through the instrument which we have recommended in the smoking of the uvula.
Do this, namely when it falls.
And there is another manner of operation in the smoking of it; namely that you take a wave in which are burning coals and the wave be covered with a cover on whose middle is a hole, and let the end of the instrument be fitted in the hole, then do the smoking from above. And let the patient close his mouth over the end of the cannula so that the smoking may not escape while you know that the smoking has reached the bloodletting because the bloodletting will soon fall.
And if it does not fall, then repeat the smoking several times and let the patient abstain from drinking, and eat salt causes and als, and do not drink water, and then necessarily this regimen will be forgotten.
And this is the form of the instrument with which bloodletting is drawn from the throat when it is seen; and it is like forceps thus you see except that in it there is some curvature: which is placed in the throat and its end is like a stork's beak which is gloved, in whose middle is tightened with a limed, so that when it presses any cause, that one does not slip.
Chapter XL.
Of pains that are made in the members of the body. In which is contained the sum of speech in perception of apostemas and in section of them.
The apostemas are of various species, from various manners according to what we remember of them, each in this book.
And they are diverse in penetration and section of them by two manners, one of which is according to the species of apostemas themselves; and the other according to what we perceive from moisture.
And the second manner is near to the sites in which they occur in the body, for the apostema that occurs on the head is another from the apostema that occurs in the buttock; and the apostema in the fleshy site is another from the apostema that occurs in a joint; and each of them is treated by operation.
And yet there are some apostemas which must not be penetrated but rather their maturity must be ripened or completed.
And yet other apostemas which must be cut when they are crossed and not ripened according to their completion; or apostemas that are near to the joints, for when apostema comes near a joint its nature is prolonged within while it presses what is in the circuit of it and very soon corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, so that it makes a cause of contraction of that member; or apostema which is near a main member, if you delay the penetration of it until it has ripened unsoundness reaches to the main member; or apostema near the buttock, therefore penetrate it not-matured, and let not the perforation be cruel but rather that one which is near to the buttock so that its pressure does not make the membrane of it protrude and be elongated to the parts within the buttock, and a fistula be made or that one which is made in the end of it if it is not healed. But know the time of the penetration of the apostema and thus when it has ripened.
And know that it has ripened when there is the cessation of pain and fever, and then a decrease in heat and pulse, and the acuity of the head of the apostema, and the other signs.
And because know that penetration occurs in the site lowest of the apostema and pus coming from the cure of the eminence.
And penetration always be according to the length of flesh or bone, if the apostemas are in the parts of the feet or hands and in sites of ligaments, of cords of nerves, of arches; and, lastly, in all equal sites in which there is no reflection for in those in which it does reflect use penetration according to that member.
But when the apostema is in a fleshy site then it is better to let the penetration of it be according to what we have said so that its digestion may be confirmed according to completion for if you penetrate it before this, its membrane is prolonged and the tissue of it swells and very soon the lips of it are hardened and its depth.
But some apostemas are penetrated according to the breadth of flesh or body according to necessity, or according to that member of which it indiges.
And let you administer small penetration and in great apostemas great penetration or wide or many dry ones according to the difference of the size of the apostemas.
And others are pustules in which the skin is sunken and cut, when it is made like a loaf of bread and is made in a way that it has already been, as well as what happens in the case of swollen lymph nodes and boils.
And some of these are cut in a way that they have three angles; and others are cut in the shape of a myrtle leaf, just like the pustules on the armpits.
And some of them are given a round incision and a moon-shaped one, and they are similar to those.
But if it is not done like this with pustules that are superficial, you should penetrate it with a superficial penetration or just flatten it.
And when the pustule is large and has already collected pus, you should penetrate it and not be afraid to extract all of the content in that hour; you have extracted some from it, and then on the next day, you fill up the pustule again, and then you extract a larger portion, and then you do this several times according to the degree to which it has been absorbed.
And especially if the patient is of a cold disposition, or a woman in labor, or a small child, or an old person in decline, because the animal spirit is many times resolved by the release of pus, and soon after dies, so you should open them.
So keep this chapter with great caution, and then make your incision where you open these pustules, and cleanse the wounds and see if the wound of the pustule is small or a flat one; then you administer a few drops of oil or old wine. And if the pustule is large and the incisions are many, then you should apply a cotton pad in each hole so that they can absorb it.
And if a part of the skin is cut off or sunken in the circuit, then you should complete it with old oil or a thread made of linen cloth, just like when you treat wounds or roots, without moisture; and then tie it on the third day; and then process it and heal it with something that helps it heal.
But if there is a flow of blood in the hour of your operation, then you should apply water and vinegar mixed with linen cloth, and place it on the site of the blood flow several times.
But if the blood flow persists, then you should administer a treatment and healing, and powders which I have recommended in many places in this book.
But if it is in the winter, and the location of the pustule is a place of many nerves, then you should mix powders with wine and hot oil, and apply them to those places.
And if it is in the summer, and the locations are fleshy, then you should apply powders mixed with water and oil or wine and oil; and let this be applied until the third day, as we have said, and then open the pustule, cleanse it, and administer to its healing something that suits it until it is healed.
And this is what is necessary to know about the cure of pustules universally, but according to the way of distinction, I have already said about every pustule in what manner is the way of its cure by chapters specifically.
Chapter 41.
On incisions of pustules that come on the skin of the head.
Small pustules on the skin of the head are of a kind of nodes that contain membranes which are made from them; and the kinds of them are many.
And some of them are pustules, and from those come moisture similar to lime. And some of them contain moisture like powder, and they are similar to them; and some of them are scaly and hard.
And in the incision of all of them, and in the extraction of them, there is no fear; as you should not be afraid to extract them, it does not cause arthritis.
And the operation in the incision of them is that you express those with an instrument the form of which you will see later, whose content I will tell you about now.
Because if what is contained is moisture, then split it with an incision according to its length by a superficial incision according to this form:
And start the incision on line B towards line G. So when the moisture is evacuated, then scrape away that which contains the moisture, and do not leave any cause for it to return, as many times it returns if you leave any cause for it.
And then immerse it in Egyptian ointment if you have some, and if not, in water and salt; and fill the wound with that, and leave it until the next day, as it corrodes all that is left of that film.
And then apply the Egyptian ointment on it again and again if it has not healed, as many times as you trust that there is no cause for that film to return; then heal the wound with an ointment so that it is healed.
And if the pustule contains a fatty node, then you should incise it according to this form: By making an incision in the shape of a cross, and cut between two lips of the incision and pierce that completely throughout, and apply your strength in extracting the membrane which contains it.
But if arthritis causes you contradiction, then do what I have told you first.
And similarly do in the scaly pustule by incision and cure as we have said; and the incision on the scaly pustule is lighter pus, because it has little blood and little moisture.
And sometimes some of these pustules are on the head in some people, and there is no moisture in them at all; the cause of this is that I have struck one on the head of an old woman and pricked the pustule like a hard, rough, white pebble, which could not be pierced, and if someone hit it, it would hurt.
But in other accidental pustules on the head, this is not in this chapter; except for the pustules that come on children's heads and come from the roots of the hair, but the incision of all these should be superficial.
And make the incision on those at the lowest part of them so that it is away from the body of the pus to the lowest parts.
And then heal those with something that suits its cure.
Chapter 42.
On the incision of scrofulas that come on the neck.
Many times these pustules come on the neck and under the armpits and in the groin; and sometimes they come in other parts of the body.
And those that come on the neck, some of them are engendered between them, and every scrofula of them is within its own membrane, and so in the nodes and pustules on the head, as we have recommended.
And the kinds of these scrofulas are many; some of them are scaly, and some contain moisture, and some are malignant and do not obey cure.
So in that which you see good disposition in the Touchment, of which the color of what is manifested is close to the color of the skin, and is swollen at all parts, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, or the veins, or arthritis, and is not deep, then you should incise it with a superficial cut from above to below from the line G towards the line B, and pierce that completely, and scrape it away from all parts, and extend between two lips of the incision with a sharp instrument, or with small incisions if you have need of them, as we have said in the pustules on the head, and extract that little by little.
It is important that the vein or nerve is not cut.
And make sure that the spatula is not sharp so as to not accidentally touch with it or disturb the patient, and cut only what is necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and prevented from your operation, then stop the wound with vitriol trippled or other powders which stop blood flow, and narrow the wound, and leave inside that which rests upon the edge of the ulceration so as to soften the wound and to start becoming suppurated. When the blood is stopped.
Then return to your operation until you have finished it.
And then examine with your finger the cause of any other small bumps; therefore cut those and clean those.
And if there is a large vein in the root of the scrofula then you must not cut that scrofula from its root. But instead cover that with a folded piece of cloth and let it fall by itself without harm.
Then fill the wound with old cheese which you have already submerged in Egyptian ointment and then cure that.
And if you cut the whole scrofula then cover the two lips of the wound and stop immediately the pus so that there is not any superfluity left.
But if you see that there is superfluity due to the size of the scrofula, understand cutting its root, and cut it and administer cauterisation and that which was said.
And that of the scrofulas which contain moistness, pierce that with a superficial piercing where it appears to you to be the location of its maturity, and pause a piercing so as for the pus to come out from the bottom of the body, thus as we have said.
And then administer a piercing with ointment and similar to those for so that it corrode what has been formed from the corrosion. And then when you see the wound already cleaned then cure that with generative flesh ointment so it is healed.
Chapter 43.
Of section of the pimple of the apoplexy inside the gullet.
The ancients described this section in the pilhot and I have not seen anyone in our land that it has been done.
And this is the inscription of the speech of those.
But in men who have squintiness cover that the extraction of the pilhot is avoided as not to be done because all the veins and the greater ones of the patient are here.
But in those who have apoplexies with scabs on the mouth or gullet or two ears when the disease is not in the head, use of pilhot section to avoid loss which is made by piercing.
Then when we want that, cut the pilhot below three circles of the circles of the pilhot or four with small section due to width in that which is between two circles in quantity, that the section be in the pharynx, not in the cartilage, and this location is convenient for section because it is deprived of flesh and its vessels of blood from it are thin.
And if the doctor is timid then let him extend the gullet with a hook and then split the gullet so as to reach the canal but avoid the blood vessels if for some reason.
And then cut the scrotum according as we have described and it is signified over the section of the gullet by the flame which is of that which has come out with that which is of him broken and by the incision of the throat.
And let the wound remain open for some time.
Then when the hour is fulfilled in which the piercing is feared add two lips of the gullet of the wound and cut that alone is the cartilage.
And then administer medicines which make flesh grow so it is healed.
And said Albucasis that the sum of the speech which we have described exposition is not but veined that some of these apoplexies have oppressed the gullet of the patient and the patient has come into death and his breath has been cut off and some go to pierce the epiglottis so that the patient breathes on the spot of the wound from any breathing and be saved from death.
And for that command to let the wound remain open until the wickedness of the disease is consumed; and its wickedness lasts for three days; and therefore then I command to close the wound and cure that so it is healed.
And that which I have seen by my servants is that a servant pressed her breast and moistened in the gullet of the patient and cut from there a part of the pipe of the lung and he was called to its cure and found the blood coming out of the wound small.
Therefore he was confessed that she had not cut vein nor nerve and the wind coming out of the wound and he cured that so fire is healed.
And did not consent to the servant if she did not want in the throat and after some days returned to milk of her dispositions.
Now I say that in the section of the pilhot there is no fear.
Chapter 44.
Of section over apoplexy which occurs in the gullet outward and is called hernia of the gullet.
This apoplexy named hernia of the gullet is great apoplexy according to the colour of the body and occurs in women.
And it is according to two manners because it is either natural or accidental.
And the natural one is without chance of cure.
And the accidental one is according to two manners of which one is like node of grass and the other manner is like apoplexy which is made by knotting of artery and in that there is fear. And do not let it be pressed with iron unless it is small. And you probe that and investigate that with the hook and if you tie it like a node of grass and it is not suspended by any of the veins then cut that as well as the nodes and extract that so as to contain it from the skin and sac; and unless let it be scratched all its being, and then cure the location with what covers of cure so it is healed.
Chapter 45.
Of section of the species of nodes.
The nodes are moved from species and I have already said all the species of them in the division.
And let me account thus the difference between node and exitus with hook of doubt.
And I say that with exudus is heat and fever and violent pains so that the ebullition of superfluity is stopped; putrefaction is completed when fever stops, pain and heat.
But with node there is not heat or fever or pain and it counts that phlegmon which is at the sac proper.
And it is according to the colour of the body and its beginning is with a cough and it is made thus with phlegm and it contains humidity and the colours of humidity are various according as I described in the division.
Therefore when you come to the cure of node let him express that and investigate that at the beginning with instrument which is called intrames according as its shape comes in the chapter which is proper for that.
And it is manner of inquiry of apoplexies and all nodes and it is that you take this instrument and insert that in the most humid location which you touch on the apoplexy, and you rotate the ends by that little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the gullet.
And then finish your hand according to the size of the abscess, and extract the pus and consider what is left in the wound.
And if there is a discharge of any color, then you should incise it superficially as I have said for the other abscesses.
And if there is no discharge from the wound, then know that it is fat.
And dry it with an incision in the shape of a cross according to this form: So that as it has been taught to you, and suspend that with an incision, and cut the skin of all parts with ease, and keep the hair or sack, if you can, on that and extract that pus with the node.
But if it is broken in the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus, and many times it is necessary to do so, and then you should extract it little by little so that no cause remains inside of it.
Because if any cause remains inside of it, a little or a lot, the node will return according to the most.
And if you see that a small part remains inside of it, then complete the wound with some corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, and place on top of that where there is an abscess cauterize, and cure that with another cure until it is healed.
And if the node is large, then you should cut the two lips of it and cure that with what it incarnates.
But if the pulse is not beating towards it, or not beating at all, then you should cut and fill the place with boiled tallow that has been cooked in a brazen pot for two or three days until the wound scabs over and the ebullition of the blood stops; and then return to incising what has broken of the node.
Chapter 46.
Of the forms of necessary instruments in incision and piercing.
There are three kinds of these instruments: some are large, others medium, and others small.
The form of the large instrument is this:
The form of the small instrument is this:
They are made of iron, of lead, and of the ends curved decently, so that the instrument pierces in the abscesses.
And these are the forms of the experimenters, and they are called albarel, and one of them is called beril.
And there are three kinds: some are large, others medium, and some small.
The form of the large experimenter is this:
The form of the medium experimenter is this:
The form of the small experimenter is this:
Convenient that they are for abscesses and wounds and fistulas and bumps, caused by bones or other causes.
And they are made round, large and thin like a needle with which the membranes are sewn, and they are made of copper, or iron, or silver; and the best are when they are made of copper.
And they make the experimenters of black feathers, which they say that through them the fistulas are opened in their cavities, in which there is a reflection on their surface from these reflections.
And there are three kinds: some are long, others medium and others short according to the amount of the width of the fistula and the tightness of it.
Form of the large experimenter of lead:
Form of the medium experimenter of lead:
Form of the small experimenter of lead:
The forms of the cauteries are of many kinds; some of which are simple and have only one curve, and there are three kinds: large, small and medium.
And their bodies are pointed, and there are three kinds.
And some of them have two curves, and there are three kinds.
And some have three curves, and there are three kinds.
And all these are necessary in their place.
Form of a small single point, form of it:
Form of the large point with two curves: Form of the medium point with two curves: Form of the small point with two curves:
Form of the large point with three curves:
Form of the medium point with three curves:
And these are the forms of the scalpels with which they cut and pierce the nodes and abscesses, and there are three kinds: large, medium and small.
Form of a large scalpel:
Form of the medium scalpel:
Form of a small scalpel:
The ends of those with which the incision is made are sharp and the others are not sharp, and they should not be held in that way, but rather made gently on the incision of the node for fear of piercing a vein or nerve, and through them the patient and rest tranquility little by the scorching which scorches away the excoriation of the abscess.
And these are the forms of the cupping glasses, and there are three kinds: large, medium and small, like this with veins.
They are made of copper and are similar to a needle with which is made a point.
And there is a pointed edge at the end punctured with a spike and in that cut to the parts inside and outside, when you want, like this with bees.
The forms of the spatulas are blunted between the fingers for fear of piercing the abscess and not feeling the patients, and there are three kinds: large, medium and small. And these are the forms of them:
The forms of the venesection for the flow of blood, and there are three kinds: large, medium and small; the form of them is this:
They are made of copper, round with no length, and they are thin.
And know that these species of venesection are large, medium and small, so that through them you can draw the blood with speed when necessary, and then when at first there is not medicine.
But do not use them to draw blood everywhere in the body, and not use it except in fleshy places, like this in the joints of the limbs and in the joints, and in the armpits and on the breast, and in the groin and the groin, similar to the joints of the limbs.
And some are made of other small instruments like this: the blood is drawn when it is done by phlebotomy or piercing of a vein or an artery.
And there are also round ones according to this form:
Chapter 47.
Of the cure of women's breasts which are like this with women.
Some are swollen breasts of some men due to the excess of sleep as they begin to sweat, and then the breasts are swollen, and there are similar breasts in women, and Roman apoplexy.
And for those who have this disease, you must cut into the wound with a lunar incision according to this form, from the line of B. to the line of G., and then remove all the roughness, fill the wound with embodied medicine, and sew together the two lips of the wound, and heal what is within until it is healthy.
But if the breast sags to the sides and is softened by its size in the same way as it does in women, then it should be split into two of its thinnest parts with two incisions that resemble a lunar shape, so that each part contains the other at their ends, and so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form from line B. to line G. Then remove the cord which is between the two lips of the wound, and remove the fat, and administer what we have said about the suturing and powders, which are necessary in the healing process until it is healthy.
And if you are unable to complete the incision because of the restlessness of the patient and bleeding, then fill the wound with a bandage soaked in corrosive ointment, and let it stay there until it corrodes the roughness, and then heal what is inside until it is healthy.
Chapter 48.
Of the piercing of boils that come from below the tickling.
These boils that come from below the tickling are of the species of scrofula, hard, and they contain a bag which is sac-like.
And some contain humidity; and those that contain humidity should be cut with a lunar incision according to this figure: from line G. to line B. And when everything has been evacuated from the boil of the pus, then you fill it with old bandages and let it be for another day.
And then the bandage should be removed and healed with appropriate ointment, until it is healthy.
And if the boil of the species of knots and scrofula is, then you should split it as we have said in the section on scrofula.
But if the wound extends so that it causes pus to flow out, then administer cauterization on it as we have already said.
Chapter 49.
Of the incision of boils that occur through an artery or a vein.
When an artery is broken and the vein is hardened which is above it, then many veins will break into the boil. And by the signs by which inflammation and boil are known to be caused by an artery or a vein: for when a boil is caused by an artery, it extends long in the body; and when you pierce the boil with your finger, you feel a stridor in it.
And what is caused by a vein is round to the appearance of the body.
And an incision on this boil is error, and especially in one that is below the armpits, and in the armpits, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very large, so its cure with iron should be avoided, and what is in the extremities, or the head, should be evaded.
But in one that is from them by inflammation of the orifice of the artery, split it into the vein with a long incision; and then open the incision with your nails and the artery, and release it from the membranes until it is uncovered.
And then place a needle on it and make it penetrate to the other side, and constrict the artery with a double thread in two places, which will cause you pain when pulling on both arteries that are in the temples.
And then punch the place which is between two membranes until all the blood comes out of it, and the boil is dissolved.
And then administer a cure in which pus is created until the membranes fall, and then heal it with appropriate ointments until it is healthy.
And if it is a boil from the section of a vein, then you should hold with your hand what is possible of the boil with the vein, and then insert the needle below the place which you have held under your hand, and make it penetrate; and there will be a double thread in which you pull out that from the other side, and then tie the boil with good ligature according to what we have said to you in the ligature of the grape from two parts with two extremities of the thread.
But if you are afraid to pull out the thread, then insert the needle with that needle below all the boil through the incision of the first needle, and constrict your threads in four places.
Then dry the boil in its middle place until when it is dried up what is in it, then you split open the excess of the vein and let go what is tied to it.
And then place on it powder which you have soaked in wine and oil, and then administer the cure that is made with poultices and ointments until it is healthy.
Chapter 50 of the boil which occurs by twisting of nerves.
As it happens in an artery and a vein, and similarly happens to boils in nerves when they occur in them by impact or occurs due to superfluous heat, and similarly.
And it is made in the places of the helpers or the ankle, or any place where the joints are swollen.
And it is a heavy boil, and it resembles the color of the rest of the body, and in its greatest part there are bumps on it, and when it is constricted with vehemence, the patient feels a stupor in it.
And it is not a boil that extends into the body, and because of it, it is below the vein, and it is swollen in every part and does not go forward or backward.
Therefore, those which are in the joints should not be cauterized with iron, for they will cause strong contraction.
But what is in the head or forehead, split open the vein with a needle. But if it is a small boil, then pierce it with your nails and cut off that from the roots.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, and cut it out, and then remove it; and sew the wound with sutures, and heal what is inside until it is healthy.
Chapter 51.
Of the incision of a boil which occurs in the cheek that occurs in the belly.
Some people have many times in their bellies and in other parts of the body those who are called by similarity to mushrooms, whose roots are subtle and the top is large; and already its lips are swollen, and it is small, and it is enlarged.
And you have seen one, and in his belly there were two bumps which were larger than mushroom-like bumps, and there was no difference between them, white, from the subtle root.
And already its lips were swollen and split, and moisture flowed out of it all the time.
Therefore, you should cut them off and pierce them with a needle in the feet for 18 inches. and the other one, wine for an inch.
And the operation in their incision is that you consider if the patient is humid, and the color of the boil is white, humid, of subtle roots; then you split it with a needle, and when you open it, cauterize it in the fire, for many times due to the opening of it, pus is expelled; and if it bleeds, cauterize that.
And if you see the patient is fearful and anxious, be careful not to begin with iron; but instead take fresh lead ore, and treat it with that fire, in the manner we have described; and let this be for two days.
Then tighten the lead wire around the ore, and keep twisting it tightly until it breaks apart and falls to the ground by itself.
But if the ore is of a coarse nature, there is often some cause for fear and worry, especially when it is located in the belly.
But you can perhaps split it in half, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then care for the wound until it is healed.
But be careful not to assume that you should split ore that is of a dusky colour, has little feeling, and is rigid; for this type of ore is cancerous.
And I will bring to mind some things now.
Chapter 52.
On the curing of an umbilical hernia.
An umbilical hernia is caused by several factors: either by fissures of the diaphragm which is located above the belly, or by a tear in the tissue or intestine, as already mentioned in other ruptures; or by blood that flows from a vein or artery, as previously stated; or by constricted bowel movement.
But if it is caused by a tear in the diaphragm and by an injury to the tissue, then the colour of the swelling will be similar to that of the rest of the body; there will be little pain, and it will appear in various places. And if it is caused by the egress of the intestine, then its location will be as we have described above, with greater or lesser intensity; and when you press it with your fingers, it conceals itself, and then returns; and it is very tender to the touch, and swells greatly with every movement of the body, and also due to warm baths and vigorous activity.
But if it is caused by humidity, then there will be little pain, and it will not conceal itself when pressed with your hand, nor will it constrict or burst.
And if it is caused by blood, then dark-coloured marks will appear on the swelling.
But if it is caused by a hernia of flesh, then there will be a large and hard swelling, as much as the amount of herniated flesh.
But if it is caused by bowel movement, then touching it will hurt.
And in performing the operation, you must first consider whether the umbilical hernia is caused by blood from an artery or a vein, or by bowel movement; for if this is the case, you are to abstain from treating it, as I have instructed you in the chapter where I discussed hernias caused by arteries and veins.
And if the umbilical hernia is caused by the intestine or tissue, then you must command the patient to lie on his back, and remain stretched out; then you are to feel around the entire circumference of the umbilicus, and command him to raise himself up with his arms resting on your knees, and you are to surround the area around the umbilicus with a palm's breadth all around the location which you have felt with your fingers; then extend the length of the swelling upwards towards the ribcage, and bind it tightly all around with strong thread or with twine, in a decent manner.
And then open the middle of the extended swelling, and insert your finger into that opening, and feel for the intestine; and if you have captured it or kept it in place with the thread, then you are to pull gently and push the intestine back inside the belly.
And if you have captured the tissue, then take it in your fingers, and cut away the excess.
But if it is contrary to an artery or vein, then surround it greatly and return to your operation; take two needles and thread them with strong thread, and insert two needles into the opening all around the hernia in a cross shape, so that they penetrate; then tighten the hernia at four points around the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and let the flesh return to its natural state and fall back by itself; or insert it when it has shrunk, and then care for it with a poultice so that it heals well.
And if the umbilical hernia is caused by a hernia of flesh or humidity, then you must hollow out the swelling as we have said, and draw out the blood or humidity which you have captured within it, and then care for it with what we have said so that it heals and solidifies.
Chapter 53.
On the cure for hernias.
We have already said, in the division, about the kind of hernia and in what way it is treated with medicines, and that it is better to cure it with iron without ulceration; and we have also discussed hernias generated by mother and child, and the caution to be taken in curing them.
And the ancients say that sometimes hernias are found in places where it is possible to eradicate them entirely, such as hernias of the nipples or groin, and especially when they are small at first.
But when it is old and large, you must not expect to cure it completely, for I have never seen such a thing happen, nor have I heard of any other case.
And in performing the operation, when it is located as we have said, you must first make him lie down and release his bowels, and then purge him of black bile several times; then cut short the hernia if there is evident swelling.
And then prepare the patient with a preparation in which he is to lie for the operation, and then pierce the hernia all around with uncut nails, and then press it in from all sides with a good, smooth knife so that no cause of the hernia remains. And let the blood flow, and do not drain it too much, and squeeze out the places, and wipe away the blood all over with your hand or with an instrument which you have to hand; for there are instruments.
But if you meet with strong blood flow from an artery or vein, then cauterize it so that the flow of blood ceases, and then care for it with the other cure so that it heals.
Chapter 54.
On the cure for hydrocephalus.
We have already recommended in the division about the kinds of hydrocephalus from water, and the signs of each kind, and their cure with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is only the kind of althitas alone, and it is not approached by iron to the kind of timpanites or to the kind of hyposarka, for these are deadly.
And when you have treated this kind of hydrocephalus with medicines and your medicine does not bring relief, then consider, for if the patient has already become weak or is suffering from another hydrocephalus, as though it were in the head or chest and is similar to those, then be careful not to treat him with iron, for there is danger in that.
But if you see the patient suffering from violent vertigo and he has no other ailment except hydrocephalus, and is not an infant or old man, then the way to cure him is to raise him up with his arms stretched out, and then squeeze his belly with your hand, pushing the water towards the groin, and then take a thorn-tipped stick according to this shape:
It should be long on both sides, with an acute end like a spatula; but there must be some shortness in it little by little, so that in the operation it does not pass into the intestine, and that you take out that.
And consider if the generation of hydropsy is due to the intestines, then you should extend the incision from the navel downward by about three fingers' width on either side, along the length of his body toward his right side over the pubic bone.
But if the generation of hydropsy is due to illness of the liver, then your incision should be left of the navel by about three fingers' width.
And if the generation is due to melting, then your incision should be on the right side.
And you should not make your incision over the rib on which he wants to lie, so that fluids do not flow into that spot.
And with your instrument, pierce the whole vein, and enter into that incision and elevate your hand with the spatula between the vein and the artery, and you will drain it; if only the amount of a nail or so much.
And with your instrument pierce the artery until the spatula reaches the desired location and is the site of the water. And extract that and insert an instrument whose shape is as follows: and it is similar to a slender silver tube; it is made of silver or brass or lion skin, and at the lower part of it there is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and its end is split like a feather, thus:
And at the upper end of it is an eye, for when the instrument reaches the water, then that immediately drains onto the instrument, thus evacuating the water in a continuous quantity; for if you evacuate from that more than it receives in the hour, the patient will die by resolution of his animal spirit, or else it happens to him five-fold that death is near.
But you should evacuate from that according to the quantity of his strength and according to what your examination of the patient's pulse and his goodness indicates to you.
And when you have extracted the instrument, then the water which causes it is retained by the vein because it is blocked by the hole that is over the artery of which and I recommend to you that you pierce that according to that manner.
And on the next day, repeat the instrument if the patient can tolerate it, and extract a little water each time, and do this for several days out of fear, and beware of errors lest you pierce the vein except for a few times.
But if you are afraid for the patient and let out a great quantity of water, then treat him with hot sand bath and in bed rest for a long time; and cure him with drying medicines until he is healed.
And cauterize over the stomach, and the melting and liver especially when there is extraction of water, according to what I have recounted in that which precedes.
Chapter .lv.
Of the cure of children whose foreskin is not pierced.
Sometimes, some children are born from the womb of their mother and the foreskin of the penis is not pierced (or it is tightly drawn or not in its place).
Therefore, you should treat him with piercing of that immediately after he is born with a very slender spatula according to this form:
And with the spatula, pierce the foreskin at its middle. And put into the slit a slender pin of lead and tie that; and let it be for three days or for four.
And when he wants to urinate, he should strain and urinate; and then return that.
And if you do not put in the pin, it is possible that the urine which goes over the place will not harm this closure.
But he of whom the slit is tight should be treated with a pin of lead, as we have said, for several days until it is enlarged.
But those in whom the slit is not in its place, they are hurt, which cause is that from them, he who is born and the foreskin is drawn down to the end of the penis so that he cannot urinate into the parts within, and there is no generation, because the semen cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a great illness.
And the manner of the operation on him is that the patient be turned onto his back, and then extend the foreskin of his penis with your left hand with violent stretching, and pierce the end of the foreskin at its tip with a sharp spatula, thus as a feather is pierced, or you scrape away any part, so that the foreskin comes to resemble the shape of the penis and the slit falls into its proper place according to what it should.
And beware of letting out blood in your operation, for often this happens; and let him take something that stops the bleeding, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter .lvi.
Of whitlow which happens in the foreskin at the end of the penis and of hardening and blackness and adhesion of the foreskin over the end of the penis.
Often this whitlow happens in the penis and is an excess of flesh there.
And one of them is malignant, and the other is non-malignant.
Non-malignant, that you suspend with a slender hook and drain it until it is all out; then put on that cut, smeared with Egyptian ointment; and let him wear that, cure with ointment dayfinicon until it is healed.
And if the whitlow is malignant, of pale colour, then you should administer cautery over its incision and its root.
But if the whitlow is in the foreskin at the end of the penis not circumcised, and one part of the whitlow is within the foreskin and the other part is without, then you should treat the whitlow which is within first so that it is consolidated; and then you cure the hole, for when you cure both together, it is not assured that there will be no recurrence.
And if you see happening in the glans and in the foreskin blackness and hardening, then you should cut away all that which is already blackened and that which is starting to corrupt or that which is already corrupted; and then rub over that with honey, which is pounded from bran of grape-pits and sifted.
And let him cure that with the other cure until it is healed.
But if blood flows out, then administer lunar cautery according to this form:
For lunar cautery is useful in two dispositions at once, that is for flow of blood and for the wound when it is corrupted.
And if the end of the penis is corroded and destroyed entirely in the hour, then you should insert into the foreskin a tube of lead so that the patient urinates through that.
In the adhesion of the foreskin with the end of the penis  (and this adhesion does not happen except in him whose foreskin is cut, and on it circumcision is not required; and when adhesion happens by plague or by blister) let you pierce with a blunt spatula until the binding is dissolved and the end of the penis is freed entirely.
If it is difficult to pull them off gently, then you should cut away some skin from the head of the penis and foreskin, because the foreskin, when it is thin, is easily pierced by its own thinness.
Then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a damp cloth so that they do not adhere again.
And then let it be treated with a styptic until it is healed.
Chapter 57:
Of the purification of children, and of the cure of those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not the same as other wounds; rather, since it comes from our own action and will, and since its use is especially in children, we must consider in that case which operation and way is most quick and beneficial to health.
Therefore I say that the ancients did not prescribe circumcision to any of their freemen, for they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired it by experience, which reason is that I have found most of the barbers and surgeons to use circumcision and purification with a razor and cauteries; and they use ointment with pitch and incision with the nail.
And if any wound of the nature of the body occurs to those who are circumcised, it behooves to cure them with a styptic and cauteries of hot iron; and if it is necessary, let a pointed cautery be done on the surface of the foot. And I have forbidden all these ways and not found a better purification with tweezers, or ointment with pitch, which is used in purification with the nail, because many times the membrane above has escaped, since the membrane of the foreskin has two tunics, and the inner one remains below, and it is easily forced to another incision and sure pain. And wounds which occur to those who are circumcised from the nature of their body need to be cured, for which reason these wounds are made; and if they cannot be cured with a styptic or cauteries of hot iron, let a pointed cautery be done on the surface of the foot. And by purification which is made with alpecat, which is digitalis, which surgeons use, the incision to the end of the virile member is not secure, because it soon enters its passage.
But in the operation with the nail, iron often obstructs and corrupts your operation. And the membrane of the infant is short by nature, and many times it happens in such a way that there is no need for purification, and I have seen this happen.
But of the purification which is made with tweezers and ointments with pitch, I have discovered the goodness by experiment, because the tweezers are of proportional incision, for this reason that the acuteness above is thus with the acuteness below; and therefore when you press your hand it is proportioned two acutenesses, and you make a cut according to a comparison in one time; and compression of the pitch is made with the figure containing the membrane of the penis throughout its whole part, with which there occurs no error at all.
And the manner of the first operation is that you make the infant be most upright if he is one who is a little bit small, so that you do not but that you smear the pitch on his penis only, and that you let him go until the next day.
And then let him be cheerful in all that way which is possible for you to receive his intelligence. And then let him be between your hands, setting out preparingly, and do not be careless; and conceal the tweezers in your hand or under your foot so that the infant does not see those or any other of the instruments.
And then put your hand on his penis and blow into the membrane, and draw that in so that the head of the penis is exited, and then purify that from what is gathered in it from dirtiness.
The form of the tweezers to purification is this form:
Let the ends not be cut and the others be cut, so that the point of the claw is not exited, and let the length of the two acutenesses be thus with the length of two handles equally.
But the error in purification is because the membrane which is inside entirely escapes, or it is separated from him after the incision.
Therefore you should lengthen that from your finger in front of the end of the place and that you make that according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then pull it out with tweezers and insert that instead.
But if three days have passed and the swelling has not gone down, then you should let the abscess burst so that the pus can come out easily, then scrape away the dead skin and insert something to aid healing.
And be careful with the head of the penis, for it should not be harmed.
And then treat the wound with the powders we listed in the treatise on powders to promote healing.
And if it is cut below the foreskin and follows the natural lines, it will not be noticed.
And then treat the wound as we have said so that it may heal.
Chapter 58:
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retained urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to a stone, or blood clot, or inflammation, or growths, and is treated similarly as we have said before in the section on treatments.
And if the cause is not eliminated with what we have said and there is strong inflammation in the patient, then you should administer extraction with an instrument called a syringe. Its form is as follows: it should be made of silver and quite flexible, like a reed cut from the stem of an owl, about one and a half inches long, with a narrow tube at its tip made from a peacock feather, also about an inch long, with a slender cane attached to its end.
And the way to extract urine with it is to take the folded needle and tie wool or cloth around its end; then insert the ends of the needle into the opening below the syringe, and cut away any excess wool with tweezers, but insert the cane into the tube with force. Then fill the syringe with egg white and oil.
And let the patient lie on his back, and pierce his bladder and penis with the syringe, using lubricants such as olive oil and vinegar.
Then insert the syringe easily into the urethra until it reaches the root of the penis; then bend the penis upwards at its tip; and squeeze the syringe inside that, until it reaches the bladder, and when the patient feels the void is reached, and if nothing else is done in this order, but the cause is met with resistance.
Then slowly pull the needle out with the wool, because the urine will follow the wool.
Then extract the needle and treat the urine, using the syringe; do not stop doing this until the bladder is emptied and the patient feels relief.
Chapter 59:
On the quality of enema for the bladder with camphor and similar instruments that are suitable for this.
When there is ulceration or an abscess, or blood clot in the bladder, and you want to distil waters and medicines into it, then use an instrument called a camphor needle, and its form is as follows:
except that at its tip it is blunt, so it is closed. And in that there are three holes: two from one end, like a needle.
At its beginning there is a concave section, in which the medicine is inserted; and it should be according to the quantity that oppilates that medicine, without addition, so that when any cause draws moisture from the bladder, it is drawn in, and when it is expelled, with that medicine it is drawn in, and when it is expelled far, according to how the camphor needle phycates naphtha on sea battles.
Thus when you want to inject moisture into the bladder, insert the tip of the clapcedra into the moisture, and draw with that what is pushed from above, because the moisture is drawn into the cavity of the clapcedra.
Then insert the tip of the clapcedra into the penis as we have recommended with the syringe; and squeeze the moisture with what you squeeze it with, because that moisture immediately reaches the bladder, and the patient feels it.
Subtle form of a clyster through which the bladder is clystered, and its form is as follows:
And it should be made of silver or brass; its tip should be like a small feather, and below that there is a tube inside the shaft.
Then grasp the bladder with force and insert into it the moisture you want to inject into the bladder; then tie that between two with strong ligature with a doubled needle, and heat that moisture over the fire.
Then insert the tip of the clyster into the penis.
And then squeeze your hand over the bladder with pressure and push down until the patient feels that moisture has reached the bladder.
But if you do not have a bladder, then take a bag of parchment and make a circle; and pierce that all around its circumference; then insert the needle strongly into those holes, in such a way that it rotates; then add the circle just as you would alsofatur, after you have paused in that what you want of moisture, oils, and waters.
Then you squeeze that in the instrument and do with it as you have done with the bladder, and express with your hand until moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60:
On the extraction of a stone.
We have already said in the section on the species of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between a stone formed in the kidneys and a stone formed in the bladder, and their signs.
And we have said about a stone for which lithotomy is performed, and incision.
And the stone formed in the bladder properly is that which is lodged in the bladder.
And they describe it with obvious exposure and abbreviation.
Therefore they say that a stone formed in the bladder mostly affects children; and its signs are that the urine expelled from the bladder is like water in its thinness, and it has sand; and the patient rubs his penis, and goes several times to the toilet; and then there is pain in the anus.
And it is easier to cure in children who have reached 12 years; and it is difficult to treat in the elderly. But in the young it is mild for what it is among them.
And if the stone is large and the treatment is easier; and if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Therefore when you come to the treatment of that, then at the beginning of that clean the patient with a clyster which extracts the whole slit which is in his intestines; because that slit sometimes prevents the expulsion of the stone through probing it.
Then grasp the patient by the feet and make him bend down so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, or he jumps in place several times.
Then make that incision between your fingers prepared, and their hands beneath the things of him, so that the bladder is all made declining to the parts below.
And then around that and all around that outside.
Then if you feel the stone in the space, then you immediately cut into it.
And if you don't get it all the way down your touch, then cover that with oil your index finger of the left hand if the patient is an infant or the middle finger if they are a fully grown young man, and insert that into their anus. And around the stone, let it stay below your finger. And turn that little by little into the neck of the bladder.
Then press on that with your finger and expel that to the outside parts way down from where you made the incision.
And order the assistant to press the bladder with their hand; and order another assistant that, with their right hand, extend the genitals up above, and with their other hand rub the umbilical cord which is below the genitals, in the area where the incision is made.
Then insert a sponge in an incident which this is the shape of it: and cut into it the water that is between the anus and genitals, not in the middle place, towards the left thigh; and let the incision be over that stone and your finger be in the anus, and let the incision be transverse, so that the outside cut be wide and the inside tight according to how much of the stone is able to be expelled to him, and no more, for the finger which is in the anus will press it strongly after the incision, and it will be driven out without difficulty.
And know that of the stone there is some which has an angle and edges, making its excretion difficult because of this.
And of that one is lion-like in shape, round, and its excretion is made easy.
So if it is the one with angles and edges, fit into the fissure.
And if it is not driven out, then cover that with oil, or press on that with a decent gesture, the end of which be like a file with which you press on the stone, or insert below it a subtle instrument with a curved end.
But if you cannot press on it, then increase the cut a little, and if you see a flow of blood, bind that tightly with vinegar and trass.
But if the stone is more than one, then at the beginning push your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then insert it a little; and do likewise if there are more than two.
And if the stone is very large, then it is ignorance to insert that with a great cut, for two causes accrue to the patient: either he will die or suffer continuous drip of urine, because the area is not entirely consolidated.
But let the assistant expel it when it is driven out, or pull at the fracture of it with forceps so that he draws it out in pieces.
So when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with poultices of aloe and dragon's blood, and bind that tightly. And place over that a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rose oil and water rubbed together, so that the wound may heal.
Then bind up the patient around his waist, and do not loosen the binding until the third day.
And when you have loosened it, wash the area with water and a little oil, and cure that with ointment of diaphoretic and diabasic ointment until it is healed.
But if in the wound occurs cauterization and corrosion, and it is like that as though the blood is frozen in the bladder, and because of it there is the prohibition of urine (and this is known from the going out of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and draw out that blood, for if it remains it provokes corruption of the bladder and putrefaction.
Then wash the wound with sour wine, water and salt, and apply an ointment of all spices until it is healed.
And take care during all the hours of the cure that you press both thighs and fix the remedies which are placed over the wound.
And if the stone is small and it is in the middle of the penis, and excretion of urine is prohibited, then cure that with what you know before you make an incision, for remedies brought on by this cure are accused of causing incision; and now we have tried that, and it is that you take a punch made of iron felt, of which this is the shape:
of triangular end, pointed, put in a handle.
Then take a needle and pierce the penis with it below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the iron into the penis, piercing it with ease until the punch comes against the stone. And revolve the punch with your hand in that stone little by little, and pierce it from the other side so that you make a passage for it; for the urine is then absorbed immediately.
Then press your hand on that which is broken from the stone in the part of the forepart of the penis; for that is tight, and is driven out with urine, and the patient is healed.
But if this cure is not equipped for some cause which prohibits that, then pierce a needle below the stone, and another needle above the stone. Then close in on the stone in that penis between two ligatures. Then pull that out. Then loosen the binding and clean off the clotted blood which is made in the wound.
And the binding of needle below the stone is not necessary except that it does not return to the bladder; and the other binding above unless because when the needle is loosened the going out of the stone, the wound returns to its place and heals.
And for that it is necessary when you tie the needle above, that you raise the umbilical cord to the upper parts or that it returns because of your command, and the wound heals thus as we have said.
CHAPTER.LXI.
Of extraction of stone from women.
Stone in women is seldom found.
But if you see stone in one of them, then the cure of it is difficult, and is prohibited by many means.
One of them is that the woman is very young.
And the second is that you do not find a woman who knows how to discover if she has been with a man when she is chaste, or it is of women having been married.
The third is that you do not find a woman who knows this art, most especially the operation with the hand.
And the fourth is that the place of incision on stone in women is distant from the place of the stone, for it induces long incision, and in that there is fear.
But if necessity compels you to that, then take a woman who knows this, and she is seldom found.
But if you are deprived of that, then seek needle which is quest and subtle, or present a woman midwife experienced in the nature of women, or a woman who has had children.
Then perform this examination and command him to do everything you tell him, beginning with the inquiry about the stone; which cause is that he should look whether the woman is a virgin, then put his finger into his anus and feel for the stone.
Then if he finds it, hold it under his finger, and then command him to piss over it.
But if he is not a virgin, then command the midwife to put her finger into the vagina of the patient and feel for the stone, while putting her left hand over the bladder, and press it with good compression.
Then if he finds it, then gradually push that from the opening of the bladder to the parts down with the summit of his power until he reaches it at the root of the thigh.
Then piss over that spot on the vagina opposite the root of the thigh from whichever side it is on, and push the stone to that spot, and his finger should not be pushed out by the stone.
And the incision should be small at first; and then put the probe into that incision, and if he feels the stone, then cut in sections according to the quantity which he knows that the stone will fit into.
And know that the species of stones are many: some are small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and have horns.
Then you should know how many species there are for what you intend to do.
And if you want to cause blood flow, apply tripe cut into pieces and put it on the wound for an hour until the blood is drained out, then return to your operation so that the stone can be pushed out.
And prepare for yourself some instruments which are used in the extraction of stones in men, so that you may be helped by them in your operation.
And if you want to cause blood flow, and know that the origin of the bleeding is from an artery which is cut, then put powder on the spot and stop it up with lint and compression; do not repeat this, leave the stone and do not extract it, for the patient will surely die. And then heal the wound.
Then when the keenness of the bleeding is decreased and the spot becomes puffy, then return to your operation so that the stone is pushed out.
Chapter 62.
Of incision upon a protruding hernia.
A protruding hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white membrane which is beneath the cords of the intestines containing the bowels, and it is called the ciphacus.
And in some cases it is in the upper membrane which nature has prepared in the part of the bowels, where there is a different bowel; and it is the cord of the intestine between the white ciphacus which we have mentioned, and it is not anything but fat.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which happens to the intestines, because that matter is poured into them; and sometimes it happens due to a blow made upon the intestines.
And this moisture has many colors, for its hue is either inclining towards yellow or blood-red, or red, or it is dark and mud-like, or it is watery white, and that is what is most common.
And the signs by which one knows that this accumulation of water is in the white ciphacus which we have mentioned are these: for if it is in the white ciphacus, then the ulcer is round declining a little towards length with the shape of a bowel, and it appears on the intestine, for the moisture contains that of all parts.
And if the moisture is in the upper membrane, then the ulcer is round with the part of the bowel, and because of that one thinks that it is another bowel.
And if the moisture is between the cords of the intestines and the white ciphacus, then cut beneath the middle.
And when you want to know the hue of the moisture, then probe the hue of the moisture in the ulcer with a hot needle whose form is preceded; and according to what comes out on the track of the needle, judge what is inside it.
Therefore when we come to the cure of it with iron, then command the patient to be bled if that is possible for you, and warm the body of him.
And then let him lie on his back for some cause a little while, and put under him many cloths.
And then sit on the left side of him, and command the assistant to stand on his right, who extends his finger to one of two sides at the cords of the intestines and to the part of the navel.
And then take a flat needle and split the cords of the intestines from that middle place along for the length until it reaches the penis.
And the incision is made according to the directness equally distant from the line which passes through the hair of the intestines, so that it reaches the white ciphacus containing it.
And cut it, and examine, and watch out so that you do not push into it; and your cutting with which you cut it by part according to the amount that is possible for you to examine it.
And then pierce the full ciphacus of water with a wide incision, and extract all the water.
And then separate between two lips of the incision with pincers, and extend the ciphacus to the parts above; and do not touch the cords of the intestines containing it, and cut the ciphacus in that manner that is possible for you. And cut it in its entirety or in pieces, and especially the sides of it sottilely, for if you do not examine the incision of it carefully, there is no security that the water will not return.
But if the bowels process from that hole of its cords in the hour of your operation, then when you have completed the incision of the ciphacus, return it inside, and then sew together the two lips of the cords of the intestines, and then heal that as well as the other wounds, so that it is healed.
And if you find the bowels putrefied due to another disease, then lie the vessels which are on the suspensory, and extract the bowels, and then heal that as we have said.
But if the water is accumulated in two parts, then know that there are two hernias; therefore cut that part according to how you have done it in the other equally; and if it is possible for you to do one operation, then do it.
And then you should wipe away the blood, and put into the incisions wool which is submerged in oil or in rose oil; and lay another wool which you have submerged in wine and oil, and spread that over both intestines and the navel; and put over it folded cloths and lint, and tie those over with bandages according to that form:
and then put on two cloths and they are folded with wool which is dyed according to that appearance; and the extremities are made with which it is bound with a thread or with wet wool, and let them be joined with compression in the band of the trousers, and one of the extremities pierces the anus towards two, and the second pierces at the part of the foreskin, and two extremities over two thighs below and two extremities over two angles, and all compression is adjusted in the band of the trousers.
And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of cutting with iron; and you should take a sottile cutlass cautery and insert it into the groin, and ignite it according to our recommendation while the white capsule containing water is exposed; then you take the cautery in this way: it resembles greek letters.
Then pierce the capsule and ignite it until all moisture is driven out.
Then stretch the capsule with tongs, and scrape it with tongs, and scrape it with a sottile cautery ignited, and insert it according to what is possible for you until you have removed all of it; and beware that the fire does not touch you.
And know that this operation is much safer and much more distant from blood flow, and better than an operation with cutting.
But if you are bothered by an abscess during cutting or during cautery, or by blood flow, then cure which ever disturbance occurs to you by that, with treatment according to what is said.
But if the patient is fearful and does not hope for the second operation because of its horribleness, then you should administer piercing according to what I have recommended here; and it is when you are certain that you must, by what we have said about the significants, that this hernia is watery.
Then you should cause the patient to lie on his back on some elevated surface; then pierce the abscess in its lowest part with a wide spatula, and make the piercing according to the length of the body.
And let the aperture be ample so that all the water can flow out.
Then stop up the hole and apply pressure to it with a cloth, both above and below, so that the remaining water will flow out. Then heal this until the wound is healed.
But if a disturbance occurs to the flow of water at that time when you pierce it: and this does not occur except because the white membrane in the orifice of the wound causes disturbance and prohibits the flow of water, then you should insert into the wound a rod or instrument with which the water is extracted from the hernia; or apply pressure on the hernia with a small rod.
And know that the water returns and is retained for a few months or around one year; and when it is retained, then let it be pierced according to that same method, for the patient will thus pass his days.
Chapter .63.
On cutting on a fleshy hernia and its treatment.
Know that in cutting on this hernia there is great fear of danger in the more common dispositions, because I have seen its dismissal and saving by that better way.
And I am recalling the operation on that one and the species of the abscesses.
Therefore I say that abscesses arise in the parts of which the genitals are composed and are caused by several causes: either by acute sharp excess, which is distributed to the genitals, or by impact.
And its color is according to the color of the body, and it does not cause pain in that place, and it is a serious abscess.
And often it is a calcified abscess, of which the color is dusky, and there is no feeling in it.
And sometimes it is caused by knotting of the vessels and by inflammation of those as a result of which there is already perceived an impression of it, or by inflammation of the veins.
But that which is caused by inflammation of the vessels is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you compress it with your fingers; and it does not cause pain when touched.
But that which is caused by inflammation of a vein is not dispersed by any cause because of compression with the fingers.
And it is possible that on this species there be made a cut and on the other meats; and you should insert into the groin of the genitals, and open up the hollows above them, and extract the contents of the white capsule, and ligate the suspenders of the vessels, and insert the suspender further in so that you have emptied it of all its parts.
Therefore if the hernia is already consolidated with those meats, then you should extract the hernia and insert it.
And if there is adhesiveness for some cause of the capsule, or between what is between the vessels, then you should loosen all that adhesiveness and insert it by a round incision.
But if there is flesh growing in the place of the adhesiveness which is behind, then you should insert all that is in it and extract the hernia as we have said.
Therefore when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine, and heal it with that other treatment until it is healed.
Chapter .64.
On the treatment of a hernia that is of veins.
Veins are an abscess enveloped by some envelopment similar to swelling with softening of the testicles; and it causes difficult movement exercise and ambulation on the patient.
And in the treatment of this illness there is fear for that of which there is a previous memory.
However, let us proceed with operation on it according to what we have said first.
And I say that you should cause the patient to lie on his back on an elevated surface; then tighten the suspenders of the testicles from below; and you touch the groin of the genitals with your fingers at the veins that are felt to the shaft; and have those others assist you, and extend them with violent extension.
Then insert with a wide spatula through the vein by cross cut in the right of the vessels so that the vessels are exposed.
And then scrape it off from every part as we have said in extraction of the veins which are in the temples.
And then insert into it an awl in which is a double thread, and stop it up at the beginning of the places in which veins occur, and stop it up again with another plug in the back of them. Then insert those into the middle place by cross cut according to the length of the body, and extract what is accumulated of foul and corrupt moisture.
And then heal the wound with treatment of other wounds in which there is desire for the generation of the veins by which one testicle falls into two genitals, for it is not bad for that.
But if veins occur in all the vessels, then you should extract the testicles or that the testicles be separated from the vessels so that it is deprived of all nourishment by the incision of the vessels, and they are dried up, or that it is separated from them for that cause.
Chapter .65.
On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
The advent of this hernia is by incision that extends in the hollow over the belly from parts of the anus of the belly, because loosening the sacs of that rupture towards some of the sacs.
And this rupture is either of the capsule or of the sac; and these two species occur for several causes: either by impact, or by drops, or by noise, or by elevation of some cause serious, or by similitude.
And the sign of that, when it is by extension of the capsule, is that it occurs little by little in a long time, and does not occur suddenly, and it is an abscess that enfolds within the sac so that the capsule compresses the sac.
And the sign of it is when there is a cut on the head, for at first it causes violent pain suddenly; and there is an apparent pustule beneath the skin, and this is due to the hernia coming out through the opening in the head.
And sometimes the intestine has slipped out of its covering, and this hernia is called intestinal hernia.
And sometimes it is caused by windiness, and sometimes the intestine splits open and there it is retained, and this is a great harm to the patient; and sometimes it causes terrible pain especially when pressed upon.
And in the treatment of this illness one must be wary of using iron because it is likely to cause damage in that place.
And the way to perform the operation on this is to command the patient to withdraw the intestine with his hand to its openings inside his cavity if he obeys its return, and then to have him lean back between your hands and raise his legs.
And then tighten the scrotum which closes the scrotum of the testicles at its upper openings, and insert the testicles all along its length; and press on two lips of the incision with hooks according to how you direct them to open the incision with those.
And if the incision according to the amount that is possible for you, then may some of that hernia have slipped out.
And then scrape away the brain matter which is beneath the scrotum of the testicles, while the white hard brain at each opening is exposed.
And then you insert your finger into that which closes the testicle, into that which is between the white brain and the scrotum of the hernia; and clean away with that adhesion which is in the opening behind the hernia.
And then stretch the scrotum of the testicles at its openings, and with the left hand stretch out the white brain to the sides, and lift up the hernia with the brain to the opening of the incision; and command a minister to stretch the hernia out and you dissolve the adhesion which is behind with a complete solution.
And check with your fingers that there is no cause for the intestine to be wrapped up in the white hard brain. But if you find any cause from him, then you cover it with a cloth beneath his belly.
And then insert in the opening beneath the scrotum of the testicles through which blood and pus flow as we have described before.
And then administer wool soaked in oil, and place it on the wound; and administer the sewing which we have recommended (and sometimes the white brain is cauterized which we have said before the incision of it fear the flow of blood because in many times they occur there) and leave the sewing so that by itself it falls.
But if the healing of it is delayed then oil should be applied to the water and placed on that so that it falls according to what we have said.
And then cure the wound with the other cure of wounds until it is healed.
Chapter .lxxxvi.
Of intestinal hernia.
In this hernia I have not seen anyone who has been healed by its treatment with iron.
And the first one said that it is made like we have recommended in the hernia which is with wine; and the other is to sew the vessels above the incision on that with ease of it; and then dry in the middle place around it as you open the apostema with what causes it, while the vessels fall.
And cure the wound according to what we have said until it is healed.
Chapter .lxxxvii.
Of the separation that is made in the joints.
Sometimes there is a rupture in the joints as we have said and it emerges from the place.
And do not let any cause of the intestines come to the genitals; and if it comes it is little; and return in all hours.
But if the time is prolonged with that then it is a fissure in the brain which extends from the scrotum into the brain; and this happens because of the extension of the brain which is in the joints as we have said, and then it becomes soft and the place is apostemata and emerges.
And its cure is with cautery like that which precedes its narration.
And sometimes it is cured with iron in this way: and the patient leans on his back between your hands, and then dry the place of the rupture of the apostemata which emerges with an incision according to the length of three fingers.
And then strengthen the white brain which is beneath the scrotum so that it is exposed.
And then take the thread and place that over the prominent place of the brain, and press that against the bone of the belly.
And then cut the two prominent places over the extremity of the thread of the brain, and join with sewing one of those to the other.
And then cut off the extremity of the thread, and do not insert from the brain at all, nor stretch out the hernia, nor another cause as you have come to know in the cure of intestinal hernia.
And then cure that with the cure of wounds, and when you insert the threads, cleanse that and restore the wound until it is consolidated; because the brain is contracted and not adjusted to the eminence of the rupture.
And cautery is better in this place because it is closer to health.
Chapter .lxxxviii.
Of softening of the scrotum of the testicles.
Many times the scrotum of the testicles in some men is softened because the flesh which is between that is softened, and is felt the guarding of it.
Then it is necessary for him who is treated in the cure of it that he makes lean the patient according to his back, and insert all the scrotum which is softened over the natural scrotum; and then sew two lips with sewing.
And if you want in the beginning the superfluity of the softened scrotum with three or four cuts and with firm sewing.
And then insert between the sutures; and then cure by the cure of the other wounds until it is healed and the threads fall.
Chapter .xc.
Of emasculation.
I know that emasculation in our law is forbidden but to me it has been revealed to me that I remind you of it in this book; and it is not necessary for its reminder except for two ways, from which there is one so that that happens in the science of medicine when he is questioned about it, who knows the cure of it to which it happens; and the other way is that we have many times needed emasculation of other animals for our young ones by those, as of horses, and of oxen, and of pigs, and of like things to the animals.
And so I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by crushing or by cutting with a blade.
However, in the method where castration is performed by crushing, the procedure is to have the animal lie down in a body of water so that its genitals become soft and droop and hang down. Then hold those with your hand so they are resolute and do not appear below the touch.
However, in castration performed by cutting and slicing, one must have the animal and press the cord of its testicles with the left hand.
Then tie the scrotum, and cut through each pair of testicles so that two pieces are produced.
Then cut those again once you have skinned them. And do not let any cause remain over those of the brain, but the subtle brain which is over the vessels.
And this method of castration is better which is performed by crushing because strong crushing will leave no cause from the testicles for the animal to desire sex.
Then treat the wound so that it may heal.
Chapter 70.
Of the cure for hermaphrodites.
Hermaphrodites in men occur according to two methods: the first is where there appears to be a space in the cord of testicles, in that which is between two testicles the shape of a female vulva; and also where there is an opening between the penis and the anus from which white fluid flows.
And sometimes urine comes out of that which is in the cord of the testicles.
But in women it is unique: and that the clitoris of a woman on the penis is like two testicles of a man a little bit at the entrance of the vagina just like the foreskin of a man and two testicles.
And the cure is of three species: two from men and one species from women. And it is that you cut into those tight meats so that the fluid of that flows out, and then cure those with treatment for the other wounds.
And in the second species of men from whom urine flows from that which is in the cord of the testicles, there is no cure nor operation on him.
Chapter 71.
Of menstruation and of prominent meats due to causes in women.
Strong menstruation is constricted due to natural causes so that it is pressed and made short, the womb being guarded; and sometimes it is magnified in some women as much as in men and pervades into sexual intercourse.
Therefore you must have the superfluity of menstruation cut with your hand or with a knife, and cut it.
And do not cut deeply, especially in the vein of the artery, so that blood does not flow out.
Then cure that with treatment for wounds so it may heal.
But a growth is meat that grows in the womb of the mother and fills it up, and often appears at the openings of the vagina according to the appearance of a penis (and for this reason some first called it “tailed hermaphrodite”); therefore we must cut it as we cut menstruation, and cure it so it may heal.
Chapter 72.
Of the cure of hernia.
Hernia is when the clitoris of a woman is not perforated or is small. It can be natural or accidental.
Accidental is through disease which has preceded it, and that is caused by meat growing constricted or by subtle brain or thick.
And it is caused in the womb of the mother or in her ribs or on top of them or at the bottom of her, and prohibits coitus and impregnation and menstruation, and often prohibits urination as well.
And the knowledge of it is caused by observation of the midwife, if the swelling is apparent then you check it with your fingers or with a needle; but if it is not apparent then you pierce it with your fingers or with a needle.
But if the swelling is due to subtle brain and is close to the two lips then you cut it and break it up.
And that is so that you may pause over the two lips with your fingers and also place your fingers on both sides of the mouth to hold it shut.
And the woman should be on her back with her legs spread out and you also spread the two lips with force so that the subtle brain is broken up and the swelling is opened.
And then take wool and dip it in oil and place it on the wound, and apply a poultice every day so that the wound does not close up.
But if the brain is thick and dense then you must cut it with spatium or with myrrh oil.
But if the swelling is caused by growth then suspend it with a needle and cut it up.
And they are the medicines which stop the flow of blood without biting like ahauca and dragon's blood and gum arabic bound with egg white.
And then administer a broad lead rod so that the wound does not heal up quickly.
And keep it for several days and administer hot water from the lyre.
Then it will be healed by other healing methods of consolidation so that it may heal up.
And sometimes they occur in the womb due to the occurrence of other meats and then you must cut according to this method. But if it is due to an ulcerated wound in the womb which has not been made contrary by iron in any way.
Chapter 73.
Of the cure for hemorrhoids and of a tail and of red botches which occur in the clitoris of women.
Hemorrhoids are the appearance of the orifices of many veins from which there flows from them continuous blood; and when hemorrhoids are old and they have become enlarged and swollen.
And I have already mentioned the species of those and their signs, and I shall now mention those which received cure and also those who did not receive cure.
Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and theyls when they are in the womb and do not appear to be felt, then in those there shall not be made cure with iron.
But those which are in the orifices of the womb upon which one feels heat, then they must be cured.
And you must put the woman in a warm bath and then extend the hemorrhoids with tweezers or with an asp, and cut those with scissors.
And then powder the hemorrhoids with one of the powders which stop the flow of blood by biting like ahauca and like its similar to those.
And then pluck her feet for an hour, and then place her in warm water.
And if the flow of blood persists then let her drink a decoction of sumac and of husks of pomegranates and of hulls and of similar things.
And then take flour of bran and comb that hemorrhoid with honey and sour wine and make a poultice with it over the hemorrhoid.
And if the blood is scanty then let her drink a mixture of honey and vinegar; but if not, then have her sit in a bath between two hot stones, and on the hemorrhoid apply escarification with a needle.
And then take wool and dip that in the juice of colander or in the juice of henna or in the juice of holly and let her drink wine that has been cooked with it, and apply it to the hemorrhoid; and then cure the wound so that it may heal up.
And cure that interior part so that it heals.
Chapter 74:
Of piercing a ulcerated wound in the head.
[The following is a list of diseases and conditions that can affect the head:] Diseases of pustules and abscesses occurring in the head, like cranial abscesses, pustular ulcers, suppurative inflammation, herpes zoster, fistulas, blood clots, and other abscesses. And I have already spoken of these diseases and their types and characteristics, as well as their treatments in the previous divisions.
Now we will discuss treatments for the head. [And I will tell you in this treatise about an abscess that appears on the head, which is among the types of abscesses that drain pus. And if you want to know how to perform the incision using a hot iron:]
So you must consider if the pain of the abscess at its onset is sharp with percussion, phlegm, and fever, and if it becomes inflamed and if pus forms on top of it, then do not open it with an incision; instead, treat it with something that aids in ripening until the acute symptoms subside.
If you find that the abscess causes pus and phlegm, and if it hurts with percussion but does not form a lump on top of it, then this abscess is not ripe.  [So you should make the woman lie down on her side with two pillows; recline on your back and elevate your feet to the lowest part of your abdomen, and let your thighs be spread apart, and rest your arms below your elbows, and lean forward at a comfortable angle.]
Then the midwife should follow the right side and administer the instrument through which the opening in the head will be made, the form of which will depend on the causes that are presented.
And as you lean forward at a comfortable angle, follow the right side and administer the instrument through the opening in the head; and when you want to administer this instrument, make sure that your finger on the woman's forehead is pressed against it, and what enters the head from the instrument should not go deeper than your finger and press against the patient. But if the instrument is larger than the opening in the head, then you should place cotton on the texture of the forehead to prevent any instrument from entering the opening in the head.
And if you see that the abscess drains pus, then quickly make an incision over it, and take advantage of what the midwife does to approach so that the incision is not deeper than the opening in the head.  [And place the vertitge (a type of instrument) that runs along the instrument from above, and let the minister hold the instrument and rotate the vertitge as the opening in the head is exposed.]
And when the ulcer appears and is touched with the hand and feels hot and moist, then you should dry that part of the head with a sponge.
And if you see pus in the ulcer and it does not drain quickly, then make a pointed cautery over it so that the ulcer is opened and it is not deeper than the opening in the head.   [And when the pus has been discharged, then place a poultice that has been soaked in rose oil or oil mixed with some astringent; and place the calca7 (a type of bandage) on the section where the ulcer was.]
And place a bandage over the head and on top of the poultice, clean wool that has been soaked in water in which mallows have been boiled.
And if you see that the patient does not drain pus quickly, then make a pointed cautery over the opening in the head so that it is more opened and not deeper than the opening in the head.    [Then let it be cured after two days with an ointment that is suitable for it to heal.]
And sometimes the head and poultice are washed with water and honey, and then with water in which verbena or long pepper has been boiled, and then return to the ointment.
And if the poultice is stuck in the head, then you should be prohibited from treating it with an iron, but instead treat it as we have said in the previous division.
Chapter 75:
To teach midwives how to treat live fetuses according to their appearance when they are born in a non-natural way.
It is necessary that the midwife knows the appearance of a natural childbirth by its characteristics, and when you see the woman expressing the lower parts and desiring to smell the air, and being pressed upon by what is above her, and hastening the birth of the fetus, then you will know that this delivery is according to natural figure, and it is the birth of it on top of her head, and the second one with it hanging or suspended from the umbilical cord.
So when you see these signs, then let the belly be compressed so that the fetus descends gently as it descends over his head, and the second one to him, and is washed of those superfluities with good washing.
But that which is other than this part is unnatural and unworthy, for when the fetus is born on his feet and his body is born before his head and his arms, or when it is born on its side with one arm, or under its feet. Or it is born on its body and its head is born with what is suitable so that the fetus is born on his back and his feet are hanging, or his head is born and his arm, or from his belly and he is turned onto his neck, and resembling those figures of him that are unworthy.
And it is necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that she guards against error and deception.
I am showing you all the figures of those, and what skills they have in order to be understood by this and to stand for this.
When the child is born on its head through a natural delivery, and it is violent with the mother and there is difficulty in delivering it, and when the strength of the mother has already been weakened, then make her deliver the child, or if women have it, evaporate its amniotic fluid with fennel and olive oil.
Then the midwife should insert her little finger between its lips and split it with her fingernail, or suck that moisture out of it with her mouth. And press the woman's belly to make the fetus come down.
But if it does not come out, then cover the woman with a poultice of linseed and a poultice of fennel with honey.
Then command the midwife to press it and make the woman sneeze with a seasoning; and put the poultice in her mouth and nose for an hour, because the fetus will come out immediately.
And if both ends of the fetus have not yet come out at first, then cover them with a little ease little by little. But if it does not obey the instrument, then put the woman on a bed and lift her feet up, and then rock the bed on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall because of the rocking.
And if the hands are not turned inside out and the fetus is dead, then cut them open and pull out the fetus's arm or tie its body to your hand with a cloth and pull it out equally, because that will come out.
When the fetus is on its feet, then you should push those up, and then turn the fetus a little, and then suck it, and then take one of its feet and stretch those little by little.
But when it has come in between the thighs, then you command it to be squeezed out, and make her sneeze with seasoning, because it will come out if God wills.
And if it has not come out with what we have mentioned, then you return the fetus little by little to its natural second position, because that will come out with an easier delivery.
And if it is prohibited by everything that we have mentioned, then take a poultice of alder and dissolved gum, and beat them both well in the mortar, and then line with that the amniotic fluid of the woman, at the bottom of her belly. And then make her sneeze in lukewarm water until she gets rid of the phlegm.
And when his limbs are softened, then make him smoke with myrtle and put that under him. And when she has smoked for an hour, then make her sneeze on a bed, and then suck her mouth and lift from that, and press the bottom part of her belly with a little compression, because the fetus will be delivered immediately.
Delivery of the fetus hanging sideways by one of his hands. It should be understood as a reduction of the hand; but if you cannot reduce it, then raise the woman and make her walk around.
And if she cannot walk, then make her lie on the bed, and rock her thighs with violent rocking, and then give her something to drink which you have prepared from poultices.
And when the delivery is complete, then make her sneeze on a bed, and then study the reduction of the hand, and suck the fetus into a natural position, and make the woman sneeze and command him to press himself until he is delivered.
Delivery of the fetus on its neck with its hands and face expanded and his forehead pressed against his mother's abdomen. The midwife should hold the fetus' hand and then roll it little by little, and this will be easier for her.
And when he is born, and after he has been cleaned off, then put on him what we have mentioned of oil and poultices.
And then command him to hold his mother little by little, and when you have done that, then make her sneeze on a bed and command him to be pressed; and make her sneeze with seasoning. Preparation of the fetus delivered sideways.
When they are about to be born from the mother in this way, consider and then you should insert the second one with your fingernail until it is evacuated of moisture.
And if the fetus is suspended over his face and neck, then you should insert it into the armpit, so that it is not held back and delayed.
And then press the fetus into the arm pits so that it rests there according to what you have commanded, and command the woman to squeeze herself several times, and he will be delivered with an easier delivery, if God wills.
Delivery of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins are born several times, and some also give birth to three or four, but that is strange and rare; but their causes are natural, and they do not live.
And count them, although they may be multiple, one second one, and they are separated by caesarean section, distinguish those within the membrane in each of their umbilical cords; and some are delivered naturally with an easy delivery, and some are delivered with a non-natural delivery as we have mentioned.
And if they are difficult to deliver and come to what we have said about the non-natural figures, then you should cure them as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is skillful and does this with ease and skill, and with delay, and she is prepared in every way as it was for her from the beginning, bringing health.
Remembrance of that which forms in the womb out of embryos and abortions.
Sometimes they are formed in the mother's womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even ten, and I have indeed verified that a woman had an abortion of six, and another of ten, all formed, which cause was made by the measurement of the glorious sages.
And all that should be in the science of the midwife who is strong with her to go to that which resembles that, and then pause at that.
Chapter 76.
On the Extraction of a Dead Fet
When you are treating a dead fetus and have followed our advice on the division of medicine and it has not been expelled, and you must use surgery with your hand, then consider whether the woman is in good health and does not suffer from any of the conditions that may cause harm to her. If she is healthy and free of these conditions, proceed with the following:
Have the woman lie on her back, with her head tilted down and her thighs elevated.
The assistant should be on either side of the woman or tied to the bed so that the woman's body does not extend beyond the extraction of the fetus.
Then, moisten the mother's mouth with warm oils and a poultice made from aloe, fennel seed, and linseed.
Then, the midwife should grease her hand with these oils and poultices, and gently insert her hand into the mother, and then circle her hand around the place where the nails of the fetus are.
And when it is in the right position: then consider whether the fetus is ready to descend head first, and then place its nails in its heels, or in its neck, or in its mouth, or on its palate, or under its beard, or in the hollow of its collarbone, or in the close proximity of its ribs, or below its armpits.
But if the descent is over its feet, then in the groin or in the middle of its back.
And make sure to have the nail in your right hand, and place the curve of the fetus in that space between the fingers of your left hand, and insert your hand gently, and place the nail in one of those places we mentioned, until it reaches the desired effect.
And then place and fix another nail in its position, or the third if necessary, so that it is attracted equally, and not extended according to its straightness only.
And let it be pulled apart entirely, so that the extraction of it is eased as it is done in teeth extractions.
And make sure that the extension is softened between them; and if any part of it is retained, then have the midwife grease her fingers with oil and insert those fingers and rotate with those parts that are retained.
Then, if the part of the fetus is out-of-place, then have the nails be moved to a place that is higher; and do this until the whole fetus is delivered.
But if the hand is out in front of the other one, and it is not possible to return it by the contraction of the fetus, then have a cloth be wrapped around it; and then extract that part until it is all delivered, and insert that or in the joint of the hand or in the armpit.
And do this with the other hand and the two feet as well.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or there is contraction during its exit, or there is swelling on its head, then have the midwife insert between her fingers a thorny spatula and split open the head and extract the fluid, or uncover it with an instrument called "alundat", the shape of which will come with the shapes of other instruments in the chapter that comes next.
And do likewise if the fetus has a large head by nature: and then insert it with a sponge or take it up with an awl as we have said before; and then extract its bones with forceps.
And if the head has exited and is constricted by its collarbone, then have the moisture that is in its armpits be poured out.
But if it is not complicated, nor obstructed by its exit, then insert the head immediately as soon as possible for you.
And if the lower abdomen is swollen or there is water inside it, then pierce that area so that the moisture inside it runs out.
But if the fetus is above its feet, then the attraction of it is weaker and the direction of it to the mother's mouth is weaker.
But if it is constricted by the abdomen and armpits, then extract that with a cloth which you will have wrapped around your hand, and split open the abdomen and armpit so that what is inside them runs out.
But if the other limbs are coming out and the head is turned, then have the midwife insert her left hand; but if the mother's mouth is open, then insert your hand into its throat, and circle with that hand the head, and pull it towards the mother' mouth, and then insert in it a nail or two nails, and pull it with those.
And if the mother's mouth is constricted by an ulcer that is happening to it, then do not press on it; instead, administer an infusion of moist and fatty causes. And use poultices; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
And if the fetus is on its side, then if possible, have it turned; and administer what we said about the living fetus.
And if that is not possible, then let it be inserted in the armpits, and then extracted.
And make sure to not leave any cause inside the second one.
And when you have completed all of your operation, then administer what we said about the cure in ulcers that are happening to the mother.
And if blood flow occurs, then stop it with styptic waters and administer the other cure.
And I have also seen a woman whose fetus was dead inside her, and then on that fire another pregnant woman, and then the dead fire is the other fetus. An ulcer happened to her in the umbilical area; and it was inflated until an open fire appeared, and then the arms started to move.
And I was called to cure him, and I medicated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Then I applied on him some poultices with strong attraction, and extracted from him one bone, and then after a few days, I extracted another bone; and I was very astonished, for there was no bone inside his belly.
And then I thought they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Then I continued to heal the wound, and extracted from him many bones, the woman having had them in her joints for a long time, and already seeing in such a way for a long time, corrected with her a little movement of the arm.
And I did not attribute that to be strange, but in what there is science and aid to what the doctor does with his hand for curing.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Form of the opening of the mother's mouth.
This is the form of constriction in which the limbs are wrapped, to this constriction there are two virtues on both ends of two bones. But this virtue is that it be made more subtle by constriction, and it be done with ebony or wood of trees.
And let the thickness of each trunk be the width of two fingers and the margin of each one is an inch and a half, and the length of each is a palm and a half; and in the middle place of two trunks there are two joints of that measure trees which are already closed, of which the length is a palm and a few less.
And these two additions should be inserted into the mouth of the mother so that she is opened by them when you turn the two prescribed vertigoes.
Here is another form, even more subtle and finer:
It should be made of boxwood or beech in the likeness of forceps. But at the end of it there should be two additions just like forceps, and the length of those additions should be one palm, and their width should be two digits.
And when you want to open the mother with those, then you should make the woman lean back so that her feet are hanging, opening what is between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument just as you do with forceps equally according to how much you want of the mouth of the mother while the midwife does what she wants.
The form of vertigo that the ancients said:
Form of impellor by which the fetus is pushed:
Form of amsidity by which the great head is contained
And it is assemled to forceps whose teeth in the end, just like forceps, and sometimes it is made long just like forceps whose teeth are like dog's teeth with which it is cut into and contained. Form of few amsidity:
Form of a hook having one spine:
Form of a hook having two spines:
Form of spatula having two ends by which the head is cut off:
Form of two wide spatulas:
All those instruments are exercised, and when they are more multiplied and prepared, the artesian should be closer to his operation and closer to men because of their quantity.
And it is not a sin for you to make those instruments, for the necessity of them cannot be excused.
On extraction of the afterbirth:
When the afterbirth is retained after childbirth, then you should command the woman to retain her breath, and then make her sneeze with snuff, and press your hand over her mouth and nose, and if through that it comes out, good.
And if not, then you take a pitcher and pierce in the lid a hole and place in that herbs burning the mouth of the mother with rosemary and rue and dill and chamomile and Arab scammony and cinnamon and frankincense. All those herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the pitcher, and place that over the fire.
Then place a reed cannula into the mouth of the mother, and hold that in while the vapor comes into the cavity of the mother.
And then make her sneeze as we have said, and the afterbirth will be pushed out with speed.
But if this cure does not work and it is still inside, then command the midwife to immerse her left hand in olive oil or in myrrh gel and then place that in the vagina and squeeze with that the afterbirth, and when the afterbirth has been found, take hold of it little by little according to rectum position so that the mother does not suffer a violent push. Before, ensure that it is moved to the right and left sides with ease.
And if the mother's mouth is constricted, we have already recommended the cure with snuffing and with medicine of the pitcher with herbs.
But if it is not pushed out with all the causes that we have recommended, then be careful not to tire yourself out by doing that in repetition of abstraction, but rather ensure that what comes out of her mouth lies in the woman's lap, and then anoint that with ointment and tetrafarmacon; for that will make it hard soon enough and will be dissolved and pushed out.
But when she is raised up, there is evil odor to the head and the stomach, and that makes the woman sick; then ensure that she is administered below with smoking and convenient to that.
But some of the Ancients have already been treated with smoking of nasea and dry figs.
Form of instrument by which the woman is smoked for retention of menses and afterbirth:
It should be made of glass or of horn.
And the small end should be placed into the vagina and the wide end over the fire, and the smoking should be placed over the embers of the fire.
And hold that in while the smoking is consumed and repeat another.
On cure of anus of un-perforated child:
Young children and their anuses are not perforated, they only appear subtle and swollen. Then command the midwife to perforate with her finger that swelling; and if not, perforate it with a pointed spatula, and be careful not to touch the membrane.
Then place over that wool soaked in wine and oil; and then cure that with ointment while it is swollen.
But if you fear that it is swollen, then place in the slit a cannula for several days, and hold it when the child wants to defecate.
And then occurs swelling of the anus by hardening of clot or of abscess; then ensure that hardening is cut into, and then it is cured with what we have said of the cure and the lead.
On cure of fistulas which descend from below:
The fistulas which descend in the beginning of below pus is low and thick, those which descend near the anus exit or in the space of one part.
And it is a fistula or more.
And when that swelling is old and hard, and some times it is penetrated by these fistulas to the point of penetration.
And those are pushed out by what is exited from those through exit and by farting; and sometimes the woman suffers pain with that exit, and much fluid exits from them with a fart.
And sometimes from those fistulas some penetrate into the bladder, and into the throat of the vagina; and they penetrate into the junction of the crotch and into the notch of the anus.
And when the fistula is penetrated into the anus and does not penetrate, then you put your finger in the anus, and insert a thin probe of horn or iron into the fistula when it is swollen.
But if in that there is swelling, then insert into it a probe of lead or of horsehair into the fistula while you feel the probe or the hair in your finger.
And if you do not feel that at all or no process of exit nor farting nor swelling, as we have said, then be sure that it is not penetrated, and then try the cure.
And when the fistula is penetrated into the bladder or into the throat of the vagina, then its sign is emission of urine from that and prohibition of it going to that as the location is cured with medicine has been hardened.
But if it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the area around it, then the sign is that you should test it by trying to move it here if there is no tortuosity in the bone, and causing pain in the area around the affected part; and that you should apply a poultice to it from time to time; and that it does not respond to that medicine, nor is it consolidated with an ointment.
And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is no cure for all of them; and their cure is toil and vanity of the foolish doctors who are committed to them.
But in those that do not penetrate and are not ancient, healing with iron is expected according to what I have told you, and that which I have already tried.
And it is that the patient holds his hands over his head and lifts up his legs in between them, his thighs are inclined towards his belly, and then you try to insert a probe of lead or of ram's horn if there is tortuosity in the fistula, trying to find the spot where the probe goes in.
And if that feeling is around his neck, then you should insert your finger there into the neck.
And if you feel the probe already inserted into it, pushing itself in discovered, then you should know for certain that it is penetrating; and then do not work on it, for there is no healing in that, as we have said.
But nevertheless some say that it is healed in some men with vinegar.
And the medicine by which healing is expected in him is that you apply a fine cautery according to the size of the fistula, as it has been mentioned, and you insert that ignited one into the fistula until it comes around the neck; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all those fistulated meats that are like a feather cane are completely burned.
And then heal that with poultices wrapped in cloth until you have burned all those meats that are joined together, and then heal that with medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh, and if it is healed, well; and if not, then it will not be healed at any time by another cure.
And if it enters and does not penetrate into your finger which is in the anus, and between that and the probe there is a slight space of flesh or of membrane, then you cut the skin at the beginning of the fistula, and you dry up the skin, and you see that it dries up by means of the probe, and let it be in the fistula until the incision reaches the place where the end of the probe comes out, and through the probe it is released and cut.
And then cleanse those fistulated meats which are like a quill of feather and from which no cause is seen to come out.
But if blood flows out between you and your operation when you insert those meats, then the millstone which is and the pus which comes out is cauterized with fire or with a sharp medicine; for cautery with fire dries up the two habits: it is the hardening of those joined meats, and the cessation of the blood from the exudation of moistness.
And then heal that with poultices wrapped in cloth or with cotton until the wound feels dry, and then heal the ulcer with ointments which generate and consolidate hard flesh.
And those are medicines in which there is constriction and drying up; when then it is restored, it is already healed and you do not fear iteration.
But if the fistula already pierces into the anus and is elongated from it to the surface of the body, then you insert your finger into the anus and probe with it.
And therefore if you feel the probe and between you and it there is a slight space of membrane or of flesh, and it is close to penetration, then it is not an operation on him but according to way of trust and of hope.
That cause is administered in him one of three ways: either cauterize that as we have said; or dry it up until you can achieve the cavity of him so that you may insert the catheters and the cure is applied; and do not proceed with cutting so that you do not pierce the membrane containing the neck, and that you bring about on the patient the rising of the exudation against his will; and then heal that with what we have said for it heals quickly; or elongate that membrane and cleanse that pus which dries up near the anus as we have said, or with a probe or another instrument of acute extremity, and then cleanse those fistulated meats which are in the incision where you can pierce by means of crusting; and then strive to bring about the restoration of all the ulcer with cutting, and if the orifice of pus above is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open at the anus, and pus flows out more quickly through the patient. And sometimes the fistula is finished in this way: it is when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is on the side of the anus around the surface of the body with the skin and at the edge of the anus, then take a probe of perforated extremity which is prepared like a needle to pierce hearts according to this form.
And insert into that the thread wrapped in wool or around those; and then insert the probe with the thread into the fistula until you achieve the cavity of him.
But if it pierces near the edge of the anus inside, then you pull out that thread from that piercing as you insert your finger into the anus; and pull out the end of the thread and bring the two ends together, and tighten each one, and let it remain like that for a day or two, and when you have pierced the meat with the thread, loosen that so that those meats which are between the two ends of the thread are pulled.
And then heal the ulcer until it is consolidated and healed.
But if the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in whatever way it is prepared for you, unless it pierces into the anus, for it is not for you to do that which would pierce the membrane; and then heal with that which it has healed.
The form of the split spatula with which the fistula is split: its curvature is made acute and the other side not acute, so that you do not pierce that which is not necessary, as it happens.
Of suturing of hemorrhoids in which blood flows in the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids are according to two ways, for either they are between the anus resembling charcoal, or they are as if they were with grease of fat. And they are small and large, and the blood flows from them at all times, and they are moved, and they are outside the anus and on its edges.
But those which are outside the anus are according to the months of a little humidity, from which flows green water or a drop of blood with a continuous body, and they are according to the color of the body.
And the cure for that which is inside the anus is to command the patient to strain and to press in so that the anus dries up and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you grab it and suspend it with your nails or whatever you have those by your fingernail, and then pierce them down to their roots.
But if the nails are not held in them by their moisture and softening of them, then take those with an ashen cloth or a twig or a piece of wool, and pull them out with your teeth, and then insert them and pound upon them some powdered herbs over them after the incision, so that they are like cauterization; or cauterize them according to what is preceded in the chapter on cauterizing. And then treat these with the other cure until they are healed.
And if the anus does not obey defecation, then the patient should be anointed with ointment in which there is a little bit of biting substance, and he should be washed with the water that is in the basin, and it should cause the anus to open easily when the patient is squeezed.
But if the hemorrhoids protrude from the anus, then their cause is lighter, and it suffices that you grab them with your finger or that you grab them with a piece of cloth, insert them, and then treat them with what we have already said until they are healed.
And if you have cut them, then you should administer a suture in this way: take the wax wrapped around and insert it into the needle, and then extract the hemorrhoids at their upper parts, and let the needle pierce the root of the other part; wrap both ends of the wax around the part below the needle and crosswise; tighten the hemorrhoid firmly, and then squeeze the wax and take out the needle.
And do this to all of them, leaving one untouched, in order that the superfluous blood flows from it.
Then place a cloth steeped in rose oil or cerate over the anus, and order the patient to rest. And let that remain until it becomes dry; then treat the hemorrhoids with ointment or with another cure until they are healed.
And if they are old and the medicine does not help, then you should scrape them with a spathon or with your fingernail until they become moist and you see blood oozing from underneath, which prohibits their consolidation; then treat them until they are consolidated.
Then you should dry them more vehemently than before, until there is no blood and they are excoriated; then treat them until they are healed.
Know that hemorrhoids, which are also called piles, are a key point; they are not unless round knots according to the color of the body resembling the head of a nail, and they are found all over the body but especially in the lower parts below the feet and the fingers, and because of them you should experience pain.
Then the cause of what is in the circle of the nail should be pricked and held with tweezers or with a piece of cloth, and be pulled out from its root; then treat it.
And if you want, cauterize the second one that is mentioned in the previous chapter.
But warts are small rough round fistulas on the surface of the body, and they often appear on children's hands.
And its cure is that you stretch it and insert something into it, or that you dry it with wax or tar until it becomes dry. And if you want, cauterize it as we have said before, with fire or with sharp medicine.
But a mole is a small fuzzy or hairy lump on the surface of the body found especially on the back, and when it is rubbed, it feels like an ant bite; it is made all over the body.
And its cure is that you take a reed pen or a feather pen, make it very pointed, and place it on the mole so that it contains the circle of the reed pen; then you rotate your hand with the pen so that you insert what is inside the circle of the mole, place it on the back of the flesh, and eradicate the mole from its root.
And if you want, do this with an iron or steel reed pen as follows:
Let the end of the reed be very thin and blunt (so that it is not perforated) and wrapped so that over the finger it looks washed and rotated.
And if you want, cauterize the mole as it is mentioned before in the chapter of cautery.
Concerning the forms of the instruments that are used to give cautery:
Sometimes cautery is done with silver or brass or melted and hammered iron; and sometimes it is done with small or large instruments depending on what they are used for, because the cautery of small children should be small; and of those whose anuses are tight or painful, their cauteries should be small.
The form of large cautery is:
The end of the reed where the pouch is tied should be wide as follows; and it should have a distinction where the pouch is tied like this many times.
And the lower end which is inserted into the anus should be blunt  (so it is not open) like a lion's tooth, getting thinner; and on one side of the reed there should be two holes, and on the other side there should be one hole, and the size of the hole should be according to the thickness of the thread and bigger for the thicker ones.
And let the pouch in which the medicines of animal bladder or sheepskin are placed, and let its root be one palm.
And it should be perforated with many holes as it is rotated; and if the space between the holes is the thickness of the finger.
Then insert into those holes strong tar that is made of ten tar, or wind it with that; and fasten the pouch with that; and when the pouch is placed on it, squeeze the end of the cautery between two distinctions with a strong constriction, and then cauterize with that each hole: But the quality of cauterizing with that is that you fill the pouch with medicine, which should be warmed according to the amount of tolerance of the patient; and take care that it is not too hot nor too cold.
Then the patient should lie on his back, and raise his legs up and place underneath him a board or a plank; then smear the end of the cautery with oil or egg white or mucilage of fenugreek or something similar; and then insert it into the anus easily, and then the minister takes the pouch and squeezes it with two fingers and expels from the cautery all that is inside it with strength until everything in the cautery is evacuated; then take out the cautery and let the patient raise his legs against the wall.
And if the medicine forces him to defecate, he should hold it as much as he can; and if he sleeps with it for a whole night, it is better to wake up.
But if you cauterize him in the diseases of looseness of the belly and he defecates a lot, then you should repeat the cautery until it is healed.
And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or hard lumps, then let the cautery be very thin and sharp, of the cauteries with which children are cauterized.
Concerning the cure of wounds:
I have already said in the division of the cure of wounds what suited the free part, and I have also mentioned the cure of them with the hand and medicines according to the complement.
Therefore I say that wounds are diversified according to what caused them and according to the place where they happened.
And the causes for which wounds are made are sometimes due to a stone, or insertion of a spear or knife, or a punch with a lance, or a stick, or an arrow, or something similar from many causes.
But the pain that is in parts of the body are like the plague which afflicts the head, neck, feet, belly, or armpits, and resembles those of the limbs.
And I have described the cure for some plagues so that you understand that argument and rule about other plagues.
I will begin with simple plagues of the head, for the memory of compounded ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, I say that when a simple plague occurs in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to a stone or something similar that has broken the skin and there is a large wound that you fear might develop into an abscess, then you should immediately perform a craniotomy and phlebotomy, according to the amount of vertigo the patient experiences if no other reason prohibits phlebotomy, especially if the blood that flows from the wound is minimal.
And perform phlebotomy on the opposite side of the affected area; and let the patient abstain from food and drink, as well as heavy meals.
But if some cause prohibits phlebotomy, then let the patient reduce their intake of food and avoid wine and meat.
And apply to the wound, if an abscess has formed, a poultice soaked in rose oil or wine in which styptic herbs have been infused.
But if there is no sign of an abscess, then apply to the wound, if it is fresh and the air has not changed that powder which I will mention shortly below.
And if the air has changed its nature, then apply some ointment until it is healed.
But if the wound is large or caused by a cut or something similar, and its lips are not closed together by pus, then close them with stitches as I will describe in the section on stitching.
But if the wound is exposed to the bone and there is no retention of pus except for a small suspension, then insert into it and properly treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh by applying a poultice on the broken skin, and order the patient to abstain from food that is coarse: onions, garlic, and their likes, until it is healed.
And if you find putrefaction in the wound and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut away all that is rotten and throw it out, then properly treat the wound.
But if in these plagues there is an artery or vein from which blood can flow and it is not cut off by medicines, then probe the artery, and if you find it uncut, then insert a sponge or ligature into it; and if necessity compels you to do otherwise than what we have said, then cauterize it until the blood is stanched.
And if these plagues are simple and small, then their cause is usually slight; therefore, you should apply to them this powder which hardens before the air changes it.
And the manner of making the powder is this: take one part olive oil, two parts dragon's blood, and three parts powdered alumen; let all be well ground and sifted, then fill the wound with it and bind it tightly so that it dries over the wound, then coagulate the blood.
And properly bind it above with powder and lint, and do not loosen it as long as the wound is not abscessed, for if you do, the medicine will not take effect.
And sometimes one can make it alone without dragon's blood when you do not have any at hand.
And this method of treatment is done for large wounds when one deems it proper to apply it and the air has not altered them.
And if the air has altered them, especially in summer time, then do not use this powder, but instead treat them as we have said, by applying some soothing ointments, or by making a poultice of wheat flour with water and honey so that it becomes a paste; then properly treat the wounds with the other treatment until they are healed.
But if a bone fracture occurs with the wound and it is small, then remove it with tweezers.
And I will describe the cure for fractures of the head in what follows.
Of wounds on the neck:
But if a wound occurs on the neck, then it does not differ in treatment from a simple wound on the head.
But if the neck's nerve or artery is cut, then if it is a nerve, it should not be treated with anything that causes violent contraction, as well as aconite and arnica which are like vitriol and its likes because they harm nerves and cause constriction. And do not apply to the wound anything that causes any heat, for the substance of nerves is sensitive to heat and their continuity is through the brain, which is the source of all members.
And if it is treated with mild medicines, as well as being washed with tepid water, any poultice infused in rose oil or other oils, and oozing when washed with tepid water and the other stones according to this manner, and moist bandages.
But if the wound is large, then administer stitches, or tie together its lips, and properly treat it with powder until it is healed.
But if the wound is deep or there is pus in it, then pierce it in its most depressed part.
But if the wound has cut an artery and blood flows from it, then stop or dry it, or ligature it, or cauterize it if necessity compels you to do so.
But if the windpipe or all of it is cut and the neck' veins are saved, then close the lips of the wound with stitches over the windpipe and do not touch it; release that and return it to its natural shape, and properly bind it with a decent bandage, and let it be bound by a tight bandage for several days; then treat it with ointments in which there is contraction and excitement until it is healed.
But if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then pierce it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract them all that you can; and what you cannot extract, let it be so that the wound suppurates, and the separation of it is relieved.
And if the wound is recent, then apply powder to it which I have described. But if a fistula has formed in the wound, then treat it with what its memory will bring to you later in this chapter.
If it is a wound from a spear or knife, and you see its depth, then consider, for if the patient is pale, know that the wound is deadly.
And if there is no depth to it and the wound is recent with its blood, then apply to it in the first hour powder, and do not bind it tightly so that the blood is not retained in its depth and returning to the heart and the patient does not faint, but apply an attractive ointment to it, and loose it twice a day.
And if the ointment is not at hand, then you should stop the orifice of the plague with a piece of wool so that it sucks out what comes from the humidity; and make the patient sleep on his side so that what is inside him can flow out.
But if three or more days have passed since the plague and the patient has not experienced spasms, nor a bad heart tremor, nor a stricture of the throat, and you see his other dispositions are good, then know that he is saved from the plague; then heal him with leeches and other remedies until he is healed.
But if his healing is delayed and the wound remains open for a long time, then know that a fistula has formed; therefore, heal it according to its nature.
And if the plague is a cut from a spear or dagger and is superficial on the foot or leg, then heal it with what is preceded by sewing, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
But if there has already been damage to the bone and pieces of it are sticking out, then you should twist the wound and cut to extract those pieces, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then let them remain inside until the wound is healed, for their extraction is painful.
And for other plagues that occur in other limbs, the cure is the same as what we have already said.
Of plagues of the belly:
The disorder that occurs in the belly is either great, or small, or medium-sized.
And a small disruption is made difficult in another way, and you see that their reduction is more difficult if you do not stop the intrusion of them into their place immediately, for it opens and swells so that its interior is made difficult.
And therefore the best disruption is medium-sized, for in that one the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, just as it is difficult in the two species mentioned before.
And know that there are four ways of sewing the belly, but two sutures are common to all other sutures of the body.
And two other sutures are specific to the others plagues, but nonetheless they are more specific in the sewing of the belly.
I will return to you each one with exposure and explanation.
Therefore I say that when the plague is small and there has been some cause of the intestine through it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of two ways: either by smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine is received inflammation due to the chill of the air.
And therefore when that is so, you should warm it in such a way that you immerse a sponge or damp cloth in water with only teasel, or you gather in squinant water, and cyperum, and spic, and embrocate with that the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes it does this in the thing in which there has been constriction, and it is better than water alone in resolving inflammation.
And therefore when you see the inflammation is resolved, then you should moisten the intestine with water in which there is added mallows and alder, for by that the interior of it is eased with little cause.
But if its interior is not eased by this cure, then split the disruption a little with an instrument by which the hemorrhoids are split.
And the first cure is better when it is not cut, and there is no need to dry it up and starve it.
Of the instrument, know its shape:
One part of it is bent acute, and the other part not acute, and the end be subtle, and its subtlety not be like a spatula, but rather be blunt a little.
And therefore when the plague is enlarged and comes out of the intestine, then you should see that its reduction is according to its natural shape, in its proper place, if possible, for that is better.
But when the disruption is wide and it is in the lower part of the belly, then you should have the patient lie on his back, and place his legs above his head; and if it is in the higher part of the belly, then you should place his head and feet below.
And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then pay your attention and consideration to that always so that the part in which there is the plague is higher than the other.
And thus you should manage this in great plagues and in medium-sized plagues.
And in small plagues, do what is prepared for you, and let the minister be between your fingers, holding the plague all around with his hand and uncovering it to see that there is no sewing any cause whatsoever.
And this is the common way of sewing: one where you take the needle, or count of needles according to the amount of the amplitude of the plague; and let go of the end of the disruption of the finger, and tighten the needle one, and then you do not put thread in the two ends of the string, with two ends of the thread that is below the fingers, within the fingers, so that you make the needle penetrate from that part; and you have added the two ends of the thread and the two ends of the thread, and so you have made four turns.
And then tighten with double thread around the needle, and sometimes from two parts together, and then bring the two lips and the plague by gathering decently; and let go of the thickness of the finger and take another needle in that, and then tie it with a thread as it was with the first needle; and do not cease doing this if there is a need for needles until all the contraction of the plague is completed.
And let the needles be between thinness and subtlety, for thin needles penetrate quickly into the flesh; and thick ones are of difficult intrusion into the flesh, and therefore let them be thinner in subtlety and thickness.
And let the needle not be pushed into two ends of the wound near each other, so that the flesh is not quickly split and the plague opens before its consolidation.
And they are not prolonged in sewing so that the plague is not prohibited from consolidation.
And then insert the ends of the needles so that they do not tickle the patient when he wakes from his sleep; and you shall place over the sutures expanded flours from all sides, which have the ends of the needles; and let go of them when you know that the plague is consolidated.
And these species of sewing with needles in this manner is more convenient in small plagues, for they have in their sewing one needle or two or around them.
But the second sewing is common: and it is that you manage with sewing the four ends, of the wound and two ends of the thread, in one go, with a needle in which there is thread wrapped around in both thinness and thickness.
And then when you have the needle penetrated these four ends, reduce the needle of that part from which it started, so that the thread drawn back goes through the most superficial part of the plague, so that the sewing is according to sewing with cloth in which the clothes are tight.
And place between each stitch an amount equal to the thickness of the little finger.
This stitch is known to men.
And with this stitch I healed the wound of a man in his belly who had been stabbed with a knife, and it was an injury of a palm's width, and it had exited the intestines about two palms from the navel and it was a disruption in the middle of the body; and then I healed him after the intestine had been punctured through the wound for twenty-four hours.
And the wound was healed in about fifteen days, and he was cured, and he is doing well now, and his condition has returned to normal.
And the other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and by a miracle I healed him without ointment, for it was in a place where ointments were not effective or any medicine, but I placed cotton wool on the wound two times a day and washed it frequently with honey water until it was healed.
But I will describe two kinds of stitches according to the narration of the Lord.
And you should start with the stitch of the cord, and insert the needle from the outside inwards.
And then the needle penetrates through the cord and the surrounding tissues according to its direction and length throughout the whole body, and leaves the end of the thread in which you inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate from the inside out on the other end of the body into the other end of the thread.
And when you have made that one penetrate, then you make the other one penetrate in that end of the body from the inside out; and leave the end of the thread on this side, and make the needle penetrate into the other end from the outside in.
And make it penetrate with that penetration with which you make the other one penetrate in the end of the body which is inside, so that everything penetrates.
And then start from this side of the body and sew that with the end which is of the cord on the other side, and pull the needle out of the cord which has been penetrated, and then return it into that cord and sew the end of the thread which is on the other side of the body with that end of the body; and pull that one out of the cord which belongs to him.
And do that once and again, and do that another time within so that you sew everything which is outside according to that example.
And the sum of this method of sewing is that you sew with a stitch of skin in which the skin is sewn, so that you sew the cord one time from the end of the thread, and then you sew the other end so that it is completed.
But the second special stitch which I describe is called Gualia, and it is made of silk thread and rewoven through him, so that you sew it according to its shape with which some doctors sew it, in such a way that they unite each part to its corresponding part according to nature; and they apply one end of him to the other end of the body, and that is done according to how I have taught you.
Take the needle and put it in the end of the body towards you from the outside, and make it penetrate to the inside in that sole, and leave two ends of the thread; and then turn the needle and make it penetrate from the inside out into two ends of the thread.
And then turn those ones, and make the others penetrate from the inside out into two ends of the body which are on the contrary side.
And this method of sewing is better than common stitching, and it is the stitch which I previously described in memory.
This is the thread of Gualia.
And some say that the stitch of the belly is straightened with two needles, so you put in these one by one a thread, and start with the penetration of the needle from what is facing you, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the sewing of those who sew bodies together mouth to mouth.
And know that when there is a disruption in the middle of the belly, then its sewing is more difficult than in other places of the belly.
But the medication of wound is judgment of the other wounds.
The cause is that when you see the wound fresh with its blood in front of the air which alters it, and reduce the intestine and sew it and adjust it decently, then put on it powder which makes flesh.
And if the air has already altered the wound, then put on it some ointments which are at your presence so that they make a hard pebble and draw in the threads, and so that the body and the wound are consolidated; and then heal it as the healing of the other wounds so that it is healed.
But if you do not have the medicines at your presence, then put it on immediately, because as soon as it starts to boil, change it two times a day, and permute it two times a day, just as I have taught you, until it is healed, for you do not need other medicine in various conditions when the wounds are simple.
But if you fear that the wound will spread to the principal members, then take a woolen thread and submerge it in oil of excellent quality, or in rose oil, and put it on the circumference of the places which are between the ankles and below the heels.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your intestines, especially when it happens several times, then scorch that with black styptic wine, and especially if the putrefaction is caused by the intestine and has made an opening penetrating into its cavity.
And know that which is of the gross intestine is a more difficult cure than that which is in the subtle intestines.
And it is of difficult cure because the intestine which is called "gegunu" does not receive healing of wound which pierces in him from all; and that is because of the great multitude of veins which are in him and because of his magnitude which is in those, and because of the subtlety of his body and because of its proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if what proceeds from the wound is the thread, and you obtain it fresh, then reduce it according to your instruction with which you reduce the intestines evenly.
But if it has passed through him and is already black or green, then tie that with a thread over the place which is blackened in him, so that there comes flux of blood, for in the thread there are veins and arteries.
And then insert that which is another that, and put two ends of the thread hanging from the end below the wound out of him, so that over you be elevated the attraction of him because of the lowering of the thread and the emission of the pus of the wound.
Memory of the wounds when they happen in the intestine.
When disruption happens in the intestine and it is slight, then it is possible that it is restored in some people, because I saw one who was wounded in his belly with a spear thrust, and the wound was of the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and made fistula, and he had an emission from him and swelling.
Then I pursued the cure of him when it was not believed in his healing, but I followed subtilizing him until he was healed and the place was consolidated.
And after I saw the site already consolidated, I advised the patient that he should take care of himself and avoid any accident or evil in his belly; and not to cause any harm by this evil accident, but rather to remain in his usual dispositions of eating and drinking, and also go into bath and exercise his body.
And some experienced people have said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied according to this manner: you take some large leaves; then you attach the two lips of the wound and place one of those leaves with an open mouth over the two lips of the wound; so when it bites down on those and tightens its mouth, cut off its head, for it will adhere and not dissolve.
And then place another ant nearby, and do not cease to do this with ants one after the other according to the quantity of the entire wound.
And then return that [the intestine] and sew up the wound; and let those leaves remain attached in the intestine until it is healed, and may no harm befall the patient.
And it is possible that the intestine be sewn with a thin thread made from an animal's intestine, since it is more delicate; and you take the end of one of these intestinal threads, make it very bare, and then sew the end of it to the intestine, wrapped around, and insert this thread through needles and sew it up with that, and return that [intestine] to its disruption.
And this manner of sewing with ants is not but according to the way of confidence and hope.
But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, then there is not but subtlety, and not a complete healing of it.
Of the cure of ulcers and fistulas.
Know that any wound or abscess when it becomes old and antique, and is made into an ulcer, and is not consolidated and suppurates all the time and is not healed, then, in whatever part of the body it may be, universally it is named a fistula, and we call it azukem.
And a fistula according to truth is a knotted, tough, white nodule, without pain, and with a cavity like that of a penis; and because of this it is named by some rizata, i.e. penis.
And in some people it is moist, which suppurates; and very often the moisture is discharged in a few hours. And sometimes this moisture is thick, and it is little, and it is gross, and it is subtle.
I have already shown all those causes, and their signs, and the healing of them with medicines in the division.
And now I will make you know the cure for a fistula which is made through way of operation with the hand.
Know that fistulas happen in all the members of the body; for some of them fall to the large veins and arteries, or to the nerves, or to the brain, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to one of the ribs, or to one of the vertebrae of the back, or to any of the composed joints by composition as that of the hand and the foot; and some fall to the proximity of the principal member and of its like.
And therefore that of these fistulas which are according to this manner is one of the illnesses of difficult healing, and does not receive cure, and occupation with it is travail and ignorance.
And if there is one of the fistulas whose depth does not reach to these places which I have said, and you expect and believe in the healing of it, and wish to come to knowledge of it, then take a probe of iron or steel, and if the fistula goes straight, then explore it with that.
But if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it with a probe of subtle lead, because lead with the lightness of its body is drawn away and bent according to the tortuosity.
And if the fistula has terrible movements, it is not possible for you to make signs upon it with a probe.
Then, christen the orifice through its orifices, because the moisture by which you christen it goes through other orifices and flows from them.
And then inquire carefully, according to what manner you can know if here there is a bone or nerve, and the cavity of the fistula is distant or nearby, or it is one fistula whose many orifices are over that, all by the sum of your strength, with your inquiry, with which you inquire the patient, and the invention of pain through your compression with the hand upon the site, and similar to the signs and to the causes accidental to the apostema.
And when you have been through all those causes with true state, then go to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider if the fistula apparent is nearby or in salty site, distant from joint, or of nerve, or of artery, or of vein, or of one of the sites which I have said.
Then dry the fistula according to what has been said of the nature of it, and watch that which is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and that which is born in the orifice of the flesh, or of thistle and its like, and heal that within as it should be healed.
But if the fistula is of distant depth and it is straight, then see that you pierce it in the preon as much as to you seems possible, and then cleanse that of all its corrupted flesh; and then administer hot water wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert those within into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood with iron.
And do that with that several times within so that the sharp medicine corrodes all that which is suppurating in the cavity of the fistula of the corruption.
And then restore that with unguents which engender healthy flesh within so that it is healed.
But if it is not healed by that, then you cauterize it according to how we have recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and it is because of you certified that, then you inquire and dry that according to how we have said, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or of principal member as we have said.
But if the bone is discovered in you and there is in it some corruption and blackness, then cut that within so that the corruption be removed entirely; and then heal that with that which it becomes flesh within so that it is healed.
And if it is not healed and suppurates as it did, then know that you have not reached the entire eradication of the corruption; and then uncover it again and explore it carefully and make the reason of it and the cleansing of it with your very strong right hand, and then restore that.
And therefore if he is healthy, then it is good; but if not, then you should know that this corruption is in the distant depth of the body and has not been conquered, and so your only course of action is to leave it as it is.
And if the bone that is rotten is small, or you are able to pull it out, then pull it out with fine forceps which are suitable for this task.
And if they are loose bones, then remove them all with great care, and do not leave any of them behind due to your own negligence.
But if you have any concerns about the humors and there is no fear or error in their insertion, then cut into those members or flesh here and free the bones.
But if you are not prepared to remove the bones in this moment, then place over the wound what will cause it to fester, and leave that within so that it is around those bones of flesh and of ligaments, and guard the wound so that it does not heal, and the incision which you have made during your operation remains restricted.
Have you, if you fear, place over it a piece of cloth soaked in vinegar or a piece of cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment, or one of the green balms, for when these members fester and the bones are separated from them, their attraction is alleviated.
But if it is a large bone like the bone of the leg or the thigh, or similar to them, and that which is rotten is only its surface, then cut away that corruption with a razor only as far as it can be removed, and close the wound afterwards.
But if that which is rotten is a large portion and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close this up and cut into that place where the corruption has occurred, and cure that so that it is consolidated.
And you shall account to me for anything that happens to a man in his thigh due to your negligence during your operation.
A young man about 30 years old had pain in his thigh, and from the soft parts within was matter that went into the thigh, and it was pustular matter with a large pustule, and there was not to him any extrinsic cause.
And so time was prolonged with that because of the error of the doctors until the pustule opened up and matters flowed out, and his cure was stopped only when the leg was fistulous and many orifices opened in him through which pus and humors of the body flowed.
And so he was cured by many doctors for about two years, and no wisdom was found in them but in their art, until I was called upon.
And I saw his leg and the matters that flowed from him out of those orifices, for a great while; and indeed his body was all swollen and his color was yellow.
And so I inserted the probe into one of those orifices and reached the bone.
And then I probed and examined all the orifices and found that they all led to different parts of the leg.
And so I cut and inserted into one of those orifices where I discovered an opening in the bone, and found it rotten, and it was already black and corrupt, and a portion of the leg was already corrupted where it had penetrated into the membrane.
And then I applied that which to me was revealed and prepared for the uncovered bone.
And I found that it was not in the bone but only that corruption which I removed and applied, and I had already broken it up.
And then the wound's restoration was applied with medicine for a long time, and it did not heal.
And then I examined and discovered the bone again for the second time on the first discovery, and found continuous corruption in the bone.
And I applied that which appeared to me from that corruption, and then I caused the cure of it and restoration, and it was not restored.
And then I discovered him another time and did not cease to insert the bone little by little particularly and probed its restoration, and it was not restored until I had cut around an inch of it, and that was extracted with its marrow, and then I restored it with medicines, and it is lightly consolidated and healed.
And it is not necessary to operate on him again or cut him again except for the disposition of his pulse and for the lack of his tolerance and fear of death, for he was overcome in all hours by excess of evacuation syncope ill.
And so he is healed entirely, and nothing remains in the place of the hard bone; and his disposition in his body is made good and his strength has returned to him; and his dispositions are converted and no harm comes to him in walking nor damage in any cause.
But if the bone is prominent in the place of the body and has been removed, then you should proceed with that second to this manner: and you should take ligament and strengthen that at the end of that prominent bone, and command someone to extend it in their hand; and pause that woolen ligament most gross from the first ligament; and then ligate that over the flesh which is beneath the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you attract the flesh to the parts below, and you discover the flesh over the place which you wish to cut so that the saw does not cut the flesh.
And pause fust or table beneath the bone properly, for when you do that the saw is not prohibited from cutting the corrupt flesh.
And that the sawing be on the rotten place little by little, for if it is in the concavity of the bone's corruption and does not appear to its feeling, and force it to saw another time.
And if the bone is rotten and not prominent, before that is one party continued with the other, and the corruption is in the middle place or in a part of it, then you discover the flesh all around; and then pause fust beneath it, and then saw that from the first party where the corruption is so that the sawing is continued on the other party.
And let the sawing be according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, examine that rotten joint and saw the bone where it is continued from the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there is not reason in him except error.
And if the corruption is in the breast of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, you should inquire into the corruption in whatever manner it appears to you, and cut that open, and close it according to each disposition which is possible for you, and with each error be straightened to you when no vein or nerve causes you harm.
And you should know which are the saws and the razors to cut these bones are much according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, and their thicknesses and subtleties and great sizes and small, and their hardnesses and rarities; so that you prepare for every kind of operation a convenient instrument for that operation.
And you should know that operation implies for you on the kind of instrument from which you lack experience and long and great knowledge of the ways of this art, and testimony of ways of illnesses, for when you have them by your masters that which is convenient for the instruments to every illness.
Here is the translation of the first sentence: The shape of a saw:
The shape of another saw:
The shape of another large saw:
The shape of a razor: Let the head of this razor be according to the shape of a star-shaped key, and its points according to the shape of the points of the staphylea.
And it is not convenient unless the heads of the joints are rubbed when they are corrupted, or the large mouth is widely open.
The shape of a smaller razor:
The shape of a wide razor:
The shape of another saw made decently: let it be made of iron, and the sharpness of it of steel, and the handle of it of a wooden dagger decently made. Its shape:
The shape of a razor in which there is a cavity:
The shape of another subtle razor:
The shape of another razor with a curved extremity:
The shape of a small razor resembling a tent:
The shape of another smaller chisel:
The shape of another chisel; this one resembling a razor, and its extremity is like a saw, and it is used in many places on the bones:
The shape of a saw which is convenient for cutting into bones:
And its extremity is triangular and acute.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly to all the causes that we have said about razors and chisels and saws.
Of cutting extremities and of the serration of bones.
The extremities can be affected either by an intrinsic or extrinsic cause, or as you will have medicated that corruption by treatment with those medicines and the treatment does not help, or if you see the corruption going deeper into the member in which case there is no cause known, then know that when you cut into that member in order for the patient to escape death or a worse evil that is a greater defect of the member.
And the sign of that to which it happens, is that the member becomes black in order that it may be cured as if by fire, or it becomes blackened close to where that putrefaction occurred within that member that affects the whole body; and therefore cauterize it with a chisel.
And similarly if the cause of the corruption is a blow from some poisonous causes such as from sea scorpion or viper or rattlesnake, or others.
And if the corruption or the blow is in the extremity of the finger, then cut off the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it may go into the hand.
And similarly if it affects the hand, then cut off that part from the joint of the bone, and do not give space to the corruption so that it may go into the forearm.
And if instead, then cut off the arm at the bend in the joint.
And if the corruption goes further and turns around the elbow, then there is death to the patient; and to add another cause in treatment is a quantity of virtue.
And similarly cut off the toe when there is corruption instead of the finger on the foot, then cut it off at one of the joints.
And if it affects the sole of the foot, then cut off the whole foot. But if it enters into the jaw, then cut off the leg at the joint of the jaw.
And if the corruption has already come upon the jaw, then there is no remedy except dismissal, and to leave the patient to die.
And the way of cutting off a member or of cauterizing it is that you tighten the ligament at the part below which you want to cut, and tighten another ligament over the spot; and stretch one ligament to the parts below, and stretch the other ligament on top; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments so that it is split lengthwise so that all the flesh is exposed; and then cut or cauterize.
And let there be applied a cloth of linen to all the parts so that it does not touch the spot, and let the patient come to the doctor injured tightly bound and cauterized.
But if it happens that there is bleeding of blood when the wounds are opened, then you should cauterize the spot tightly, or put on it some powders to stop the bleeding; and then return to your medicine so that it may be completed.
And then bind the wounded member with a ligament in the most convenient way, and cure that which is healed.
And he said to you that which was given to a man on his foot, this medicine accidentally caused him to have blackness in his foot from scorching which was likened to burning of fire.
And that corruption first occurred in his toe and spread to all the foot.
And then that man prepared for himself remedies more powerful so that the cure would go to the member with the force of it, and he cauterized that foot at the joint, and healed it with fire.
Long ago there happened to him that corruption in the finger of the hand.
And then it came to me, and so I perceived that excess went over the hand with that which was placed on the hand of medicines, then the purification of the body; and the excess was not stopped and began going to another finger as it began in the hand.
And he called me to cut off the hand of it, and I did not want to do that hoping about the effect of that excess, but when I saw that I had to cut off the hand of it dead, for the virtue of the patient was greater than usual.
And since he despaired of me, he returned to his land and it happened to him that that man prepared and cut off all his hand, and it was healed.
And I have not added this narrative except that it be an aid to what is taken from this illness, and that it be a sign by which it is understood and according to which it is done.
Of cure of ulcers and quality of cauterization with medicines.
When there happens suppuration in some fleshy members and the suppuration is prolonged so that it makes collection of pus, and then it becomes broken and perforated, and the pus has been discharged from it, and the hole is opened as if it were a vessel, and there is not any impression on bone or on ligament, it is called sinuous, and if it does not become suppurative, and does not make fistula.
But however, if the suppuration is prolonged so that the corruption infects some member, then it is called fistula and not ulcer.
And the cure of it is that you cut off that vein all around as it is turned, and more greatly when it is cauterized and made with a cloth, and cauterize that not adheres to the spot because of its corruption.
But if you expect that the vein adheres and that corruption does not have happened because of the former cauterization, and in the vein there has been a passage of face, then you cure it with an ointment.
And if you consider that sinuousness, and then it is great, and the arm which is seen has a fetid odor, then cauterize it with Egyptian medicine which is made of oil and vinegar and resin mixed together, and let them be applied on the wound in an ointment, and let them be tied over the fire so that the medicine melts.
And then you take what is necessary from him and dissolve it with water and honey; and you enema the rectum with that, and strengthen its opening, and leave the medicine in there for the amount of two hours.
And then you extract that with a sponge; and do this for as many days until the rectum is cleansed and the wound is healed.
And sometimes it is enema with ash water when you do not have this medicine available; and you take ashes from wood and put water on it; and then you strain that and enema with it until you are convinced that the rectum is healed.
And if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or ash water, then enema with water and honey with ground zinnias mixed in it, and enema with wine and honey mixed together as well since the property of honey is to cleanse and wash while wine adheres to the rectum and especially when there is excess of dryness and stiffness.
And when you do this several times and you are convinced that the rectum is healed, then enema with something that makes the flesh grow back in there.
And you should take a thin ointment and dissolve it with rose oil and styptic wine, or you can enema with some other medicines and ointments that have the properties I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
And if the opening of the rectum is narrow and cannot receive the tip of the syringe, then you should gradually enlarge it with a small iron instrument and place a sponge wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment inside until it is enlarged.
And similarly, if the opening is large, then you sew up the edges of it and leave a quantity in which the syringe can fit without adding anything to it.
And if the opening from which the intestine hangs is elevated upwards towards the upper parts, then dry that place with pus in the lower part so that the intestine can hang down, for when the intestine is constricted in the depth of the rectum the flesh is generated there.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the rectum within the range of the pus base as you want, then you will be forced to prepare that member with preparation so that the intestine runs slightly according to how you see fit and so that there is no cause for the intestine to be retained in there.
But the one that is over the rectum opening, which heals throughout the hour on its own as it dries out whatever is inside the intestine. And so that you can tell if what comes out of the intestine is a lot or little, or digested, or not digested.
And with that you consider the place of that rectum, if the patient feels pain there or not, and if there is an abscess there.
And when your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that is excreted over the rectum opening already adhered or a formed adhesion, then you loosen it on the third day, and when you loosen the plaster, then you change the sheet and renew the ointment.
But if a subtle humor exudes from the rectum for a long space of time, then do not despair about the adhesion to it, for its healing is proper, for some people have slow generation of flesh in their plasters while others have the opposite happen to them.
And if the intestine exudes undigested food for several days, then you know that the rectum does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the rectum is delayed and the cause prolonged, then you reduce the moisture in the medicines, and if the medicines are wet in their substance and in their strength, they are dried as with thin ointment when there is excess of addition of wax.
And the best medicine with which it is treated is to take thin ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and put over it old wine in its substance, and then you test that on it and use it.
And when there is no intestine, use thin ointment, honey when it has been cooked until it is thickened, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe, and grind them both and powder them over the honey as it sits on the fire, and then smear that on a sheet and strengthen it over the rectum; and smear it with the honey which you have cooked until it is thickened, and powder it on a sheet and strengthen it.
And sometimes they are administered with a long aristology and roots of celestial lily (and it is celestial lily) and farina of worms and centaurea, and use those simples or adjust, grind them and sift the powder over the honey which you have cooked; and use it.
And if the rectum is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, then you know that the corruption is in its depth, and then it makes an incision in the bones or other hard members or tendons; then you treat it with a fistula treatment as mentioned above.
Of treatment of panarici and nail scrapings and added digit incision and section.
Panarici is an abscess that arises under the nail of the finger of the hand or the toe, and strongly affects the other fingers, and when it is prolonged and its healing is slow, or is an abscess of cauterized abscess, or is corrupted, and it causes intestine to run inside which corrodes the roots of the nail, and strongly corrupts all that, and strongly permeates its corruption into the bone within which there is a foul odor, and the extremity of the finger is affected, and its color becomes dark.
And therefore when you have that with what we have said in the division and do not bring about your healing, then cover that with iron completely over all the superfluity which is raised from the nail and then cauterize the wound indeed, for cauterizing quickly helps in that.
But if the bone is intact and the nail is healed, and the additions of the nail grow again into the fingers, and they begin to puncture and pierce it, then cover that with a thin thread under the angle of the nail which punctures the flesh, and push it upwards and insert the flesh with ease, and put over that medicines that burn corrosively so that everything is healed. And then treat that with ointments so that it is healed.
But if the corruption has already permeated into the bone, then cover that and extract it, for there is no time when it will be healed as long as the bone is corrupted.
And if the rottenness and corruption go into the finger, then insert that into one of the nuts according to how it is affected, and then treat that so that it is healed.
But if the nail has a concussion or abrasion, and it has pain there at the beginning, then cover that with fleubotomes on the patient, and then dry the nail with a pointed spatulum with a transverse section on it above, and be careful that the section does not permeate into the flesh underneath the nail, for you will cause violent pain to the patient, and you will increase the cause of pain to the nativitas of the flesh with superfluous generation in the place; and then treat that place with what reduces pain.
This text is indeed a mixture of several languages! I will do my best to provide a translation:
And some of them are born in the root of the joint, or their origin is in some nuts of the fingers. He who is born in some fingers of the hand is not bad, and he who is born in the joints is very painful.
And of those who are born fleshy, the incision is easier, and you should insert it into its root with a spatulate instrument.
But of him who is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; therefore beware of its dissection.
But for him who is born in the finger joints, you must insert at the beginning into the flesh with a round incision within the bone, and then cut with one of those saws appropriate to that, and then cure that within which is healed.
But the consolidation which happens to the fingers between them, whether due to swelling or by the nature of the person who is born like that, or due to the hardening of a wound, or due to burning fire, or due to something similar, then you must cut that consolidation so that the fingers return to their natural shape.
And then place between them fabrics soaked in rose oil so that they are not consolidated quickly, and separate those fabrics, or place between them a thin lead plate so that it is consolidated according to the person.
And similarly, if consolidation happens in some fingers with the palm, then you must cut that consolidation according to how it is prepared and convenient for the figure of the member.
Of incisions of vultures, they are varicose.
Varicose veins are varicose, and they are thick wrapped veins full of melancholy superfluities which come in movements of the body's parts, and their greatest occurrence is in the legs, especially in the legs of travelers, laborers, and carriers.
Therefore, you should administer the purging of the body from black cholera several times with strong expulsion, and then let the patient bleed from the basilic vein.
But the cure of them is according to two ways: one is that it is cut and the black blood is drawn out; the other way is that the vein is elevated and all of it is extracted.
The incision of it is according to this way: moisten the leg at the beginning with warm water so that the gross blood is dissolved, which is feculent from the leg, and then tighten the patient's leg at the highest part of the thigh into the highest part of the crotch with a bandage, and then cut the vein in one, or two, or three places with a broad incision, and then elevate the black blood with your hand from the lower part of the leg upwards, inside out, so that the amount of blood you want to be expelled is expelled, and which the strength of the patient can bear.
And then ligate that, and command him to abstain from cholera-black generating foods.
And repeat the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full and this is noticed by the patient.
But the elevation of them is according to this way: you raise the leg of the patient, if it is moved by them, and then put him in a bath and moisten his leg with warm water so that it softens and the veins are dilated; or that he be exercised by strong exercise, if a bath is not available to you, so that the member is heated.
And then cut the cord in the direction of the vein by incision in the long or behind him according to the leg due to the thigh, or in the bottom due to the foot.
And then open the cord with uncios and gouge out the vein from every part so that it appears to the sense, and it is necessary for you to notice that this changes into blackness.
And so, with the evaporation of it and of the cord, you will see that white one is stringy.
And then you put that down with a ligature so that it is elevated and drained of the cord, and suspend that with golden wire.
And then cut another incision just below that incision for three fingers, and then gouge out the cord from above the vein so that it appears.
And then elevate that and insert that into the posterior incision due to the foot, and then extract that and elevate it so that it is expelled by the second incision, and then extract that from the incision which is above that.
And do that so that you extract it from the incision which is highest or highest of all the incisions, so that all of it is expelled; and then insert that.
And if it does not obey you to extract and elevate, then insert a strong bent needle into the vein and ligate that and extract it, or insert below the leg and revolve your hand around all parts so that it is pressed. And beware that it is not cut; because if it is broken, it is made difficult for you to elevate that part and it has come over the patient through that harm.
And when all of it has been expelled, then place over the location of the wound wool soaked in wine and rose oil and not-rose oil, and cure that so that it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted having tortuosity to which there is an envelopment at the parts, and it is not according to rectitude as we have said, then you must split that at all parts of its tortuosity and of its envelopment, and then suspend that with uncios so that you elevate that entirely.
And beware that you do not cut the vein and plague it, for it is difficult for you to elevate it; and use your prudence in that.
The form of the incision by which it is dried out:
It should not be applied like nails nor have an acute edge so that it does not cut the vein; and it has a thick flexibility of lion, for if it were thin, it would cut into the vein by its thinness; excess thickness is found in it as we have said.
Here is the provided text for accurate translation:
This vein is generated in the legs in tail-like lands like Al-Ategi in the land of Arabs and in tail-like and arid lands of little tenderness where there is no grass or herbage.
And soon it is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And its gestation is from putrefaction that comes under the skin like venom inside the body of serpents and worms and shrimps and worms generated between the skin and the flesh.
And the sign of the occurrence of it is that this vein happens in the leg with violent inflammation; and soon the place becomes vesicated, and soon the vein begins to come out of the place of that vesication like the root of a plant.
And then when you see the end of it, then you should wrap around that a piece of lead of which its weight is two drachms, and hold that and let the lead hang from the chest.
And as many times as it goes out because of some cause, wrap it in lead and leave that there. And if it is prolonged, then you must cut into it and wrap the remaining part; and do not cut into that which has come out so that it may be outside as it was previously, for if you cut into that, it is contracted and goes inside the flesh and causes abscess and putrefaction in the place and a bad ulcer.
So that it should be treated gently and extracted little by little, while it is pushed out of its end and not drawn back in any way into the body.
And from this vein there is issued in some men something that is in its length of six or ten palms, and I have seen one that was twenty palms.
And if it is cut into at the time of its medication, then insert the needle into its opening and pierce that with a long needle into the body until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the place for some days with medicines; and then heal that with the healing of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has painful spasms, and especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and painful movements come to it, and it is issued from each opening like a ram.
And then heal that as we have said in the division and with what is above said.
Of cutting above worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine illness.
This illness is named in some lands as bovina due to the fact that it sometimes affects oxen and it is a worm which is generated between the skin and the flesh, and goes throughout the body pushing and penetrating, and it is shown through the feeling of its movement from one limb to another as it breaks the skin and comes out.
And its generation is from putrefaction of some humors as happens with worms and serpents and earthworms and roundworms in the belly.
And it is feared for its wickedness, for when it goes in the body and is elevated to the head and has come to the throat, then it breaks out and penetrates and destroys the throat, and that therefrom many times.
And therefore when you want to heal and extract it, then it is not done unless through its walking and appearance to the feeling, and then when you press what is above it and what is below it with strong binding and contraction, and then dry over it and extract it.
And if it is buried in the flesh and you do not cut it out, then you place cautery with fire over the place where it lives, and the greatest cause that is feared is corruption of it by which it corrupts the place as we have said.
But if you want that to come to the head near the throat, then bind strongly over the forehead and press over it and extract it; and when the patient uses cleansing of his body with evacuating medicines and abstains from food generating putrefaction, then he guards himself from bad and putrid humors.
Of cutting above the illness of the navel.
This illness is named in our land as navel, and it is a pain that comes to some limbs, and soon it is moved from limb to limb.
And I will tell you about that according to what he tells me. He went to a wicked woman in a village, and discovered her arm and saw a small inflammation on the vein of the arm, and as the pus had come out for an hour, he saw that inflammation go as if it were quicksilver when it moves from place to place.
And then it went to the pain of that place and pierced into the muscle, and soon he stayed there for an hour.
And then it went through the other body until it came to the other arm.
And then he told me that it revolved through all his body as he saw; and was too marveled by its transformation and the quickness of moving from limb to limb. And he had seen before that in my own body according to that way, but he had seen move which bear pain being transferred from limb to limb. But I did not see it with the arms like in the woman.
And I did not think it was that but that it is because the woman was of such age, of old body and of uncovered veins, and in this appeared to the feeling that wrinkledness transferred.
And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this back-cure in those who are delicate and of body with humors mixed with veins.
And when you want its cure and the patient feels that pain, then it is not for you to appear to the throat as we have said, but you bind over that and push it gently and dry over it until that wrinkledness is released, and cauterize the place.
But if you do not see it in your own arms, then you heal that with an emission of the body and with what expels wrinkledness, and cauterize those with foul-smelling poultices and with poultices of serapium and similar things.
Of extraction of arrows.
Arrows are diversified according to spices, and according to the places of the body in which they are placed, for their diversity is that some have great points, and small, and concave, and hollow, and from them that have three angles, and those to which there are tongues; and from those to which there are astels.
And the signs of the soul are when an arrow pierces him, and penetrates the bone, and is situated in the sipho which is above the brain, because it happens through it violently, and scotomata, and vertigo, and burning in the eyes, and inflammation and heat of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of the mind and vomiting of bile, and the speech is very feeble and destroyed, and there comes out of the site of the wound a white humidity similar to pus, and his eyes are like water.
And therefore if you see these signs, then you abstain from the cure and the extraction of the arrow, unless it is exposed.
But the signs of the arrow when it pierces the heart are that it is near the left nipple, and one feels that it has been struck with a hard object, and it is not a superficial wound; and soon the movement of the arrow is similar to the movement of the pulse, and black blood flows from the wound, and there is coldness in the extremities, and a hissing sound, and syncope; and therefore know that death is descending with certainty.
And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lungs are foaming blood coming out of the wound, and the vessels near the neck are swollen, and the color of the patient changes, and he breathes heavily, and demands frequent breathing.
And if the arrow pierces the membrane which is in the chest, then the pain is near the small ribs, and there is made a great wound with violent pain and with sighing, and not all the members of the muscles are affected.
And if the arrow pierces the stomach, then soon you will see from the wound some undigested food.
And if the arrow pierces the abdomen and is stuck in it, you will see some slit in the wound, or the membrane, or intestine which is torn, and there is no hope for cure by extracting the arrow.
And if the arrow pierces the bladder and urine flows out of it, and some cause processes outside of it to the exit, and there is strong pain on the patient, then know that it is deadly.
But the other members, such as the face, neck, collarbone, shoulders, vertebrae of the back, sternum, thigh, and their likes of the members, are saved according to the most serious dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery, and is not a venomous arrow.
And I will recite to you what I have seen of the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand through this about your cure.
The cause of which is that in a man who has an arrow in the tear duct of his eye socket in the root of his nose, if I extract that from him from the other side, below the gray matter of his brain, he will be healed and no harm will come to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew who had it in the gray matter of his eye socket, below the eyelid, and the arrow was already hidden and he did not get anything from it except for a small extremity with which it adhered to his socket; and it was a great arrow of the sharp arrows of the Turks, with a lion's ferrule at its tip, and in which there were no eyelids.
And the Jew was healed, and no harm came to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who had it in his collarbone, and it was an Arabic arrow, and it is the one which has eyelids; and then I inserted that between two fingers, and it was already submerged in his collarbone; and then I pulled it out with subtlety, and he was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who had it in his abdomen, and I thought that he would die from it; and therefore, since he had passed 30 days and there was no change in his dispositions, I inserted into the arrow and probed it, and he was healed, and no harm came to him.
And I saw a man in whom an arrow had pierced his back, and the wound had healed over him, and after fire had burned it for about seven years, the arrow came out in the root of his thigh.
And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had pierced her abdomen, and the wound had healed over her, and she did not change in her dispositions for many years, and the woman did not suffer any harm in any of her natural functions.
And I saw another man to whom an arrow had pierced his face and the wound had healed over it, and the arrow was broken, not causing any pain here, and similar signs to these.
And I extracted the arrow from the king's son who had it in the middle of his nose, and he had already turned to the right a little, and the entire arrow was hidden.
And I was called to cure him when the arrow entered three days ago.
And then I probed the wound of the arrow carefully, and he did not feel it; but he felt a pain below the right eyelid, and then I perceived that this pain was from the tip of the arrow.
And I applied the location with a plaster in which is vertute atractive and digestive, believing that the location would become apparent to me as the location of the arrow, so that it would dry over it.
And there happened no significant accident that the arrow had reached that location; and I continued with the plaster on it for several days, and there happened nothing; and the wound healed in between, and the wound of its extraction closed up within the space of several days, until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and made me aware of it.
And then I applied sharp and corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until pus came out, and with probing I felt that, and discovered the tip of the arrow which adhered to the socket.
And then I applied the perception of the wound with that sharp medicine until the tip of the arrow appeared to me visibly, and I passed through time with it for the space of four months.
And then, since the wound was enlarged, and it became possible for me to insert the forceps into him without resistance, I did not cease probing and manipulating that wound with various instruments, until one day I began on that wound with forceps made for descentment, according to the shape of which in the end of the chapter, until I extracted it; and then I restored that wound.
And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored that and the wound healed over it, and the patient was healed with complete health, and nothing bothered him.
I will remind you of the quality of extraction of some arrows so that you pause this rule and significance on what I have not said, because the parts of this art and their definitions are not understood by narration or do not understand the book.
And the wise artisans compare a few things about motion; and what is present about what is absent, and find a new operation and a new instrument that must be descended from strange causes of the art when they happen.
And therefore I say that arrows are not forgotten in the members in which they are placed, but according to two ways: either by attraction of the place in which they enter or by the contrary of the other party.
And that which is forgotten by the location where it is entered, or an arrow proceeding in a fleshy place, and it is shot and forgotten.
And if it does not obey the time in which it falls, then you should leave it for several days until the meat around it grows and is healed, and its attraction and exit are relieved.
And similarly, if it is placed in the bone and does not obey you in time, then leave it for several days and repeat that with attraction and motion every day, and it will be forgotten.
And if it does not obey you after several days, then you should bore in the circuit of the arrow into that bone from all sides with a very thin tool until the place is enlarged by the arrow, and then extract it.
But if the arrow is already hidden in the place of the body, and is hidden from feeling, then you should inquire about it with touch, and if you feel it, then shoot it with some tools that are appropriate for its attraction.
And if you cannot act on it due to the constriction of the membrane and the length of the bone, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, then you should open the membrane so that it is enlarged and that it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if you are acting on it with ears that are held, then loosen the meat in which it is placed all around with every tool you can; and act on that, if you cannot act on the emission of the meat in the fracture of the ears and in their torsion so that it obeys.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then use with twisting of your hand with forceps to all parts so that he obeys; and subtly with great subtlety so that the arrow is not broken and that it is difficult for you to attract him and extract him.
And if you cannot act on that for a while, then leave it for several days until the parts that are in his circuit grow, and then repeat that because it has been relieved by then. But if you are contrary to the flow of blood, then administer what we have said about healing in its chapter.
And guard your virtue from cutting of vein or nerve, or string, and act in every possible way to you of the emission of the arrow; and do that with ease and tranquility and slowness and firmness as I have recommended to you and to you.
And therefore, do that to contract the arrow so that the patient is according to the figure according to which you must aim the shot of the arrow at him, for it is more beneficial. But if that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you by the figures.
But the arrows that are forgotten by the contrary of the other party, or that have already proceeded from him to the outside parts, or make darkness in the extremity of the arrow by feeling of the part above the joint nearest and often touch that; then you cut about it; and let the incision be according to the amount in which the forceps take hold of it; and then shoot it, for it is made easier to him.
But if it is retained in the bone, then you twist the blade according to the contrary so that the arrow presses on the bone, and enlarge yourself, and then extract it.
And if not, leave it for several days, and then repeat that until it becomes easier.
And if the shaft of the arrow is in it, then you push him with it.
But if the shaft is broken and you want to administer impulse, then you enter it into him, if it is hollow, a tool bent so that it enters into the concavity of it in the head of the arrow, and then push it with him.
But if the arrow is hollow, then you push that with a strong tool entering into it, for the arrow is relieved by it.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then open all the meat in which its venom is, as much as you can do that, and then heal it with whatever is convenient for you.
And if the arrow falls in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the side, and is near so that you touch it with feeling, and you can act on it, then act on it and beware of cutting of vein or nerve, and extract it, and then close the membrane if it bleeds, and heal it until it is healed.
Form of forceps with which arrows are pulled out:
And when you want to shoot an arrow at someone, then push it with some tools that you hold in your hand. Let the ends of them be like the beak of a bird that are made with a saw when they grasp the arrow so that they do not let go.
And they are made in various shapes, large, small and medium-sized, according to the amount of the size of the arrow and its weakness, and of the width of it, and of its constriction.
so that its instrument is relieved in the hollow arrow and is pushed by that.
Of phlebitis of the veins.
The veins of phlebitis of which usually run from .xxx. which are in the head .xvi., so are two pulsating veins which are near the ears, they say alhasisain; two herbs that are on both temples appear to be apparent; and two veins that are on two lacrimal of two holes that are called ascentics; and the vein prepared in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the end of the nose; and two guides that are at the neck; and two veins that are on the lip above; and two veins that are on the lip below; and — these are the veins that are called algelic —; and so two veins that are below the tongue. But the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are .v. There is one of those that is a cephalic vein, and it receives the wild side; and the people call it "the head vein", and it is deaf, and it is a small vein, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica, and from another branch of the cephalic; and the people call that the "vein of all the body", and the basilica is the vein which is stopped on the domestic side, and is called "citillar", and the vulgar call it "the belly vein"; and the funis of the arm, and it is stopped over the fire, and it is that in which phlebotomy is done, and it is that which appears above the elbow by a manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it is the vein between the said ear and the smaller one, and it has two ramps.
And in the foot and the leg there are three veins; one of those is below the curvature of the jaw of the wild side; and the second is sophena, and its location is below the leg of the domestic side; and the sciatic vein, and its location is below the leg of the wild side; and in the leg are other veins similar to those.
The cause of the veins that are near the ears is from old catarrhs and migrations and ancient bad ulcers of the head.
And the quality of bleeding those is according to what you count for yourself: it is that you wash the head of the patient, and wash the head of the patient in the occipital region in the place of both veins with a broad cloth with good friction; then tighten the patient his neck with a bandage inside which appear the two and their places are near the ears at two points from the head; and feel those with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of them with your finger, here is the sign with a tent.
Then you take the cutting scalpel, and it is that which is incident, and then you insert that below the vein into the vein within which the phlebotomy comes to the bone. And then raise your hand with the vein and the bone to the parts above and insert the vein with an incident incision. And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two fingers placed or around that; and let the blood flow as much as you want.
And then tighten with powder and leave that until it is healed.
And now I have preceded in the beginning of the book the incision of those and their cauterization.
But from the two veins of the arteries that are in the temples, the cause of phlebotomy is an ancient migration and a bad habit and a constant eye disease and a body of sharp acute superfluities flowing to the eyes.
And the quality of bleeding those is according to what you count for yourself: constrict the patient his neck so that the two veins appear to the sense by a manifest appearance and the pulse of them below your finger; and then you sign with a tent.
And then you raise the bone above the vein to the parts above with your finger indicating, and insert phlebotomy below incident, and raise the vein above; and insert that as well as you have done in the two other veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
And then loosen the constriction of the patient's neck, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, and then place a knot and powder on that and tighten that above with strong constriction, and leave that until it is healed.
And now is preceded the remembrance of them, and of those the incision, and the attraction in the beginning of the book.
And therefore the cause of phlebotomy of the vein of the forehead is the phlebotomy of the cephalic to the ancient illnesses of the face and to migration and redness and smelly ulcers.
And the quality of bleeding it is according to what you count for yourself; it is that the patient constricts his neck with a bandage so that the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called "fessori", of which this is the form of it:
Place the point that is on the top of the fessori over that vein and percute on it with a needle or with another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood flow according to the quantity which you want; and then loosen the perforation of the patient's neck and tighten that until it is healed.
And sometimes it is opened with phlebotomy of the ear, however not so that the phlebotomy is of acute extremity as well as other phlebotomies, but of lateral extremity, and phlebotomize that according to the transverse, because the bone is close and would break it strongly in it the phlebotomy when it is subtle.
But the cause of the two veins that are in the tear ducts of both eyes by roughness of the eyes by redness and tearing in the eyes, and to the illnesses of the face.
And the quality of bleeding is that the patient constricts his neck with a bandage, and then phlebotomize those, and you may stand over the head of him.
And let the phlebotomy be made according to the transverse at length of a little with phlebotomy of little, because in the place there is no flesh; and if the phlebotomy is subtle, strongly its extremity is broken.
And then cause blood to flow as much as is necessary for you, and pause over those spots, and tighten them for one night, and then loosen them.
But the phlebotomy of the nose vein is applied to acute fever and violent heat, and to illnesses of the face, and emigration and redness that occur in the face, and especially when it is chronic.
And the nature of his phlebotomy is that the patient tightens his neck and then touches his nose with your left hand, and takes the phlebotomy needle and inserts it into the middle place of the head of the nose according to its direction, because the vein does not appear to you here, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
When you have finished with the phlebotomy needle little by little and caused blood to flow according to your need, then ligate it for one night, because that is restored quickly.
But the use of phlebotomy of the two veins leads to constriction of the throat and the beginning of leprosy and many illnesses, and impulsive and bad corrosive ulcers, just as with herpes.
And the nature of phlebotomy from those is that the patient tightens both under his neck with a bandage; and the operator stands over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a stool.
And then phlebotomize the vein along its length with a small, wide phlebotomy needle little by little; and extract blood according to a moderate quantity or according to what you see is necessary for it; and then do likewise on the other vein.
And then loosen the bandage and tighten the two veins with a looser bandage so that the patient is not overwhelmed, and let him go into the mat that the plague is healed.
And the use of phlebotomy from the veins of the arms leads to small abscesses and pustules in the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and to bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
And the nature of phlebotomy from those is that you make the patient face away from you and tighten his neck with a bandage, and then turn back the lips of him and observe two veins from which one is from the right side of the lip and the second from the left; and the demonstration of each is by the darkness of each of both, and that more so because in the circuit of those are minute black veins; and then cut into each with a cutting incision.
But if you doubt it and do not know which is which, then go to the incision of the largest of those, and of the most obvious pus from those.
And do likewise on the two veins that are in the lips above.
But from two veins that are below the tongue, the use is the phlebotomy of the cephalic one to illnesses in the gullet, to the illness of the uvula, and to illnesses of the mouth.
And the nature of phlebotomizing those is that you follow the patient between your fingers in front of the sun, and raise his tongue, and observe below the tongue, from one side of him the vein comes and from the other side the vein comes, and the color of each is declining to blackness.
And then phlebotomize each one; and be careful not to finish your hand in phlebotomizing those, because below those are arteries.
And the veins that are phlebotomized in the head are those in which blood usually flows in all men, and the phlebotomy of them is done according to two methods, either with the mirtilat or olive needle declining in subtlety; or cutting with a scalpel, and it is called if alnessil, and this is its form:
Let the side of him be thus with sight, and it suits to open the concave veins full proceeding apparent thick ones, and to those that contain thick twisted blood.
And this phlebotomy is of lesser width and more thin extreme, and suits the phlebotomy of thin veins that contain subtle citrus blood.
But the use of phlebotomy from the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: because it extracts blood from illnesses that are below the gullet and the neck, and from what affects the feet and the belly.
And it suits the phlebotomizer, when phlebotomizing that one, to guard well it and be above-fearing in it, because below him there is an artery, and if he errs and pierces in the piercing of the phlebotomy, to cut into that artery and happen bleeding of blood, so that one must not phlebotomize it with a piercing needle, but rather cut into it with alnessil.
And if the basilic does not appear by apparent manifestation, then one must let it be and move to the other, or seek some branch of it; or phlebotomize in the end place of the arm, because that one is manifest; and cut into it with alnessil just as we have said.
But if you want the phlebotomy of it meteyssa, then one must in front of the tightness of the arm touch the place between which one knows the place of the pulse, and then press on him with a bandage; and then loosen the arm and cut into the vein with a concave incision with alnessil just as we have said; and be careful not to hit the pulse for some space of the place of the artery.
And when you see, while tightening the bandage, swelling in the place that you have pressed with a bandage, then that swelling is of the artery, and therefore loosen it.
And if you see the blood flow in the phlebotomy just as the shining of a child, and the blood is subtle red, then know that it is of the blood of the artery; and therefore press and pause your thumb over it for long space; and then push your thumb, and if the blood is cut off, because many times it is cut off, then tighten the arm and let go of him.
And guard the patient of the morning of him, and be above-fearing of him and do not maltreat him for several days until he is healed.
But if the blood is not cut off and you see that there is no medicine present to it, then one must cut into the artery if it appears to you; because the end of him is contracted, and the blood is cut off; or take a piece of fistic, and put on it, and take the one hand and tighten it over the place of the vein with tightness going down on the other day.
And then if the blood is cut off, well; and otherwise, then heal that one with that from which it comes before the remembrance of the place of the powdered ones cut off flow of blood.
And the cutting off of blood from him is difficult in many dispositions by the small place of the plague and the possibility of the tightness of the arm.
But from the dark vein the phlebotomy is use that extracts blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; because it is composed of a branch of the basilic and of the cephalic just as we have said.
And one must be above-fearing in the phlebotomizing of it because below that is a nerve; and then if you pierce in the piercing of the phlebotomy and hurt the nerve, stupor will come to him, and it is difficult for him to heal, and strong he is not healed from all, and this nerve many times appears to sensation; and if it is hidden in some men and is subtle and is not manifested, then one must pause the phlebotomy with which you phlebotomize with a concave incision, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
If the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein in its length.
The use of phlebotomy on the cephalic vein is to reduce the blood in the head and help with illnesses of the brain.
And for this specifically, if you wish to perform phlebotomy, use olive-wood or myrtle phlebotomy; for it is the safest of all veins, since no artery or nerve lies beneath it.
But however, it is very rare for an aposteme to appear in some people when they are not phlebotomized on the first percussion, but do not press on that aposteme.
The first of these is that one should know that phlebotomy is not administered only for the sake of health and in anticipation of it, and to guard against the onset of illnesses, and that phlebotomy be done on one of the veins that are in the arm: cephalic, fuscus, and basilic; and that phlebotomy be done at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter near the meal, when signs of fullness appear.
And phlebotomy be done on the third day or the first day after three hours have passed from the start of the day.
But phlebotomy that is administered should be done when it is convenient and necessary, at any time of the night or day, at all hours and at all times.
And children should not be phlebotomized until they are 14 years old, and pregnant women should not be phlebotomized except from the fourth month to the seventh, and the elderly should not be phlebotomized after they have passed the age of 60.
And when someone wants to be phlebotomized for any reason, one should cleanse the intestines before phlebotomy with a lion's-wool cleansing, if there is a retained fissure in them, so that the veins do not spit out the superfluities during phlebotomy of the intestines, which are purged, and that they do not harm the principal members.
And those who are phlebotomized should not be suffering from jaundice or diarrhea, nor recovering from any illness or drunkenness, and not suffering from a cold or fever, and not just after taking a bath, and not when colic is being felt, or vomiting, or pain in the belly, or multiplication of cough and fever and exertion from meals, or wakefulness, or from anything that weakens the body or animal.
And consider in subtle bleeding before this if the blood is thick, with food and drink, and with medicines if that is possible for it.
And enter into a bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or exercise in some way so that the blood is thinned out.
And pause the phlebotomy of him at the feet during the third hour of the day, as we have said.
And you should ensure that the feet of him are guarded during that day from all accidents of animals, as they are anguish, anger, fear, and from all bodily accidents, as they are labor and excessive pain and cough and their likes.
And to his own self, let the causes be present in the use of which, according to custom, people are healed by aromatics and ointments and balms and their likes according to the quantity of possibility.
And the phlebotomist should follow over a cushion that is higher than the cushion of him who is to be phlebotomized.
And then stretch out his arm, and rub that with his hand the phlebotomist two or three times; and then tighten the bandage with a belt and wrap him up two times.
And the tightness should be moderate, for when the tightness is unequal or the tightness is on superfluousness, then the flow of blood is prohibited; or it is on softening, and then the blood of the body runs out.
And then the tightness, let him who is to be phlebotomized rub his hands together in between them so that the veins are puffed up and declared to the sense.
And then the phlebotomist anoint his phlebotomy with a little of ancient oil properly; and then pause his right hand's thumb over that vein from which he wants to phlebotomize so that the vein runs a little, and the percussion is pressed down because from those veins from which one draws out blood, they are stretched like cords, and from those is full of windiness, and when he pauses the phlebotomy over that it is contracted from the phlebotomy, and is drawn back the phlebotomist; and the phlebotomy does not open the vein, and if it opens it, then that vein is tightened.
And so, therefore let the phlebotomist be firm and be solicited in all these causes.
And then pause the phlebotomies, but if the vein is opened in one go, let it be; and if not, you iterate that again another time over that spot a little bit, or over it with a compression, if the spot is not apostemat.
And if the spot is apostemat, or the patient feels faint, then you leave it for one day or two, and do not tighten the bandage, for very soon it will draw out an aposteme cauterized, nor enter into a bath.
And then repeat the phlebotomy if she has a fever.
And if the perception is slight and the blood flows subtly, and you fear that it does not draw out the amount of blood that one wants, then you iterate the phlebotomy in that vein according to rectitude and adjust in the perception a little bit, and do this with a compression before that spot is apostemat, for the spot is apostemat in most men from slight perception.
But if he is already apostemat then do not iterate over him, for it does not excuse you any cause; and pause over that spot some part of the fissure of oil, for it arouses the blood of the body. And is better in this spot than other oils.
And similarly administer fissure of oil in every phlebotomy from which phlebotomies the veins because the prohibition of blood of the body, and do this tyriaca alfolic and sarsaparilla when it is paused over that spot, for the blood is thinned out and is moved when it is thick.
And if in the spot of the phlebotomy a large aposteme is generated from many times, and especially to him who is not stat bleeding except that go, or in the perception of the vein little, then you cover it up, and pause over the spot sponge soaked in water and salt, little warmed, for it is dissolved.
And let him do this then the issue of blood from that vein with complement of him or another vein.
And if there appears in the spot for several days any blackness or viridity, do not worry about it; and if you want, pause over that any cause of aloe and of myrrh dissolved, or any cause of juice of mallows or of balm or their likes.
And many times happens apostemes and eminences from phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
And then place your hand over it, and if you find softness under your compression on it, then that protuberance is evil and bad; and so beware of placing on it any cause of what we have said, for the arterial blood will quickly flow from it.
And make a poultice with what is stiffening it, so that the area is hardened, and then cure it with another cure until it is healed.
And draw out blood from the vein according to the amount of its virtue and according to the colour appearing over the blood according to what appears.
For if the blood is black, then let it issue until it is red; and likewise if you see it thick, then let it issue until it becomes thin; and likewise if it is acute, let its keenness be stopped.
And for him who is full and strong and has a need of bloodletting in one sitting, let the phlebotomy of the vein be enlarged and the phlebotomies be wide.
And for him who is frail, let the contrary of this be done, and let him who draws out the blood do so in several sittings, and let the incision be narrow.
And the best that is administered in phlebotomy of a vein is that it be a transverse section, not a puncture.
And this manner of phlebotomy is safe from blood flow and incision of nerves, and it is more praiseworthy and safer than phlebotomy according to width and length.
And to whom it is accustomed to occur fainting because of phlebotomy, let you cure him before the phlebotomy with a little bread soaked in wine of myrrh or simple oxymel warmed; and draw out some of his blood in three or four sittings.
And if it is paleness of complexion, then take before the phlebotomy bread soaked in myrrh syrup or in spiced honey syrup with pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar things, or in scented syrup and very odorous.
And if fainting occurs because of phlebotomy, and it is caused by much blood loss, then let him take to drink water with meat and scented syrup very subtle; and use aromaticity with hellebore, and let his feet be bound with that.
And use the other causes that we have spoken of in the division in the chapter on fainting by evacuation.
And who wants to empty his arm and dissolve his blood second time, let him of whom the phlebotomy is for great evacuation, and whose virtue is cold, evacuate the blood little by little according to the amount of his virtue in continuous days.
But who wants to empty his arm and let out his blood second time, and whose body is strong, then do that about seven or nine hours from the first phlebotomy.
But who wants to draw out blood from his body contrary to the side to which it declines, let him be bled in the second or third day.
But the body in which much blood has already been drawn and is acute and fever occurs, let him have blood taken from him in one sitting and let a great quantity be taken from him and let the incision be enlarged so that fainting does not occur, for you will have observed all the conditions of phlebotomy; and let you place your hand over his pulse because of the blood of the body, lest he die from fainting, for many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And do not, when you want to loosen the arm and evacuate blood second time, when the orifice of the vein is already closed and the issuing of blood is difficult, press upon it with vehemence and the extended arm be bent slightly, for that is very bad.
Let him be bled until it is finished; or remove that with the acuteness of the phlebotomy which coagulates the blood in the orifice of the vein; or place over that tyrian rose, or sage, and compress that with slight compression until the blood has issued forth.
And if the vein is inflamed, then leave that and do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
And if the need compels you to evacuate blood second time and there is no excuse, then let him be bled on that location or on the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called “the strings of the arm” is bled in the place of the cubital or basilic vein when they are not found or are hidden, for it is composed of those.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient immerses his hand in warm water so that the vein swells and appears manifestly.
And then let it be bound over that with a ligature by slight compression; and phlebotomize according to the transverse slightly, not according to width nor length.
And let the incision be enlarged and let your phlebotomy be over that joint by a little.
And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you repeat the hand in warm water and let the blood run in the water until you perceive your need.
But if you are in the days of summer, then you will be excused from repeating the hand in warm water, and let the body of blood be bathed in warm water in winter time.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than all other veins, for beneath it there is no pulsating vein nor nerve.
And the phlebotomy of the upper part of the right hand is suitable for diseases of the liver.
And the quality of that phlebotomy is that you compress the hand by ligature or with your hand, for you have immersed it in warm water, so that the vein is inflamed and has become manifest; and phlebotomize that transversely; and if you incise it from everywhere, it will harm nothing.
And observe that you do not pierce your hand with the phlebotomy, for beneath are the nerves of the fingers stripped of flesh.
And then immerse the hand in warm water and let the blood run in that, for if you do not immerse that in warm water, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein and flow is prohibited.
And when the blood is drawn according to the amount of need, then you place over the vein olive oil and salt, so that it is not consolidated hard; and likewise let him who makes the incision in all limbs be strict.
But the advantage of the phlebotomy of that of the left hand is that it is suitable for diseases of the spleen.
And do likewise in the phlebotomy of that just as you have done in the other.
And the advantage of the phlebotomy of that vein is for diseases which are below in the body, just as those of the uterus, and to retention of menstruation, and to diseases of the joints and old ulcers of thighs and legs, and to their like diseases.
And the quality of that phlebotomy is that the patient immerses his foot in warm water and rubs over it so that the veins appear; and tie over the joint of the foot with a bandage; and let the location of the vein be marked by the tip of the finger pushing, and from that ramify into the fascia of the foot many branches.
And then phlebotomize the most ample vein or below the leg from where the toe deviates, for it is better and safer.
If there is bleeding in the face of the foot, then you must be careful of the nerves that are below it on the surface of the foot, and apply your phlebotomy with which you phlebotomize across them, as if you were going to incision.
And let the phlebotomies be stopped.
But if the flow of blood is prohibited; then you repeat the foot in the cold water and let the blood run into that place where it was evacuated.
And if the phlebotomist makes a mistake in the first turn, then repeat with the phlebotomy on top of it a little, because the place is salty; and do not be afraid of it being bad for you, but rather guard against the nerves as we have said.
And similarly, do the sole of the other foot in the same way.
And from the sciatic vein, the place is as we have said, under the talus below the ankle of the wild tree.
And the youth of his phlebotomy is in pain of the hip when it is for hot blood.
And the quality of his phlebotomy is that the patient enters a bath, and rushes and tightens the scrotum from the side of the broad between above the talon above four fingers in one long slender bandage, because it does not appear except through that.
And therefore when it appears, then you phlebotomize that according to each device that is possible for you and according to the cross, and it is better; or incise that by incision or cut it by section, because the place of it is salty.
And it is in most men hidden; and if you find that, and it does not appear to the feeling of all, then phlebotomize some ram of it, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot under the little finger and the ring finger.
And guard against the nerves, and let the blood flow as much as you want.
Then loosen the tightness and place it on the site of the phlebotomy tightly and firmly, because it is more likely to be healed.
Of ventilation and the qualities of using those.
Ventozes are of horns, or of ram, or of skin.
And ventilation is done according to two methods: one of them is with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is ventilation without scarification.
And this ventilation which is without scarification is according to two methods, because either it is with fire or without fire.
And the vents which are administered with scarification and extraction of blood are xii locations on the body, of which one in which vents are placed is alnocrati, and it is the back part of the head; and the middle place of it from two parts of the neck; and vents of the chin under the jawbone below the mouth; and vents of two spatulas; and vents of alohoster, and it is on the end of the nose; and vents of two little holes, and they are of two arms; and vents of two ankles; and vents of two thighs.
And ventilation does not extract blood except from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and for that it does not have the virtue through them as it is clearly through phlebotomy; nor believe that ventilation be done with fire or without fire in any disease made by fullness within which the whole body is evacuated.
But if necessity prompts for ventilation in disease or in continuous, then administer that at any time at the beginning of the month and at its end, and in the middle of it and at any time.
And therefore when it happens for any of those causes, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, then command ventilation be done after they have passed two or three hours of the day.
And the youth of ventilation of the nape is that when it confer to heaviness in the head and at what is sunk into the eye sockets; but believe that that is proper evacuation of all the body.
And this ventoz is in the place of phlebotomy of the cephalic.
And it is not advisable to use that which is of complex friction, or in which there is phlegm, because it gives great harm to him.
And for that, do not believe that its use is for the old, and in the heads of which there are cold diseases.
But to him on whom that is continuously done over him is made forgetfulness; and for that, do not command the venturer to pause his hand a little with the ventouse at the ends below, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
But ventilation of the alkehel is in place of phlebotomy of the dark vein and the basilic: and for that it confer to asthma, and to the constriction of a throat and to the splitting of the instrument of a throat, and to coughing, and to fullness.
And let the ventoz be bound a little, because if it is paused below, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And ventilation of the alhagdahan confers to accidental pains in the head and to ophthalmia, and migraine, and pre-eye pain, and to pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in place of phlebotomy of the basilic.
And let the commander not press his hand with scarification lest he incise the artery and light flux of blood.
And ventilation below the chin confer to alcola in the mouth, and to corruption of the gum, and to appearance to them of the diseases that are in the mouth, and stand in place of phlebotomy of the aliheric which is on the two lips.
But ventilation which is done on the two spatulas confers to caphathe, which is done by fullness of heat.
And ventilation of the two holes within the little fingers confers youth of phlebotomy of three veins, that is of the basilic, dark and cephalic, because it draws blood from all those veins more tender than those thick veins within which the attraction comes to the three veins.
And command the venturer that he does not process too much in scarification, because the place is deprived of flesh, and below it are nerves and arteries.
And it is one ventoz that with which he is ventilated over the buttocks and confers to the hemorrhoids of the anus and to the ulcers below.
And let the commander that it is a great ventoz, and that it is of ram, because the place demands a strong section; and strong its own split ventozes are subtle and let it be scarified with scarification.
But vents of the legs are diminished for manifest diminishment, because they draw blood from all the body, and confer to old pains of the hips and of the mother, and of the bladder; and they provoke menstruation, and confer to bothor and ademil; and stand in place of phlebotomy of two sophenes, and alahorcoben, and of two ankles.
In fact, they weaken the whole body and cause syncope in many people.
And from the hernia the aliment is brought up to the mouth, as well as from the hernias on both sides of the body.
And the quality of the position of the hernias is that you must pause at the beginning, and allow them to heal by sucking, not prolonging the position of the hernia, but instead allowing them to heal quickly and remain stable, so that the fluids can come into alignment with each other. And do not stop doing this until you see the area turn red and swell, and the blood appears.
And then you must scrape and continue with the sucking process little by little, and pay attention to the condition of the body.
For a man whose flesh is very thin in some places, one must scrape only once and not more so that the area does not become ulcerated.
And command the scarifier to deepen the scraping and take a few steps back, and moderate the sucking with ease.
And if the blood is thick, then one must scrape twice; for in the first scraping, the passage to the blood and its moisture is opened up. But in the second, it allows for a more thorough examination of the removal of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very fetid, then one must scrape a third time in order to achieve the desired result.
Finally, when we wish to extract a little blood, or only a small amount, one scraping is sufficient for us.
And if we wish to extract a lot of blood, we must scrape with many scrapings; and if we know that the blood is thick, then one must scrape with a deep scraping.
And the term for a "scraping" indicates the depth of the cut only in how it is made.
And if the person's skin is thick, hard, and dark in color, then one must unt the hernia spots with something soothing and opening; in the summer time, use oil of aloe or violet oil, or almond oil, or oil from a horse's hoof; and in the winter time, use oil of snow, or oil of lily, or camomile oil, or blood, and similar substances.
And if the excess is thick and hard, then one must use oil of amarant, or oil of balsamita, or oil of aloe, or oil of anise, and similar substances.
But if the person' s skin is very thin and loose, then one must avoid oiling it; instead, the hernia spots, near the hernia itself, should be washed with water and vinegar, or hot water of solatrum, or water of a horse's hoof, or water of bathwater, and similar substances.
And if the person' s blood is very moist, then wash the hernia spots with sour wine, or water of myrrh and sumac, and similar substances.
And for a person whose excess is thick, wash the hernia spots with old wine, or water of wormwood, which is marjoram, or water from anise tea, or camomile, and similar substances.
And one must guard against taking a bath after the hernia treatment; one should wait until after the person has eaten and then rest for an hour or two afterwards, and then go to sleep.
What is it that must be done before a bloodletting?
And if one must consider the beginning: then if the person who is to be bloodlet or bled has choler and blood that is hot and inflamed, then one should take cool things, such as milky drinks, and endive with sour wine and leeks, and poplar bud tea, and julep, and similar substances.
And give them food as well, such as poultry, and meat from young birds, and seasoned foods with vinegar, and to him similarly.
And for a person whose complexion is hot, one should drink rosewater with honey, or rosewater from poplar buds and sesame seeds, and sumac, and very fragrant wine between spring and autumn; and one should recommend to him that he drink little and eat little, and give him poultry, and cabbage, and peas, and small birds and pigeons.
And so that on the day of the hernia treatment and bloodletting, one should drink more than eat.
And one should give the person a drink of alcohol in certain hours to certain people with thrush, or medication from musk, as it is musked, or alcelita before the hernia treatment or bloodletting, so that the main members are comforted and the blood is subtilized; and do not take that cold.
But the hernias that are not scraped should be hernias that are placed on top of the liver, and over the melsa and podagra, and over the umbilical area, in the places of the joints, and the pith of the finger, because these members do not suffer from scraping.
And it is not needed for those except to attract blood from a member, as well as placing a hernia on the breast in a blood flow malady of blood from the nose; and one should use that so that a thick hernia is dissolved by heat within the member, as well as placing it over the belly and umbilical area, because that will strengthen the member and ease the pain caused by the hernia.
And it is also placed over the knees when they are affected by pain or swelling; because of the strength of its attraction, their hernia will be eased and removed from its place.
And similarly, when it is placed over the liver and spleen, one must have a hernia in those who are enclosed.
And these hernias are administered dry with only suction; and some are administered with fire.
And some are administered full of lukewarm water in illnesses of the spleen.
And this is why the hernia should be filled and large, so it is water alone or water in which herbs are steeped to make it convenient.
Form of hernia administered with fire: the opening should be two digits in width, according to how we have formed it; and the amount of the cup should be a palm in length; and in its width, in the place where it is in the circuit, let it be a palm in width, the hole should be small according to the amount that enters into it, like an aglet.
It is made of ramie, or citre, with thick edges, of lion, and dogwood and terse, so that it does not stick to the member, it should be placed above the member.
And there is a crosswise bar of ramie or iron, where a candle is placed with fire.
And this hernia should be greater than the one we have recommended before, and the small one according to illnesses and the condition of the person who uses it.
And hernias for children and exhausted people are different from those for young people and thick-bodied people.
And the quality of placing this hernia with fire over the member is that one extends the mace with fire of decently-sized wood in front of a small candle of wax, and place it over the middle of the crosswise bar in the middle place of the hernia, so that the fire be lit around the bottom so that the body of the patient is not burned.
And then it is placed over the member of the patient, and the finger is placed over the hole that we have said, in between when one holds the hernia and does not press on the finger and causes the vapor to go over that hole, then the hernia will be dissolved right away.
And then light the candle according to its custom, and repeat that if it is requested of you.
But in a ventouse that is administered for the malady of pleurisy, with water, in which there is no transverse vein or pulse, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is placed on the member only.
And this is the shape of it: And this ventouse, the larger it is, the better, so that it can receive a great quantity of water.
Chapter 97.
Leechdoms are not administered on small members unless ventouses can be placed on them, because of their smallness, as well as on the tongue and gums and similar places; or on a naked limb, as on the finger and nose and similar places.
And the quality of using those leeches that you find in the murky waters of clean rivers.
And they are left in the water for a day and a night, until they become hungry, and no cause remains in their bellies; and the body is evacuated at the beginning by phlebotomy and ventouses; and the member of the patient is rubbed until it turns red; and they are then placed on him.
And when they are full, they are removed.
And if it is possible to suck the place with a ventouse, it is better done in this way.
And if not, then wash the place with agreeable wine and then with cold water; and it is rubbed and pressed.
And if the body is prolonged in bleeding, and it is sweating, then you dip a cloth into cold water and place it over so that the sweat is absorbed.
And if the blood is profuse, then powdered vitriol or eggshells and similar things from the group of styptics are sprinkled on it so that the blood is stopped; or cooked fava beans are placed on the spot and left until the favas adhere to the spot, and then the blood is stopped.
And if it is necessary, the iteration of leeches, when they can be changed.
And if the leeches are prohibited from suspension, then the spot is rubbed with fresh blood or a needle is placed in the spots where blood oozes, and they are then placed on it, for those as soon as they feel some blood.
And when you want them to close up, sprinkle on them a little ground aloe or salt or ash, and then immediately.
Thus begins the treatment of the third part: of restoration. This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine; and it is the restoration of fracture and accidental dislocation in the bones.
Oh son, know that the foolish doctors and the common people and those who for any length of time did not read the books of the Ancients nor understood a letter of them.
And for this cause it has happened that this manner of the scientists in our land is neglected; and I have not practiced it at any time on account of all; and I have not employed what I learned, except through length of reading the books of the Ancients and study about their understanding, so as to extract the science from them.
And I have added experience and study in the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that my science and over the length of my experience tells me; since I have abreviated it for you others and freed you from occupation with lengthiness; and I have abreviated it at the end of abridgment; and demonstrated it at the end of demonstration; and formed in it many forms of the instruments which are administered in it, as is done through addition of demonstration, so also have I done in two preceding chapters.
First chapter.
Summary and collections from being fractured bones, from which their premise is necessary, before we begin the treatment of broken members and diverse if any. So let us begin at the beginning of this chapter the summaries of speech; and the chapters to the understanding of which in the beginning are necessary the artificers and at station upon the truth of them; you are and those who are prompt to learn this noble art from you.
And therefore I say that when accidents happen to anyone fracture or dislocation or twisting or herniation, then you must in the beginning with phlebotomy or poultice on him, or any embrocation, if no counter-indication from any cause; or is it to one who has happened debility of strength, or is it to whom it has happened fainting, or is a time of violent heat, or violent rubbing.
And let him be fed with food of herbs fresh and of birds' flesh and of crabs; and prohibited thick flesh and to fill up on food and on all food that fills the veins with blood, so as to guard against pustule cautery, and if you do not fear effusion of material from the member.
And then return the patient to his first regimen with which he was accustomed.
And therefore when the bone begins to be restored, then let the patient be fed with nourishing foods of food thick and heavy in which there is stickiness, as well as foods made from wheat cooked in water, and rice, and peas, and fish, and bellies of cattle, and hogs, and fresh pigs, and wine thick and similar to those; and by this regimen coagulation of fracture is made more quickly and better.
And know that fractured bones when they are in the old and in the decrepit, it is not possible that they are continued and are consolidated according to their nature by the drying of their members.
But nature adjusts and makes a knot on the fractured bone of all parts any cause similar to glue in which there is thickness that adheres and strengthens it all together, so that it comes to an end of strength and of firmness, as well as fire in the beginning, so that no counter-indication from any cause prohibits it from its works.
And for this cause it is necessary that you withhold the patient's food, food in which there is heaviness and stickiness and thickness, as we have said.
And know that the kinds of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for the fracture of the bone of the thigh is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the toe; and similarly all the other members are diverse among them.
And I have written about every kind of fracture, explained in its own chapter distinct from another.
Diversity of fracture in itself. And the kinds of fracture of bone in themselves are diverse; for there is made arcuate fracture others that happen in them stars; and some times there is made fracture according to the length of the bone: and they are fractures of the satagia and asthel and addition which proceed and do not proceed, as well as it happens in the pen when it is prepared for writing, and there is fracture with crack and disruption in the head, and there is fissure fracture small.
And all species have their own pain or torture in their restoration according to what will come to the recollection of them distinctly in their places.
There is a sign for fracture of the bone. And by this is a fracture of the bone known: it is its crookedness and appearance to the sense, and feel of it when you press on it with your hand.
And therefore when there is no crookedness apparent in the place nor anything done because of your touching when you move the bone and the patient feels no great pain then there is not here a fracture.
It is possible that there be crookedness or slight fissure, then it does not behoove you to press on it with your hand and with compression altogether; rather pause over it medicines of which come recollection properly to the place; and let it be bound tightly with a subtle ligature.
And know that the place when it is arched and not split in two or anything else that does not happen in it satiation, as is rememered all separated from its kind, then it behooves you to begin from your hour at rectification of it lest what happens in it be cautery.
And if what happens in it is cautery, then let it be that for some days until the cautery ceases; and let the wound heal according to whatever way you can of elevation and painlessness.
And know that restoration of it and piercing of it is more difficult than of the bone in which occurs satiation.
And let it be bound according to what will come to the recollection of it.
But if in the bone there is satiation, then is necessary extension of that broken member from two parts, if it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two strings or one string and the hand.
And let your position be such that you pause the member's location according to its natural figure, while the parts are extended from the broken member, then it behoves you to make those accessories return with painlessness and according to whatever way you can in their places.
And guard yourself according to your strength that no pain nor injury happens to the patient through your operation; and see to it according to your power that you apply one bone to its fellow's company according to their best forms.
And it behooves you in that hour profitably to touch with your hand that, and if you see here any diverse cause, rectify it and heal it according to the quantity of your skill.
And shun violent extension and compression, likewise as do foolish doctors who many times cause cautery to happen through their operation, or cause contraction in the member likewise as we have seen this through the operation of their many times.
And the quality of the binding of the broken member is that which you consider best; for you to know that broken members are diversified in their smallness and in their bigness and in the forms of those.
And of those that are small likewise as the arm and the finger and the elbow and similar to these, then let the wrapping be of very thin cloth.
But those that are big likewise as the thigh or the leg, then let there be wrapping of tough cloth, for the tough binding connects the large member and binds it tightly all around, so that no crookedness enter it.
And let there be commencement, then your evacuation of equiting, pause the binding convenient to that, over the place of that fracture with three or four wrappings according to what the member merits; and strengthen your hand a little with the binding.
And let there be coming to that at the beginning most superior part of the place of the fracture, and strengthen mind that your binding by which you have strengthened the place of the fracture not loosen. And let there be lengthening by you of the wrapping of the place of the fracture a little, and soften the binding a little at a time, while you take from the place its great part.
And let there be taking another bandage and wrapping that other part over the broken place, and let there be your operation in the binding and in softening of that likewise as we said in the first wrapping above.
And let there be pausing between the bandages of stopa or cloth by which the crookedness of the fracture is equitably bound, if in it is crookedness; but if not, then pause in it no cause.
And let there be pausing over it another bandage, and let there be equiting over these bandages decently made stockings at once, if in the place is no inflammation or cautery, then pause over it that which seats the cautery and which causes the inflammation; and let it be that for some days; and then you strengthen over it the stockings.
And let the stockings be of the measure of thin cane rod, and be formed wisely; or they be of wood of pine; or of rams' penis; and let the width of each stocking according to this form and this figure:
However let the stocking that is paused over that fracture be thicker and tougher a little than the other stockings, and the length of the stocking according to how long it is from the fracture in bigness and smallness; and let there be strengthening over the stockings with another bandage according to your first binding; and let there be tying over it decently with thread according to what we said about binding, and let the binding be according to the place of the fracture less, and how much less is the length from the fracture.
And let the threads be middling in thickness and thinness, and they be of pliant thread; and if the threads are thick, likewise as we have seen by the operation of some foolish pausing their threads of rope threads, and it is great error when the binding is not equitably.
And very thin threads are not convenient, for you will not accomplish by them that which you want through binding, and it behooves that between stocking and stocking there be mind of a finger's breadth.
And if the patient is pricked by the ends of the stockings then let there be pausing under those of stopa or woolen cloth until it does not cause him injury.
Some times fracture is with plague, and happens disruption in the sinew, and we come to recollection in that in the head according to singleness.
And know that not every broken member is bound with stockings on the first day; and the cause of this is because the member, when it is large, it behooves that you pause over it stockings only after a few days or more, according to your security about coming of cautery.
And this is the way of the plasterers by which the Ancients used to heal, they which are paused over fracture and dislocation and wrenching.
Method of emplastrum as a remedy for fractures, suitable for many complexities and especially for women and children, because it is about what does not come heat or friction: and you take from the dust of the mill, and it is the medulla of the flour that passes through the movement of the mill on the walls of the mill.
And cook it as it is, but strain it through a sieve into an egg white, and use the thick or thin consistence as appropriate; then use it as needed.
Another manner of healing ointment for broken bones and dislocation and twisting: take from assafetida, from myrrh, from acacia, from enula, and from mace, which is the juice of wild pomegranate, of all an ounce each; of myrrh and aloe, of each a drachm five; of aloes, twenty; all these shall be strained and sifted and mixed with honey water or with egg albumen if the patient's constitution is hot; and then use this ointment, for it is of good composition and restores quickly broken bones, and confers to many men.
Another manner of ointment which confers to broken bones and twisting: take mace, and put of white poplar an ounce each; of myrrh and aloe, of each a drachm five; of acacia six drachms; all mixed with honey water or egg albumen, and then make a good ointment.
All are ground in a mortar with a little moisture, and strained, and cooked with water or egg white, and administered.
Method of emplastrum for joints and bones separated from their places, and pain caused in them, and to fissures and fractures: take soft wool and submerge it in sweet wine and cut oil, and place it on the affected area.
Let this emplastrum not be used to restore strength, but to cauterize and expel pain properly.
Another method of emplastrum that heals broken bones: take leaves from a fig tree and leaves from wild poppies; pound all together and make an emplastrum from them.
Method of emplastrum administered for the restoration of broken bones and when you want resolution of the remaining of an abscess: take pounded marsh mallow, chamomile, and violet flowers, and flour of bran, all together in one part .I. Let all be ground and cooked in wine, if the affected member is not wounded.
But if it is wounded, then cook it with water of coriander or with water and use it.
Another method of emplastrum which is stronger in resolution than the previous one, when an abscess happens due to the restoration of a member: take pounded marsh mallow and sesame seeds, and ballota, and marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile, all together in one part i unground; let all be ground and cooked with water of celery or with warm water or wine, according to the quality of the affected member and its rest of color.
But ipocras doesn't dry in its own free that it is placed on the broken member due to its restoration but wax made of wax and oil and no other cause; and return that it is between thickness and thinness.
But it is seen that they are placed on the broken member due to its restoration and the causes in which there is dryness with little heat are also like those causes that we have recounted.
Method of emplastrum that provides to injury and pain: take mace, cesium, human hair or bird feather, marsh mallow, and salt, all unground; let all be ground and strained and cooked, and make an emplastrum from it.
But the amount according to the quality that covers the bandage and then it is loosened, consider if there is no pain nor swelling, nor the bone is broken not moved from its place, then you do not displace for many days. And if it happens to the affected area violent pain or swelling or inflammation, then you cut or loosen it at the hour and remove the emplastrum from it.
And take a band of linen and marine sponge wet with warm water, and soak the affected area in tepid water, and wash it with that until the swelling and pain are reduced; then let it rest for an hour; then place on it soft wool soaked in sweet wine and oil or rose oil, and bind it up for one night within which you are sure of the abscess cauterized, and the inflammation of the member is soothed, and the pain of it.
Then repeat that gentle compression and little binding, and not tighten it by your first tightening, and apply that until it is healed.
And if the abscess and rogor and pain and inflammation and all the accidents are now reduced to all, and you have stopped using emplastrum and compression, then repeat that as you did at the beginning equally.
And if there is not any cause to the member of those that we have mentioned, then do not loosen it but after three days or four or five or seven. And some time all that is left for twenty days according to how you appear by the loosening of the bandage, as we have said, until the fracture heals, and approaches the coagulation of the flesh on it.
And then tighten the compression but not as in your first compression all together, and adjust in the swelling of the member, according to how it is preceded by its memory.
But if you see the fracture is already dried and wasted but not closed, then know that food is prohibited to reach it; and then soak it with tepid water due to total exhaustion that of the member; and let it be for three days; loosen the compression a little, and by this operation food reaches the member, and it is healed lightly.
But that which is done by the false restorators of the member's fracture due to its not being restored at the beginning, according to how it covers and is restored according to tortuosity, is error according to their operation, and great fear, and if they were stretched in their free parts and turned am on them.
And I have not seen any of them doing that, because it is more reasonable that it does not happen.
Chapter according to: Of fracture when it happens in the head.
The kinds of fractures are many, and their shapes are diverse, and the causes are distinct, for any fracture is not done by the impact of a staff, and the impact stands all the bone within the skull, which is under the skull, as it happens in the foot, and by this that kind of fracture is named ascial; or the staff penetrates a part of the bone, and penetrates the flesh of it and does not go through the interior of it; and this kind of fracture is named absolute elevation.
And the split of those two fractures or is great or small, and the fracture that is compression or atraction; and cause of it is impact by a stone or falling on stone, and to them similar.
And this fracture is penetrating that it approaches the membrane which is under the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the split of these two fractures or is great or small.
And in a fracture it is removed from the bone, in the subtlety of the hair's smallness, and because of this it is named this kind of capillary fracture.
And it is a fracture that is done by either chipping or stone percussion and their likes, causing some lamella of the bone to enter the cavities inside, and it is done in the concave place just as it happens to fingers when they are hit with a rock and there is an entrance made into the cavities within them.
And mostly this happens to the bodies of hollow bones, just like in baby skulls.
And for all these species of fractured sutures, they are separated as if with stars. And then I will have the memory of all this in my place.
And I know all these species of fracture by detection on those, and by inquiry of their feeling and appearance of rotten flesh that is upon them.
And capillary fracture is known by that being uncovered on the bone and being cleaned, and being stung over it, for then the fracture appears black.
But in the cure of fracture consider at the beginning the accidents of the patient, and then if you see by the accidents that signify by manifest signification for fear, as with vomiting of cholera, and extension, and loss of understanding, and absence of speech, and syncope, and acute fever, and sweat of those, and redness on them, and similar to them in the major dispositions, it is not healed.
And if you see accidents not occurring you hope for health then you begin the cure of it.
The reason for which is that if it has come to you the sick person in the beginning as it was sick and that is on the day twelve according to all disposition, then cover that you study in the appearance of the bone against the day fourteen.
And if it is in the days of summer then cover that you cut the bone against the seventh day having that which is below the bone be rotten by the membrane and that the accidents we have counted happen.
And if the fracture has already come to the membrane covering the brain and it is with small pieces and crushed then cover that you insert the crushed and ground piece according to what I will tell you.
And it is that you scrape the head of the sick person and uncover upon the bone according to habit and manner to you possible according to the figure of the plague and that it be lighter on the sick person.
And if it happens to you that you must make the detection of the bone and bleeding of pus or cauterization then you stop it with what covers, and you moisten the place with bandages infused in wine and rose oil and let the plague rest while the pustule is settled and blood stopped; and then proceed to the incision of the bone and removing it.
And that be according to one of two manners of operation.
And one manner is that you insert the bone with a narrow incision knife and this is its shape: And then administer another incision knife this one a little wider than that; and this is its shape:
And then administer even more the incision knife wider than the second.
And have that it be ought to you number of incision knives various, of which some are wider than others; and some of them are shorter than the rest and are in the thickness of their sharpness, and they are of iron or steel.
And use them with facility upon the incision knife so that it does not cut into the head and lead that one.
And if the bone is strong and hard then cover that you pierce into its circuit before administering the incision knives with awls which are called non-deep awls.
And they are not named thus but because those do not pass the end of the bone but the awl is round or rounded on its edge and below the head of it looks like margin or small circle, which forbids being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take of those awls great number of which each one suits the thickness of each bone, within that it be to you present in all skulls the extremity of which is acute, the quantity in length and brevity according to the quantity of thickness of this skull.
And this is the form of three species of awls: The quality of boring into the circuit of the broken bone is that you pause the awl on the bone and rotate it with your fingers within that you know that the bone is already penetrated; and then change the awl to another location, and pause what is between every hole the quantity of thickness of the thread or wrap around that.
And then insert with incision knives what is between each crack of the bone and do that more subtle than you can on its end in fineness, as we have said, within that you erradicate the bone or with your hand or with some other cause by any tools which you will have apparatus for, as tongs and forceps subtle.
And have that you keep with all precaution that the incision knife does not touch any nerve of the brain.
And then when you have bored around the bone and separated it from the brain if it is continued with it, and have that extracted, cover that you scrape and gnaw it in its roughness of what is in the bone with another instrument similar to an incision knife but indeed let it be thicker and more subtle than the other incision knives.
And if you break any of the small bones and sutures then take that with facility by what is ought to you from the tools, and then cure the plague with poultices and ointments which we have said.
And the other manner of operation is lighter, distant from fear, which is said Gualia and is broken by great force; and this is its speech: it is necessary to you in the beginning that you begin to uncover the crack of the bone of the place in which there is the fracture most violent and most manifest, within that when you have uncovered that crack and you will have paused below it the extremity of this incision knife lente and gentle of which this is the shape:
And the lenticular crack is lion and does not insert any cause, and the acute crack is of it in two sides forward in length as you see; that the lenticular crack be attached to the brain by the membrane of it cutting into the bone.
And then pierce over the incision of one crack with a small hammer within that you insert all the bone with facility as it is turned and you be sure of the membrane that no accident happens in any manner which you fear in any way, and if the patient was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he was sleeping.
And then if it breaks any cause attached to the bone of the membrane in some place of bones, insert that of it with the extremity of the incision knife lenticular and deliver that of it with facility for it is delivered from it its harm and its fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate within the membrane and what is broken or remained of the bone is the membrane of it and you break into it and gnaw its roughness and sutures subtle, then cover that you scrape that roughness and erradicate those sutures with razors subtle by which you have prepared the number, of various quantities so that be to you possible administering them in every place most convenient of them and most proper of them according to what you are led in your operation that broken bone and the figure of it.
And whoever you administer to in your care, with which tools you extract the bones at the start of those wounds, and then use that tool on the pus beneath them, and do not stop doing this until you have extracted all the pus and the subtler humors from all these places.
But in any of the other small broken capillaries and subtle fractures, whoever you are treating should be cured according to what is lost in order to rectify it.
And it is a cause that has not been revealed above all those who have studied that art. And now about what we have written, we will show in great fractures.
And if the skin is stretched when you remove the bone, then take a piece of cloth according to the quantity of the wound and soak it in rose oil and place it over the hole of the wound; and then take another cloth folded or doubled and soak it in wine and rose oil and place it over the first cloth and do this gently so that you don't harm the nerve; and then administer on that a liniment, and don't tighten it except for the quantity of the wound.
And leave him with this treatment for a day or two until you are sure of cauterization; and then remove it and administer medicines that get rid of superfluous moisture, such as lint and barley flour, and powder of onions and of aristology, and of similar things to these.
And it is that you make of these medicines a powder that can be sprinkled over the wound as they are dried; and generally, administer to him all medicine of which its property is that it cleanses and doesn't bite.
And take care according to your virtue that the wound in your curing is clean; and let there be no surdity of ointment or other thing in it; nor let virulence gather in it; for when it is applied on the membrane of the brain, it corrupts it and causes evil in the patient.
And it occurs in the membrane of the head when the bone is removed and especially when the cure of it is neglected, and there is blackness on its surface; and therefore if these accidents occur in the patient, know that he has six diseases.
And if blackness does not occur except from the medicine that is applied to it and it is in the virtue of that medicine that makes that blackness, then take a portion of honey and of rose oil [portions] iii. and with those lines a cloth, and then place it over the membrane; and then cure that with spices of cure that are suitable until he is healed.
Chapter iii.
Of restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken except in two places, some more prominent than others, or one of those bent slightly, because there are two bones in it, for the lower part is cartilaginous and not broken, and nothing happens to it except curvature and tortuosity and sinusitis.
But if one of the two places is broken, then you should insert your little finger into his nose and grip that fracture inside with your index finger and push it outward with your thumb until the nose returns to its natural shape. And let this be done by you easily, and take care that he does not cry out from that operation on the patient.
And if the fracture is on the most prominent part of the nose and the finger cannot reach it, then let it be straightened with the tip of the needle in which there is a small thickness.
And if the fracture is on two places, then you should do that similarly.
And let him be restored on the first day of the fracture if it is possible; and if not, then let him rest for the cauterization of the wound for seven or nine days.
And then insert into the tip of the nose a piece of cloth if there is one fracture, or two splints if there are two fractures, and let the splint have enough thickness to fill up the gap in the nose.
And some of the ancient restorers say that the splints should be wrapped in a cloth, and changed every day, but I have not seen this; others say that the cloth should be wrapped in a ball of honey comb with powder of moly; and then let it stay until the bone is set and the cartilage is hardened.
And in some cases, let the bone of the nose be inserted instead of splints, a feather of the peacock more robust that is wrapped in cloth of lion; and let it stay until the fracture of the nose is more violent and that the patient is not prohibited from breathing.
And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want to do it, then do it, and if you want to make splints, then make them.
And if another cauterization occurs on the nose, plaster it with ceratum or cotton soaked in wine and rose oil, or with diaquilinum.
But if there is no cauterization on the nose, then let you plaster it outward with sesame flour and powder of onions cooked in honey; and then place over it a sponge of lion's wool, and do not press the nose for any reason.
But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or are crushed, then split them and remove them with tools that are suitable for those; and then sew up the cut, and cure it with what encapsulates and consolidates, and plaster it in whatever is convenient.
And if there is a wound inside the nose, then let you cure that with splints and administer lead tubes until it is completely healed.
Chapter iv.
Of restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
When the jaw is broken and there is no wound on it, observe then if the fracture is outward only and not broken in two parts and bent inwards, then its understanding is easier.
And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, then insert your left index finger into the mouth of the patient; and similarly if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert your right index finger; and push by that the curvature of the fracture inside with ease to the outward parts by your other hand from the outward part of the bone; by this he will be evenly straightened.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then let you administer extension of both parts according to its rightness until it is possible for it to be even.
And if there is concussion of teeth to disruption, then tighten those from which you expect that they will break with a thread of gold or silver or silk; and then place over the broken jaw ceratum, and then a doubled cloth, and over the cloth a great plate decently made, or a stone of only length of the jaw; and then tie that above according to how it is equipped to you as the application convenes so that it is not destroyed.
And command that he have rest and tranquility, and let him drink cooling drinks of lions.
And if you think that it is altered in some way, then let you bind and loosen it on the third day; and then rectify what is altered of it and plaster it with powder of moly, with honey comb, or with sesame flour, after you have removed the ceratum from it, and place over the plaster lion' s wool.
And then when he is lying still and that plaster is applied to him, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave it, so that you do not disturb it until the fracture is healed and strong; for in many ways this fracture is tightened within three weeks.
And if another blister occurs from a cautery, then administer what we have said many times in the treatment of him until he is healed and that blister is resolved.
And if the fracture is complicated by an infection, then you should carefully examine whether the bone is separated or crushed; then you skillfully remove those crushings with that which is convenient in removing them with instruments.
And if the opening of the wound is narrow, then you widen it by phlebotomy according to the amount of your need.
Then when you have removed those crushings and they do not heal, then you clean the opening of the wound if it is large; and if not, place one of those plasters that are convenient for that and let it become embedded until it is healed.
Chapter 5:
Of the restoration of the collarbone when it is dislocated.
Many times the collarbone in front is broken by a blow from a muscle, and that fracture occurs in one of three ways:
Because it is either broken, or separated, or separated into two parts without the occurrence of blisters; and its restoration is easier; or it occurs with blisters, and its restoration is difficult; or the fracture is complicated by an infection.
And the operation on it, when the fracture is complicated by an infection, is that you have two ministers, so that one has the support and follows the collarbone that is broken, and the other extends the collar under that part.
Then fasten the fracture with threads so that it is made in the shape of a cone and not have a small eminence or concavity.
And if you need more extension, then cover the area under the armpit with a thick pad of cloth or wool, and let its size be according to the amount of your need; and extend and elevate the collarbone and contract the pad with your hand until you fasten the fracture as it should be.
And if you cannot draw the end of the collarbone to the outward parts because it is reached by the breast, then let the patient be reclined on his chest, and place a cushion over his shoulder, with a half-cushion in size, under the muscle of the collarbone.
And the minister presses the muscle of it to the outward parts below so that the collarbone bone is elevated from above, and then you correct the fracture and fasten it with threads.
But if you feel blisters on the collarbone and they are not resolved, then let them be lanced and those blisters extracted with ease.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you devise an incision of it with one of the incisers which you have prepared for that purpose, after you have placed below the collarbone the instrument that serves as the head; and it is an instrument of wood or iron, and this is its form:
And it is like a chisel of which this is the concavity; and let its breadth be according to what you need of it, according to the size of the bone or its thinness.
But its length be according to what is possible for you in the operation; and let it have two ends just as before, and one end be broad and the other narrow.
And if the opening of the wound which you have lanced when you have extracted the blister from the bone is large and it is certain that there will be a blister from cauterization, then you adjust the two lips of the wound with a suture.
And if the opening is small, or you fear a blister from cauterization, then you fill the wound with cloths and powders according to the amount of the opening of the wound.
And if a blister from cauterization occurs, then soak a cloth in warm vinegar and rose oil and place it over that.
And altogether, let the stake not be resolved over the broken bone; and therefore you see the patient every day, that when the ligament becomes soft or you see the stake already resolved, then you correct it and make the fastening strong.
And then place the patient's head upon his arm, and let there be placed under the armpit of him a little cushion; so that with that is elevated the support of it from the side of that, and therefore is elevated the fracture of the collarbone to elevation of the muscle; or let the arm be bound to the neck of him.
And do not remove the ligament unless blisters occur in the place definitely, or within twelve days.
And then renew the plaster when you have seen its face to that, and adjust in constriction and restore it and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the collarbone is coagulated.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the moon in 28 days, and in some men it is made within a month of that time.
Chapter 6:
Of the restoration of the fracture of the shoulder.
The spatula is broken in the wide place of it and not broken from it except its margins.
And then when it is broken at the place of it — and it is broken in the middle place of it — and is not congealed except by contact, then according to the figure of the fracture you have the preparation of it and reduce that according to the natural figure in every way of engine which is possible for you.
And then place over the place powder of wheat with white of egg and piece of linen; and then place doubled cloth; and then place over it a wooden stake that is thin according to the quantity of the spatula all or perhaps a little.
But if under the stake is a concavity in any of the places of the spatula, then you fasten that concavity with piece of linen, and then place the stake according to equality.
And then strengthen above it with long ointment with decent constriction and with firmness of the stake so that it is not resolved in its place.
And consider the ligament every day; and whenever it becomes soft, ligate another time and tighten it and equalize the stake if it is resolved in its place.
And hold the patient upon his own side.
And the spatulate is restored in 20 days or less.
And when this number is complete, then you should dissolve the ligament; and know that it belongs to the bones from which the beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed from the place of the bone to the bottom of the cord, then you should split it, and ostiate it, and do according as we have said in the fracture of the collarbone of suppuration of pus if it happens here.
Chapter .vii.
On the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
The foot sometimes is broken in one place and there is no pain therefrom; but the extremities of it are sore, and the bones are crushed and splintered.
And of its accidents when the middle of it is broken there ensues a decline to the parts within and there befalls it great pain, and difficulty in walking, and cough, and strong vomiting of blood; and a cavity is manifested in the broken bone and is not concealed from sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient should be reclined upon his back, and place under him a cushion; and press against the muscles of him, and adjust the ribs of him with the hands of two men, and keep him in the operation of it and in the setting according to every possible way that he convenes to it, until he returns the shape of the bone according as it was.
And then place upon him plaster and felt, and place over it a bed of subtle sawdust or of ashes, or of things like them in lightness, after you have enveloped that in cloth; and then carefully apply that against the broken bone lest it be hurt; and go with ligature according to roundness to the back sometimes, and strengthen that with decent tightness; and consider the ligature at every hour, and when it is softened strengthen that.
And if necessity requires the removal of that you must cut off that or press upon it, or pain, or suppuration that befalls it in the place, then you should cut and unbind that and eradicate the plaster and rectify that which befalls by way of cure of it; and then return the plaster, when you see is fit for it; and adjust the tightness on him until he is healed.
Chapter .viii.
On the restoration of the ribs when they are splintered.
Know that fracture of the ribs does not occur except in gross places that follow the back; and from the ends of them to the front there befalls to those no constriction except by reason that they are cartilaginous. And cognition of it is not concealed from sensation you must make inquiry of it with the fingers.
And the restoration is that you should close the fracture with the fingers according to possible manner, until it is healed according as it was, and then plaster and strengthen the broken bone with splints, if he needs them.
And if the fracture of the ribs is declining to the parts within then there befalls to the patient violent pain and piercing, just as piercing that befalls that which has been punctured, and by reason of that the bone thrusts upon the membrane; and there befalls to him difficulty in breathing, and cough, and vomiting of much blood; and this is of difficult cure.
And now the antiseptics are applied to it with warm poultices.
And of them I say this: let him abstain from foods that engender inflammation and windiness, so that the belly may be swollen and extended, and the fracture be driven to the parts without.
But we would abstain from it lest it be the cause of suppuration to generate cautery, if not happen; and if it does happen then it would help.
And some of them say that it should be laid upon with fomentation and then drawn with strength; and this is like ratiocination, but indeed it is feared that the fomentation would drive out the superfluities to the place by reason of weakness.
And some of them say: let the place be covered with wool that has been dipped in hot oil, and let there be laid in between the ribs a poultice which is moistened, so that the ligature is wrapped around it according to roundness; and then let the patient be cured by cure of pleurisy of food and medicine.
And if it causes violent constriction that he does not endure, and the bone thrusts upon the membrane with piercing pain, then fear about the patient; therefore let him be cut over the place, uncovered of the splintered rib, and then let there be placed over it an instrument that conserves the ciphac, the memory of which precedes, and that we insert into the bone with ease, and extract that.
And then let us adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with cauterization, and cure that by way of plaster until it is healed.
And if suppuration befalls within then you should cut and apply poultices in warm oil, and let it be cured by what covers the suppuration within.
And let him be reclined upon his side upon which he slept until he is healed.
Chapter .ix.
On the restoration of the fracture of the vertebra of the back and of the neck.
Sometimes fracture befalls to the bones of the neck, and it extends to their articulations, and likewise to the vertebrae of the back. And if it befalls to anyone and you wish to know whether he will be healed or not, then consider, for if you see the fingers are already swollen and stupefied and dead and cannot move those nor extend nor tighten them, and when you pinch those with your fingers or stab those with a needle and he does not feel pain in those, then know that he is not healed, and in months of disposition it is mortal.
And if you constrict those with the fingers and stab those with a needle and he feels pain in those, then know that the marrow of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured by cure.
And if you see the vertebrae of the neck like that and wish to know whether he will be healed or not, then consider his feet.
Now if you see that they are already swollen, suppuration befalls to them like that which befell the fingers, and then when he lies upon his back he experiences windiness and loss of his will, and sometimes is reclined over his back and wants to urinate and cannot, then know that it is mortal, and therefore you must not work in the cure of him.
But if none of those befalls to them, then the cause is better and likewise less painful.
And the cure of him is that you pierce to the suppuration of the cautery that rests upon the splintered vertebra with oil which is warmed, or with balls of hempseed which are scorched; place over it sometimes during the day while the suppuration is settled.
And then place one of the poultices that are comforting and hot, and strengthen over it with ligature; and command the patient to take rest and tranquility, and not sleep upon the part from which he experiences pain until he is healed.
And if suppuration befalls by reason of the articulation of the bone or any cause that is already separated from him, then cut over it and let that bone dry; and then adjust the two lips of the wound with suturing if it is large; and cure that by way of poultice of the intestines, until it is healed.
But if the lowest of the vertebrae is splintered and it is the end of the spine, then let you insert the tip of the middle finger of the left hand into the anus, and close the splintered bone with the right hand according as it is possible by second position; and then place over it plaster and splints if they need that, and then strengthen that.
And if you feel broken bones in him, then you will put a splint on it, and fix it, and heal the wound with the medicine that is preceded so that it may be healed.
Here is the translation of the provided text:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation: Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation: Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Chapter XII.
On the restoration of fractures of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called the two bones of the elbow; one of which is small, and is that which is above the bend of the wrist, and the other is large, and is placed below the small bone, from the part further down.
And usually the larger bone only is broken, or the smaller one, and rarely are they both broken at the same time.
And when the smaller bone is broken at the top, then its restoration is more difficult, and its healing is even more so.
And when the bone is broken below the elbow, then its fracture is harmful, and its healing is difficult.
And worst of all is when both bones are broken at the same time.
Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the smaller one at the top, then it is appropriate for the doctor, in performing its restoration, to apply a small extension with ease while that part is bandaged.
But if the larger bone is what is broken, then it is fitting that he apply more vigorous extension.
And if both bones are broken at the same time, then you must apply extension with the greatest force.
And you must make the hand into the shape of a hand when performing its restoration and extension by extending it over a cushion, with the palm of the hand upwards, more than all the others, and let the auricular part be further down than all the others, and let the patient be seated upon a raised pillow.
And let there be a cushion beneath him, in the height or angle of his body, so that he does not move about.
Then the assistant should extend the arm at the part furthest down with his hand or with a bandage, and another assistant should similarly extend it upwards.
And the doctor should bandage the bone as he reduces it to the best figure that he can.
And if in the setting of the bone there are any knots, then you must reduce all pressure in its place with your strength.
And if there appears in it a separated knot that punches through the tendon, and it is not within your power to restore it, then you must work on it and prevent that according to the manner which we have said above.
But if the fracture is compound, I have already spoken about that in this chapter, and so you may take its cure.
And if suppuration occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should spread a cloth soaked in oil of roses and white wax, made medium between thin and thick, and tightly bound over that suppuration; and then remove the cerate and apply plaster prepared from powder of moly with honey, and then place splints; and let the splint which is placed over that fracture be more layered and stronger.
And know that the number of splints for the arm are seen in the greater dispositions, or whether the fracture is in one bone or both bones together.
And then apply your binding over the site of the fracture more strongly and more vigorously, and when you loosen the binding at the parts above the fracture or at its lower parts, loosen the binding a little according to how it is remembered in the beginning of this chapter.
And the cloths which are wrapped over the fracture should be soft moist cloths, and not hard or rough; and the thread with which it is bound should be of an appropriate middling thickness between thin and thick, as we have recommended.
And consider the member and the binding after a few days. And if there is any cause for which rectification is necessary, then as soon as that happens to the member, then you should immerse the member in warm water until that subsides.
And let the member not be bound while it rests, and then return the binding.
And if the binding is already loosened and the bone is already set right and similar to those, then you should rectify all that with your strength.
And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from coming to the member due to excess of binding, then you should loosen that a little and let it remain for a few days so that that comes to that member, and then bind that more strongly.
But if there is no cause to the patient for those which we have said, then it should not be unbound until after about 20 days or more of those.
And then let the patient's hand be suspended by its strength in an agitated movement, and make him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 32 days, or very seldom in 28 days, and all that is according to the disposition of the complications and the dispositions of nature.
Chapter XIII.
Of the restoration of the wrist and fingers.
Know that to the wrist and knuckles of the fingers there often occurs fracture, and not to them but much movement many times.
And when it happens that there is a break or tear in the hand, then you should have the patient lean forward and lie down according to his ability, and then place your hand over that extended area.
Then the assistant should extend the broken bones and the doctor should bind those areas which are appropriate with a good bandage.
And then you should place plaster and padding if there is no abscess, and then put a poultice over it according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that in cloth.
But if the cut is on the sides of the fingers and within the palm, then make a tent with cloth, and instruct the patient to hold that area with his palm which has been cut; then have it bound with long cloth.
And let the poultice of meat be applied to the palm with cloth, and have it bound according to how it should be.
But if the cut is on the outer parts of the fingers, then you should place poultices over it and another one below in the palm so that the hand can be opened and straightened; and then apply the binding as the hand turns around with the palm facing upwards between the thumb and fingers.
And if a cut happens to one of the joints on the fingers, then it should be bound according to how it should be and then bound with the palm; and if you want, place a small straight splint so that the fracture is elevated and not bruised.
But if the cut is on the other fingers, thus it is in the middle finger, or in the index finger, or in the ear finger, or in the ring finger, then it should be bound and tied with that finger which has the cut; or they are all tied according to continuity, and that is better; or place a small splint over it as we have said in the pous.
And consider in your restoration and then that, the disposition of abscess cauterization and opposition — with your operation — with what occurs when any cause of those happens, according to how it is iterated in his narration.
Chapter .xiv.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the thigh bone.
The thigh bone is often broken and it is declared to the feeling according to how it turns to the front and to the upper part.
And its restoration is done in such a way that the bandage is bound over the fracture and another bandage below the fracture, and the patient lies on his back and on his face.
And then the assistant should extend all the bandages to their ends according to quality, when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
But if it is near the hip joint, then let the bandage be near the groins at the end of the pubic bone, so that the extension pulls upwards, and let the other bandage be below the fracture.
And similarly if the break is near the groin, then let the bandage be made near the groin, and let the extension pull from below.
And then the doctor should bind the bone with both of his hands within in order to reduce it according to its natural appearance and the bone is joined by good conjunction; and then you should place plaster and binding if there is no abscess in the limb. But if an abscess happens in it, then let it be left for some days until the abscess has subsided, and then return to your cure.
The binding of it should be done thus: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, and fold that two or three times, and remove from it superfluity; and then wrap the leg so that it comes to the ankle and to the hip joint.
And put in long wool between the thigh and the leg near the groin at the ends below, and let the extremes of the wool come from the highest part of both parts, and then turn around on the leg and the thigh that which is superfluous from the bandage.
And then place splints over the thigh at the site of the fracture, and place one of those splints over the bone of the leg.
And then fill the emptiness between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths so that the binding is coagulated.
And then begin with strong binding of the middle over the site of the fracture with three or four wrappings, and as you distance yourself from the bandage of the site of the fracture, your binding should be lesser and more loose and more soft.
And then extend the two extremes of the wool to the ends below so that it comes to the ankle of the foot, and bind both extremes of the splints on the other side so that the bandage is not pulled from its place.
And then let the binding be over that, where it is so that no corrosion nor abscess nor inflammation happens to it and its likes; and if any of those happen, then treat him with removal of it, and correct what happens altogether, according to how we have said many times.
But if in the bone there is an infection of the bone, then you should bind it according to how you are able; and if not, leave it and remove that, and cure with what from which preceded is the reminder so that it is healed.
And sometimes this fracture of the thigh is bound by others so that they are fitted to it, thus as we have said in the assistant and in the arms.
But in the restoration of it so made, let the patient not have a limp; and if it is restored alone, then let the other leg be applied to it, then it is necessary that he limps from which one there is a fracture.
And know that the thigh is bound for 40 days or a few months or a few months, and all that is according to the diversity of the complexities and of the other dispositions.
Chapter .xv.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the groin.
Know that a fracture of the groin starts inside, but it happens to it many times traction.
But if a fracture happens to it, then it is not anything but crack or tear in its parts, and that is with wound or wounds, and over that all is felt by the sense.
And its restoration is thus that it is bound where it is broken in its parts with the fingers so that it is added and joined according to how it is possible by accommodation and ease and fabrication.
And then place plaster and place over that a round splint if there are indigent from that; and bind above it with binding as is convenient.
And then consider all the dispositions which we have commanded in the other fractures, thus as there is abscess cauterization and similar to those in that there is a stop to all accident with what to it is convenient so that it is healed.
Chapter .xvi.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
Know that in the leg there are two bones of which one is large, and it is named by name of the leg; and the other is slender, and it is named tibia.
And it happens to each of the species of fracture that it happens to both bones of the arm, and for that reason is done restoration of it thus as restoration of the arm is bound, and the operation of it is one.
And if are broken two bones together, then the leg is turned to all parts.
And if the more slender bone is broken, then the leg turns to the front parts.
If the bone is cracked, you treat it by bleeding, which is one of those things that are not your business.
Then administer extension and alignment and liaison of the bones according to the treatment.
But if the fracture of the leg is open and has many small wounds, then the extension should be lesser and gentler, and you must use your skill.
And if the leg has any cause for operation on the arms, and it is when you treat the bones and complete all your operation, then you will take weights of wood which are placed under the causes that are placed in soles, and they are made from white of palm; you arrange those whose small thickness is small, and there should be no gap between them, and their length according to the length of the leg, and into the deepest part.
Then wrap around each one in two wraps according to the length of it, and place one at the end of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, and they should be into the deepest part of the bottom of the foot.
Then tie the two bones in three places with two extremes and at the middle place, for with this tension the leg is prohibited from tilting to the right and left sides, and it stands in good position.
And a brace of wood has been administered according to the length of the leg, and it should be placed on it so that it conserves its movement.
And most importantly, you do this in fracture, and when it is properly healed.
And then consider the leg every day and study it with that previous study, and you must guard it from abscess and inflammation or similar causes; and when any of those causes occur, then apply to it what is necessary so that it becomes healthy.
Chapter .xvii.
Of the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and the toes.
The ankle does not usually fracture completely; but the bones of the foot fracture sometimes; and few toes of the foot fracture, and they do not fracture unless there is attrition in the places of disposition.
And if the bones of the foot are fractured and those bones happen to be elevated upon each other, then the patient should put his foot on the ground prepared in this way.
Then place one foot on that which is elevated of those bones, and then press and heal those within so that they return to their places.
Then apply plaster and a plug on top of it, and place under the belly of the foot a small table to which are two pegs.
Then strengthen that with the foot with decent tension, because you have wrapped it with drapes and other things from which you are not able to get away.
And when three or four days have passed, then you loosen the ligament, for you will find the bones healed, or cracked, or dislocated, and the operation in those is just as you know it to be.
But if any toes are cracked, then restore those, and heal those just as you and your opinion are accustomed to in the restoration of the toes of the hand. Then place a splint on the cracked toe according to the length of the toe, and let there be more of it; and under the foot this table which is recommended to you, and strengthen that with decent tension.
But if that which is cracked of the bones is two or three or more, then you place on each toe a splint of its quantity wrapped in lion drape, and strengthen the table under the bottom of the foot, and let it stand on one of the pegs of the table so that it has good retention.
And it is convenient for you not to forget that you do not consider all the causes which are told to you in other fractures of the accidents that we have said; and apply to every accident what is necessary.
Chapter .xviii.
Of the fracture of the groin and the bone of the hip and the rod of man.
When the groin of the femur is fractured, then make that fall into the hollow, and then incline that to the side at the top a little, and let it be held behind.
And then the midwife fills the crotch with cotton, and let it be done in the crotch just as sperma; and then the femur is concussed, and elevated at the top little by little, for all that is forgotten within so that it becomes before the crotch just as sperma and the bone cracked returns.
And then sprinkle powder over the top of it, and when he wants to urinate, let him hold the crotch with facility and then urinate, and reduce and return that according to the manner according to which you measured it at the beginning, and then return to its first powder.
And do this for seven days or around those, for it is restored.
And if you want, take an ovela bladder and strengthen over the hole of it a straw of reed; and insert the whole bladder into the crotch of it, and then insufflate through the straw with strength so that the bladder is inflated inside the crotch, for the fracture returns.
And then let it be filled with sperma and stand for some days according to what we have recommended, so that it becomes healthy.
And when the bone of the hip of man or woman is cracked, then administer in its restoration and healing what we have recommended in the bone of the hip.
And that which is right is not hidden in these nearby fractures and which hardly happens, mostly to him to whom there is some study and use and understand my free will; for that fracture indicates to you in the greatest dispositions directly in the restoration and in the tension of it, and therefore understand well.
But in the rod of man when it is cracked, take the skin of a horse, and put the rod into that; and then apply over it wrap of drape, and let it be wrapped, and then let it be left for three days or around those, and let it become healthy.
Chapter .xix.
Of the restoration of the bones when they are with plague.
It is convenient for him to whom fracture happens with plague, and especially if the bone is large just as it is the bone of the head or of the helper, or similar to that, that you take care and fleubotomies that just as the conditions of fleubotomia testify to you so above.
And if the plague flows and bleeds, then it is necessary that you take care of the retention of it just as you pulverize over it a trissat zegi, unless another cause is present.
And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not prolong it, if an abscess does not occur.
But if an abscess occurs cauterized, then you let the restoration of it go within the sixth day, until the abscess is healed, and do not approach it on the third day and the fourth of all, for you will make bad accidents occur.
But if the cracked bone is prominent over the uncovered tendon, then it is necessary that you reduce and heal that just as with your hands with facility and with little extension.
But if extension is not prepared for you and the position of it with your hands, then you reduce that just as with your hands with this tool; and this tool is made of iron, the length of which is seven digits or eight, and its breadth according to the quantity of the plague; and it is necessary for the physician who takes three or four according to the quantity which induces that in the cure in all kinds of fracture.
And it should be turned inside out, and there should be little roughness so that it is not folded over when the pressure is applied during the operation.
And it should have an acute tip to which is attached at its own ends; and the top of it should be thick, and half of it should go into the incisions.
And this is the shape of it:
And it is called in Greek "labra volant atelarem", which means a small spatula.
So that when the end of it is placed on the prominent end of the bone, it is elevated above it.
And it pushes the bone into a hollow, and then return the bone to its normal position with some traction.
And then try to bring the ends of the fracture together, and if the broken end is thin, and does not take the instrument well because of its small size, then you must insert that bone end so that the instrument can do its work.
But if you are unable to reduce the bone at all with what we have recommended, then cut it with one of the cutting instruments as best you can.
Then smooth away any roughness and small bumps on the bone.
And when the bone is reduced, and suddenly the patient feels great pain while being bent, then you know that the bone has not been returned to its natural position; and then do what you know will benefit the patient greatly.
When you have finished restoring the bone, then immerse it in black styptic wine, and especially if it is summer, and do not apply a poultice or any other cause which will bring about swelling and corruption.
And then administer stars in the hour of your completion of the restoration of the bone, and leave the wound uncovered so that you may insert the hook with tweezers according to the amount of the wound.
And be very careful not to strain the wound with the fracture, for many times foolish doctors have done this and caused death or corruption or putrefaction in their patients, which is unsanitary. And if it seems loose, soft, different from the other fractures.
And if the wound is large or is a bad wound, and you fear any of those bad accidents which we have mentioned, and pain occurs in that place, then do not put stars on it, but make an envelope of hard rags in place of stars and strengthen it with those.
And when about a day or two has passed and the wound begins to suppurate, then you must remove the cloth which you had placed over it with wine, and then administer poultices, according to our custom is that we treat wounds, also with tetrafarmacon poultice and similar to that.
And it is good for you to loosen the bandage and examine the wound every day morning and evening until it is consolidated and closed, and that the limb be prepared in such a way that the swelling runs from it into the surrounding areas with ease.
If after many days the wound is not consolidated or the suppuration has ceased from it, then you know that here there are small problems so that wherever you touch the wound, it hurts. And of those small problems which are separated and extracted, those from which the member is not separated and which cause pain when pricked, pierce them according to what is possible for you.
And if suppuration or redness occurs to the wound, which are stamen, or another type of corruption and putrefaction, then do not place on it any of those from which the cure is preceded, a narrative of which is given in its chapter.
And of that from which you must not be ignorant and make your prediction: when a large bone is broken, it protrudes above the member like the bone of the thigh or the helper, and alike to those of the large members, and do not presume traction on it, nor its extraction for many times death has occurred because of this; let it remain as long as it pustules, for it will fall off by itself after about 20 or 30 days. And then cure the wound if it is seen to you, and if not, leave it.
Chapter .XX.
Of the cure of nodules which occur in the path of a fracture.
Many times this nodule occurs in the path of healing of a fracture, and mostly it is near the joints, and it is irritated by its own action; and very often the member is prohibited from its own operation.
Then consider if the nodule is recent and administer to it medicines which have astringed like aloes, and senna, and mallow, and plantain, and like these; in such a way that you take some or all of them, and mix them with styptic wine, or white wine, or sour wine, and apply this to the nodule on a piece of cloth, and constrict it on it with good constriction.
And let the constriction be as long as possible for many days; and then loosen it and repeat another, until the nodule is swollen; or strengthen on it a sheet of lead descantingly, for lead has property to soothe all that is inflamed in the limbs.
But if the nodule is already turned to stone and tight, and necessitates causing it to be split open, then cut it along the highest part of suppuration, and insert the excess and prominence, or cut it with some sharp instrument until it is swollen; and cure it as it heals.
Chapter .XXI.
Of the restoration of a fracture when it is restored and what happens then to the member if it is thin and weak according to its nature.
When a bone fracture is restored, and then what happens to the member if it is thin and weak, then this is not done except for several causes: one of which is the abundance of suppuration of the wound and the ligature of it not according to nature; or by excess of swelling of the ligaments through which nourishment is prohibited from flowing to the member; or by abundance of heat; or by excess of movement not in its time; or by weakness of blood in the patient's body and of debility.
And the cure of this is to cause the patient to eat and make his heart tender so that blood is multiplied in him; and administer bath; and put gum and lettuce over it.
And then apply poultice over the member, so that the poultice attracts nourishment to it, or continue fomentation of it with warm water, until nourishment flows and returns to its natural figure.
Chapter .XXII.
Of the cure of bones broken when they are restored bent and prohibited from their own operation of what it is necessary for.
When it happens to the member already restored that healing of bentness and eminence occurs to the broken bone and nodule, and is fed from its form, but nevertheless the member is not prohibited from its own operation, then do not accept the word of him who examines this member that it is newly broken.
But now are many foolish doctors and restorators who have done this in our land; and this operation is very blameworthy having presented great fear, the sign of which is deadly.
But if claudication and nodule are recent, then let them be fomented with warm water in which they put soft herbs, as well as the leaves of mallows and their roots, and mallow, and like these; and let an ointment be made from it with emollient ointments, or let it be pressed with white poplar bark and be applied to it; or let it be bandaged with a poultice of poplar bark and be bound to it; or let it be pressed with fat of stearic acid and be bound to it; or let the fat of stearic acid be mixed with oil of camphor, and be applied to it.
And sometimes it is dissolved by frequent friction, however light, with the hands wet, and motion of the affected part in all directions at all times.
But if the tortuosity has progressed further and become strong and turned into stone, and is causing pain that demands treatment with iron, then let the pus above be opened and the continuation of the bone be dissolved, and that which is superfluous in the nodules of that joint with the bone be cut away with thin instruments, and let ease be administered to it by solicitous care and study.
Here is Chapter 23:
Of speech in dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of one of the joints of its place, by which motion is prohibited, and the form of the limb is changed, and it causes great pain and serious injury to the patient.
Therefore when any dislocation happens, it is necessary to reduce it immediately, and not delay in reducing it, for if it is delayed, the joint becomes calloused, and it is made very difficult by this to reduce the dislocation.
And for that reason it is not good to be pressed upon or stretched in the hour of callousing, for often it causes spasms and pains in them.
But when it happens, then you should have recourse to phlebotomy on the patient, and let the callous be left inside while he rests; and the limb should be fomented with tepid water and oil, and then reduced with ease.
And every limb be treated by that from which its memory will return to its place.
And you have already and orderly arranged the chapters on dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture, from the highest part of the body down to the lowest part.
Chapter 24:
Of treatment for dislocation of the lower jaw.
The two jaws are dislocated if not bitten; and the dislocation of both is made in one of two ways: they are either pulled from their places by slight motion and slightly softened, or else dislocated throughout and completely, so that they are drawn back at the joint where saliva flows from the mouth of the patient, and he cannot hold it nor close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped around his words.
But when its dislocation is slight, then in the greater dispositions it returns by itself for slight cause.
But if the dislocation is entire and complete, then let reduction of it be administered slightly, and not be delayed in any way.
And the minister should hold the head of the patient, and let the doctor insert his finger from one hand into the root of the dislocation of the mandible inside the mouth of the patient, if the dislocation is on one side; or that he inserts both fingers together, if the dislocation is on two sides, and the other fingers of his hands are outside holding them open; and command the patient to cease moving his mandibles and to relax those in every part; and the doctor should hold the mandible and press it in while it returns to its place.
And if reduction of it is difficult, and especially if both mandibles are dislocated together, then administer evaporation with tepid water and oil, so that reduction of both be made slightly and not delay the reduction of both in any way, as we have said.
And when they have returned and are closed, and the mouth of the patient is not softened, then pause upon them powders of linen with cerot, made from wax and rose oil; and let it be bound up with ease by mild ligatures.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and let his head be held between two pillows, so that he does not move it to the right nor to the left; and do not force him to chew for any cause; having his food be meat of lion, so that when the pains are increased and the mandibles are swollen, then let him chew what he will.
And let that be administered with ease, and do not work upon the opening of the mouth after eating and drinking and waking, so that the mandible is swollen and healed.
And if reduction of two mandibles is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and not returned to their places, then often it happens that fevers and constant sweating occur, and very frequently the belly of the patient is swollen, and he vomits pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is fatal; and often the one to whom it happens dies within seven days.
Chapter 25:
Of reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and of the extremity of the muscle.
Collarbone is not dislocated from within throughout its continuation with the shoulder; and sometimes it is dislocated at the part that is outward, and that is declared in sensation.
And its restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms. And then compress the joint with your palm with strong compression, for it will return.
And then pause upon it poultice and powders, and bind that strongly.
But the extremity of that which touches the shoulder and is continued with it, is not dislocated in any day; then let it be reduced and closed according as we have said and as it is prepared for you.
And then pause upon it poultice, and powders, and constriction, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until he is healed.
And with this method of cure is reduced the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from its place.
Chapter 26:
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is that it is dislocated at the part of the shoulder joint to the lower part.
And the second is that it is dislocated at the part above the muscle, and that is done suddenly; and it is not dislocated at the parts behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the parts in front by the nerves.
And most often it is dislocated and drawn out at the parts below by the shoulder joint, and most often in those of which the flesh is thin, it is dislocated easily; but in those of which there are many meats, it is drawn out with difficulty.
And very often it happens to certain men by impact or blow, and the muscle of him is calloused with callous, and it is injured for that which has already been dislocated.
Therefore let you know this while you are standing over him, and then proceed in the cure of him.
And the dislocation of it is known when it is at the parts below by the shoulder joint; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the intact muscle, for you will see a manifest difference; and you will feel in the head of the muscle concavity and above the shoulder joint from the touch of the head of the muscle as though there were a hole, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to his shoulder, nor move that at all.
If the foot or ankle is dislocated, you will feel a clear bump and it will not be hidden.
And from this dislocation, there is an easier reduction when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
And the reduction of it is that the minister lifts up his hand to the parts above; and then he places his fingers under the patient's chin, and lifts up the joint with strength into its place, and the minister lifts up his hand, and extends that so that it returns more easily.
But if it does not return through what we have said, and so from the beginning that the dislocation occurred, after several days, then let the patient be bathed in warm water and let it be anointed with a liniment that softens, just as though his skin were razor-burned, with anise, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and let it be administered.
And then the patient is laid on his back and a wool pad is placed under his chin, held between elevation and compression, and then the doctor places his heel on the sphenoid bone, and lifts up the top of the muscle with strength, and pulls the patient's hand so that it is not burned at the parts below, and another minister holds the top of the patient's head so that it is not burned at the parts below, for as soon as this is done the joint will return to its place.
And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: and have a man who is taller than the patient stand on that side, and place his hand below the patient's chin and lift up the chin towards the parts above while the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the patient' hand from the parts below his belly. But if the patient is light, then let him be suspended by another cause, for the sake of gravity, for the dislocation will return at once.
And it is reduced in the same manner: and it is that a long pole be placed on the ground, the top of which is round in shape, like a mortar, neither thick nor slender, and then let the patient be placed under it; and then let linen be placed over the pole, and the patient stand according to the length of the pole, and then let his hand be extended towards the parts below the other part; and let his body be extended from the other side with strength, for the joint will return to its place quickly.
And if it is difficult to reduce it by all the causes we have said, then use this cure: and it is that you take a pole of two cubits in length, and four digits in breadth, and its thickness is taken from the chin according to this form:
And then over the round head let linen be tied so that the pole does not hurt the patient.
And then let the patient's chin be placed under it, and his hand or arm extended over the pole towards the parts below, and let the pole be tied to the assistant's waist, and his arms and the end of his hand.
Then let the arm be placed on a rung of a ladder according to its breadth, and the hand extended towards the parts below, and the other body suspended from the other side, for the joint will enter at once.
And when its medicine is complete according to whatever way it is possible for you, then let you place under the chin a sponge of equal quantity; and then place plaster prepared from mill-powder with honey and egg white over all the muscle, as though it were rolled upon it, and then press down on the chin with decent tightness; and let the bandage be rolled over the plaster, and his hand be attached to his neck, and let him lie, and not hurt his hand for seven days.
And let the food of the patient be reduced a little, while the member is comforted, for it is easier to heal him.
And then let his food be increased after seven or five days and let exercise be given to him; and if it is firm and not soft, then he has healed.
But if the joint is dislocated many times by moisture that occurs in him or by another cause, then let it be cauterized with three cauteries, as was said before in the chapter on cauteries.
And if all of this is done and then after seven days the bandage is removed and the joint is not firm, and the plaster and tightness are reduced upon it several times, and it is not firm, and can't raise his arm to the parts above, then know that its nerves which are at the top of the muscle have been cut or extended or made soft, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
From the dislocation that is made to the feet and the breast or the back parts, its reduction is done by pushing and extending with hands, as it returns.
And let the other tightness be administered upon it as it is healed.
And if after the healing the heaviness increases upon the member and the movement of it delays, then let the patient take a bath several times so that this heaviness is eased and he returns to his first nature.
Chapter .XXVII.
Of the cure of dislocation of the neck.
Know that the joint of the neck is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated to all parts, and especially to the front part more than the back part, and its dislocation is not hidden from you because it hangs down below the shoulder or below the touch according to whatever figure it is dislocated, and when you adjust the neck that is dislocated with the head, this is declared to you manifestly, for the joint is hollowed out and cannot bend the arm, nor touch with that the muscle itself.
And let you know that your neck and reduce the dislocation at once before an abscess comes upon him with a cautery, for if an abscess comes upon him with a cautery, it is difficult to reduce it, and it is not healed of all; and especially when it is at the back parts, for it is the worst of all kinds of dislocation, and of greater pain, and many times they die from that.
And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce, is that his hand be extended with two hands, and his arm be expanded, and the doctor's hands be upon the neck and under him, and he press the joint with the knuckles of his fingers or with the palm of his hand rolled in so that it turns into its place.
But if the dislocation is to the front parts, then it returns so that he bends his hand with his hand, as he pierces the neck with the palm of his hand rolled in.
And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer a strong and violent extension.
And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold that joint so that it is not burned by the extension.
And then let the arm be rolled all around as it is wrapped in a folded cloth over his hand, or bandage.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, let it be anointed with some oil so that it is helped by causes which help in the lubrication of the joint with ease; and then press the joint with strong pressure as it returns.
And then its reduction let it be that the plaster upon which it is placed be stiffened and dried with egg white, and let it be stretched with decent tightness, and his arm suspended from the neck, and let him lie for several days.
And then he should be unbound; and if the joint is formed in its place, then you unbind his ligament and leave it.
And if you see that the joint is not stronger, then you repeat the plaster and the ligament, and leave it for a few days until it is strengthened; then unbind it.
But if there is a heaviness that happens to him in the reduction of the joint, and its disposition is in movement, then administer moisture by bath and subtle friction, compression while he is moved away; or pause over the joint a poultice, if it is a mobile joint; then bind it, and leave it for the day and night. And then stop that, and put him in a bath; and when he is dry, then you rub the joint with temperate friction, and then repeat on it an ointment, if it is swollen with fluid, once, and the second, and the third day, Already corruption has come about the wound' s innermost part, while it is filled with pus.
And if you want, pause over that split a wet and warmed-up cow's udder with blood and strengthen it over there; and do that several times, because that is wet and returns to its disposition.
Chapter .XXVIII.
Of the cure for a dislocation of malasan, which is of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
Malasan of the hand sometimes is displaced, and the reduction of its dislocation is easier, and the contrary is of the other joints, but however there must be velocity in the reduction of it in the hour in which it is displaced, before that the site is pustularized or pustules happen to it.
And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the joint of the patient's hand on a table and him extend his hand, and the doctor places his hand or his palm on the prominence of the joint, and press it in while it returns to its location.
But however there must be considered if the palm is already turned towards the palm of the hand, then the patient places the back of his hand on a table against the extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is previous to the back of the hand, then the position of the hand of that one intrinically on the table, so that the doctor's hand boxes over that prominence of the joint.
And therefore if it returns immediately, it is good; and if not, then strengthen that with plaster yielding the pustule and leave it, and do not repeat it, because otherwise, he will not endure or be able to bear the reduction of it until days have passed over him.
But however the joint is bent according to its tortuosity; and do not notice to the patient any cause, except that the hand is softened and cannot strengthen anything; then know that the nerves are pinched or cut, and then there is no remedy in him unless it is strengthened with cautery near the place of it and make it strong there is no remedy.
Therefore when the malasan is returned, then pause over it plaster which we have mentioned, and let it be left and strengthened for a few days; then unbind it and let his hand be exercised.
But if its movement is stopped and there happens to it some heaviness, then soothe that with warm water and friction a few times, until it is moved away.
Chapter .XXIX.
Of the cure for dislocation of the thumb.
Sometimes the thumbs are displaced completely apart.
And when any of those fingers is displaced to the back of the palm or to its belly, then press and push the displacement of it with your fingers, until it returns.
Then support the head of the finger, and suspend that over the part to which it is displaced, and leave it for two days.
Then suspend that and extend that until it is straightened in that its day.
And when it is morning, loosen that according to that narration, and do not stop unbinding it in the day and exercising with movement, and loosen that in the night; and do that for a few days until it is tight.
And do that same thing with that if it is displaced to the belly of the hand, and loosen that to that part and do with it its first operation, until it is healed.
And likewise do with that if it is displaced to the other parts.
Chapter .XXX.
Of the cure for dislocation of the shoulder joints.
When there happens to any of the shoulder joints or the neck a complete dislocation, and they remain only the shoulders out of their places, then in that there is no cure, because death pursues the patient.
And the sign of that is that the digestion of the patient is outside his will, and he cannot retain it; and often times some members of him are softened or two legs of him or two arms of him, or one of those; or one joint is displaced out of its location, because often times there is displacement and the removal of those to four parts.
Then that one is displaced to the back parts and is named luxation.
But its cure is that then you consider if the luxation happens from childhood, because in that there is no cure or of that there is no healing at all.
But in that one which comes from falling or striking against those, then the Ancients gave the manner of cure with prolix speech, of which the most returns with profit; but I and the few excuse the excess of me, because of my proximity to my intention exposing it, with which I have exposed that and spread out that.
And of those none is healed except that one which happens in the shoulder precisely with that which I return to it.
And let the patient be extended over his face on a flat surface, and let him be extended under him instrument wet so that he is not bent at the feet of him.
Then a straight staff be placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the stake around the head of him, and another staff in a hole the feet of him in the other extremity of the stake.
And one minister holds the staff, and it is not fixed in a hole; and another minister has the other according to that form.
Then wrap around the head of the patient and under the tits let them be stretched by a lion-wasp; and extend the end of the band to the staff which is over the head of him, and loosen that in him; then strengthen the other band over the buttocks of him the knuckles of him, and under his legs; then tighten all the bands and loosen those in the other staff which is over the feet of him.
Then the ministers each extend the band to the end of the staff, and let the two staffs and the bands of their locations in which they are fixed not be displaced, but however do not stop as I have said before.
And the doctor pauses his palms over the shoulder with strength until it returns, or let him pause over that a table, and then adjust over the table his feet until it returns.
But if it does not return by that form, then take a table of which the breadth or length is in a hole four arms, and a cavity in the wall of which I have said before is near the patient a place into which the end of the table. And then place the middle of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and stretch well so that the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
And if you want, open a turn which is twisted by hand; and it is that you place on the ground behind the head of the patient at the height of two fists, the length of which is one arm, and behind his head at the height of two fists; and let the distance between each post be a palm, and now there is made in each post a hole through which the rope passes, and each is firmly fixed to the ground so that it does not move.
And there is placed a round post in which is the turn, and it is wound around the two holes of the two posts.
And at its end there is a hole through which the post passes, the length of which is a palm where it is wound; and on the other two posts there are similar ones.
Then stretch the ligaments that you have tightened on the patient's feet in the hole that is behind his head, and the ligaments that you have tightened on his thighs in the turn which is behind his feet.
Then place each turn and have an assistant twist the turn with their hand, and the doctor bends the spine as we have said.
Then, after the spine has returned and the place has been greased, you must apply plaster of Paris mixed with egg white, and then stop it; and then place over the plaster a plate of wood whose width is three digits or so, and the length of which is the quantity that takes up the area of the hunchback, and over the spine its thickness.
And then it should be bound with ligaments as we have said, and let the patient take subtle nourishment until he is healed.
And if any swelling remains in the area at the end of the healing process, then let potions that soften and smoothen be administered by application of the table for a long time, which we have recounted; and now lead is applied to that place.
And sometimes swelling occurs in the back of the spine, and it is cured by that dislocation; and it is that bone which one should be wary of so that there is no protrusion to him by this medicine, for it will certainly bring about his death.
Chapter 31.
Of the cure for a dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the pelvis and the joint of the muscle do not move except by dislocation only, and it does not happen to those which happen to the other joints of slight removal and concavity.
And the joint of the pelvis is dislocated according to four manners, for it is dislocated at its parts within, or at its parts without, or at its parts before, or at its parts behind.
And most often it is dislocated at its parts within, and rarely at its parts before or behind.
And the sign of its dislocation at its parts within is that when you touch the leg of the patient with your hand, it is longer and the hip joint is more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend his foot due to the tongue-like protrusion, and there is the place where the tongue-like protrusion is pustular due to pustules, so that the head of the thigh has come here.
And the sign of that which happens to dislocation at its parts without is that his symptoms are contrary to those above.
And the sign of that which happens to dislocation at its parts before is that he spreads his leg according to his will, but still cannot bend it without pain where it hurts in the hip; and if he tries to walk and cannot go forwards on the tiptoes of his feet, his urine is retained and there is pustulation where he walks, and he has to walk on his heels.
And the sign of that which happens to dislocation at its parts behind is that he cannot spread his hip, or bend it in front of him where he walks; and his leg is shorter than the other, and there is softening of the hip joint, and the head of the thigh protrudes towards that place.
However, the reduction of this dislocation is that you should consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, and it has been aged by having it reduced and remaining according to its condition, then there will be no cure in that; and afterwards there will be no protrusion.
However, in the one for whom the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four kinds of dislocation, then you turn to that which he wants and extend it towards its parts within and without, and also to his right and left, for it will return quickly and does not need another cure.
However, if it does not return in this way, then you should prepare a strong servant and extend the leg of him from the lowest part, or with his hands on top of them over the hip joint; and another servant extends his hand over his anus that puts his fingers below his testicles; and then stretch with ligaments on the root of the thigh, and have another servant hold the end of the ligament.
And let his extension be from the part within towards the ankle, or from the part behind to the part of the chest.
And let all those extensions be in one moment while the patient is elevated by his body from the ground and hanging bent.
And this species of extension is common to all four.
And therefore if the dislocation returns as we have said, then it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to all that I will say about the proper cure.
In the proper reduction of it, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is at its parts within, let the patient be placed on his back; and then place the ligaments over the root of the thigh in that place between the head of the thigh and the place below the hip joint; and then stretch the ligament to the highest part of the ankle towards the highest part of the furcula.
And then let another strong servant grab his arms and press the large place of the hip joint and stretch to its parts without by violent extension, for it will return to its place.
And this species is the most gentle cure by which that member is reduced more than the other species.
However, if he is stubborn and does not obey this species of cure by all means, then let his two feet be bound together with strong ligaments, gently, over both heels and both hip joints.
And let the length of each of his parts be the quantity of four digits, and let the leg of him be extended but the other by the quantity of two digits.
And then let the patient be suspended over the head of the post, and let him be in the middle; and let his length from the ground be the quantity of two yards.
And then command a strong young man to press the head of the thigh, and let another young man be suspended by the patient, and the other young man press the thigh with strength, for the joint will return to its place with speed.
However, in the proper reduction, when it is dislocated to the part without, let him lie on his back according to how we have recommended regarding his hunchback; and let the ligament be tightened over the hip joint properly and over his feet.
And then two sticks are placed, one at the feet and the other at the head; and the sticks are adjusted to the middle of the hip on which dampened cloths are wrapped so that the patient is not harmed by the stick being between their thighs, so that the extension to the parts below is not drawn.
And then each assistant extends to his part, and the doctor has his hand open in the reduction according to the art.
And if the dislocation is to the front parts, then ensure that the leg is extended slightly and it will be according to this narrative on the hip; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand over the collar bone of the patient, and then with the other hand he grips it tightly, and with this grip he extends the leg out to the foot at the part of the dislocation.
And if the dislocation is to the back parts, then it is not necessary that the patient's leg be extended out, and he must be elevated above the ground; when he is lying on his side with his hip dislocated outwards according to what we have said about his positioning on two sides, and he is on his face and his limbs are extended according to what we have said, then there is no worry.
And it should be administered with pressure using a board over the location of the joint.
So when the reduction is complete according to what we have said — and the sign of its completion will not be hidden from you, and it is that you extend both legs of the patient, and when you see those signs and the patient stretches out his leg and expands it without any excuse, then you will know that the limb has returned to its proper place — and then you should bring the two thighs together and apply a poultice and bind with a bandage so that the hip is not harmed in either of its parts; and let the patient rest for three or four days.
Then loosen the poultice and bandage, and compare one leg with the other.
If you see those signs in full, then know that the dislocation is already closed and then let the patient walk.
And if you see any cause for softening, then return and plaster it, and extend it according to your first extension, and let him be in three days.
Then loosen that, and make him delay walking for a few days, until he is comforted.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of the cure of neck dislocation.
The neck is dislocated in three ways: it is dislocated outwards, inside, and to the bottom but not to the front.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you command the patient to apply his collarbone with his thigh; then know that the neck is dislocated.
And the restoration of all of its ways is that you make the patient lie straight, so that he extends his leg if he can on it; adhere two fingers to his face, and place the sole of his foot between your feet; then make someone else extend his leg while the neck returns to its place.
And the sign of its reduction is that his collarbone adheres to his thigh with effortless lifting.
Then plaster it and make the collarbone adhere to the thigh, and then bind them together with a bandage for three or four days, and then loosen those.
And do not use the patient for walking for a few days, until he is healed and comforted.
But if its reduction is not possible for you, then administer strong extension with the limbs of which in the cure of the hip there is preceding narrative.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of the cure for dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle is sometimes hurt by small removal, and sometimes it is dislocated according to completion, and its dislocation is done either inside or outside.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you see the ankle swollen proceeding to the part to which it is dislocated.
But its cure for removal is of slight reduction, and it is extended with ease with hands and is wrapped until it returns.
But in its cure when it is dislocated according to completion, you must make the patient lie straight, and have a strong and valiant minister from behind press him on his hip.
Then you with your right hand take the highest part of the foot from above, and with your left hand take the lowest part of the foot in the location of the ankle.
Then pull the foot to you with your right hand, and then twice with the left, and extend with the left; and press the sole of the foot with the right because of the collarbone there is work.
And do that two times according to what we have counted.
Then press the sole of the foot on the collarbone the third time, and you are at the ankle.
So if it returns in one or two according to this manner, and you see the foot soft, it is good; otherwise, repeat the operation on it until it does return.
But if it is prohibited for you to reduce it with what we have recommended, then let the patient lie on his back on earth, and stretch a wooden post in firm earth, and that it be between his thighs, and you have already wrapped a cloth around him so that he does not hurt the patient.
Then the minister of him has his thighs, and then another minister extends the foot with their hands or with the limb that lies over the collarbone; and each minister extends against the extension of his pair, and the post is extended between the thighs of the patient, so that his body is not drawn to the parts below because of its extension.
Then the doctor grabs the dislocation with his hands, and another minister has the healthy thigh at the parts below, because the dislocation returns with ease.
So when the dislocation returns and you are shown the health of its reduction, then plaster it and extend that with strong limbs, and tie the foot to the collarbone.
And you must be careful or watch out for the nerves which are behind on the ankle, so that the limb over it is not vehement and lead that strongly.
Then let him be in two or three days; and if the limb is softened, extend that.
Then loosen that on the third day or fourth, and prohibit the patient from walking for 40 days. But if he is forced to walk before that space, it is not certain that the dislocation is not dissolved and ruined, and then that he does not receive cure.
And if it happens to him wound blister, then you must minister in the healing of him that in which our narrative preceded, at another location of cure and of fomentation, until it is healed.
Chapter .xxxiiii.
Of the cure for dislocation of the fingers of the feet.
Let him who is dislocated be greased with a little oil; and that which is not difficult, rather than being easy.
But if the dislocation is in any bones of the chest, then let him make the patient lie on his back on the ground or a table, and be lying as if he were walking.
Then you stand on your feet, and place your hand over what protrudes from the joints, and then press that with your foot with strength until it returns, and see that it is greased and there is no protuberance in the location.
And then place under the chest of the patient a board which covers the whole chest, to which are two ends, and then tighten that with decent and firm strapping for three days; and then loosen that and let the patient rest from walking for several days, until he is healed and his healing is assured.
Chapter 35.
Of the kinds of dislocations that are done with a blow or with a fracture or with any impaction.
When any of those causes happen to you and you are proficient in the cure of that and in the restoration of him, many times death ensues.
And therefore you should not presume about the cure of him, but let him who is wise in the art, with a long experience, be merciful and compassionate, mild, not hard and presumptuous; and that he use in the beginning medicines which yield apoplexy cauteries only so much, and let the patient trust in divine judgement, except to him by whom you expect salvation from ruin, in the alleviation of the illness, and in which some hope appears. And then try to make him the reduction at the beginning of the cause, before he receives an apoplexy cautery.
And then if the member returns according as we want, then administer a regimen which yields an apoplexy cautery and cures the blow with that which convenes to him of the dry ointments.
And if the dislocation is with a fracture and it happens in the separated bones, then you are proficient in their binding, and do in that which we have said in the simple illnesses of that from which they come.
And guard and avoid according to your ability that of the instrument in the ways of fear according as my preaching is preceded to you; for that is better for you to your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more salutary to your true body, those in your time. Thus end the words of Albucasim perfectly from which God be praised. Amen.
